UYV'LV-S.'t 'LL
National Library of Scotland
illlllllllll
*6000393390*
GAY HUNTER
By the same Author
SPARTACUS
THREE GO BACK
ETC .
{See page 287)
GAY HUNTER
By J. LESLIE MITCHELL
I care not if you bridge the seas
Or ride secure the cruel sky,
Or build consummate palaces
Of metal or of masonry.
But—-have you wine and music still,
And statues, and a bright-eyed love?
—James Elroy Flecker
LONDON
WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD
FIRST PUBLISHED 1934
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
at The Windmill Press, kingswood, surrey
For
CHRISTOPHER MORLEY
Dear Christopher Morley,
This is not> in any sensey a sequel to (Three Go
Back? But I suppose it might he called a companion
book; and I hope Gay in the forests of futurity will
please your lighter hours as much as Clair did when
we three hunted aurochsen on the plains of pre¬
history.
My main work is to pry in the ruins of your own
incomparable continent, and I wrote iGay Hunter*
in the pauses of writing a history of the Maya. But
though I found my theme in those solemnities of
research and sent it to hunt a new home in space
and time, this book has no serious intent whatever.
(The star-chaos of that distant night-time sky is,
Pm well aware, unlikely.) It is neither prophecy
nor propaganda. It is written for the glory of sun
and wind and rain, dreams by smoking camp-fires,
and the glimpsed immortality of men.
(Still, though the Hierarchs may never happen,
I have a wistful hope for the Hunters!)
Sincerely,
J. Leslie Mitchell
I934
CONTENTS
BOOK I: GAY GO UP
Chap. PaSe
I THE COMPACT 3
II THE INCREDIBLE MORNING 26
III EVEN THE STARS 39
IV THE MOUNDS OF WINDSOR 62
V RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 75
VI THE DAM 99
VII SUNSET 112
VIII THE HIERARCHS 133
IX PERSEPHONE H1
X THE MOON IN AJALON 159
BOOK II: GAY GO DOWN
I THE BEAM I?1
II EAST 189
III THE FOREST IS ON FIRE 201
IV A LOST GOD 212
V THE RUINS 227
VI THE RATS 243
VII SPEARS 259
VIII SING FOR ME 274
IX THE RETURN 202
BOOK I
GAY GO UP
I. THE COMPACT
§1
Gay Hunter stood in the blow of the wind on the
Wiltshire Downs, and surveyed the landscape with
a drowsy approval.
Below and around her, and curving in long lines
of pastelled background, the unfamiliar moors
quivered and moved their cloaks in the coming of
the afternoon wind. Rightwards and downwards
she could see the pillared ruins of Stonehenge:
Pewsey slept amidst its trees, Netheravon edged the
skyline with its barracks, far on the flagstaffs of
Upavon the wind indicator bellied in the breeze
over the aerodrome lost in the grasses below. Gay
found it very peaceful. She liked the change of
peace. It was hard to believe it England, or, indeed,
her century in any land at all. If the barracks and
wind-indicators were to vanish, leaving the land¬
scape to the curlews and herself, she might half-
believe it the world of the antique men. . . .
‘Still thinking shop,’ she reproved herself,
drowsily.
She found great amusement in reproving her-
3
GAY HUNTER
4
self. For, on the whole, she rather approved than
disapproved of this self that lived and looked and
ate and dreamed and slept and worked and had a
passion for temple-measurement and an acute dis¬
taste for the English method of cooking cabbages;
and puzzled a bright, enquiring gaze at Alpha in
Centaur at night; and liked to sleep without sheets,
between blankets, because it tickled one amusingly;
and loathed trains, trench-mortars, and all the
American Presidents but two; and bore with glad
fools gladly, being, she recognised, something in the
same category; and thought of dying and going out
of sight of the sun as a sad thing, not the matter for
indifference or passionate hope that others thought
it; and intended to have two babies sometime—not
all at once, twins would be a trial, in a space of three
years better; and wondered how it would feel to
sleep with a man—rather silly and fun, perhaps;
and liked hard chocolates best, because she had good
teeth—funny teeth, they met and bit edge to edge
as the teeth of the Cro-Magnard men did; and liked
lying in bed with her heels on the bed-rail, reading
poetry by Gertrude Stein, and giggling; and liked to
walk in rain, with the sting in her face, and come
back, and strip, and shiver like a cat—lovely that
shiver that shook one’s skin clear of one’s bones for
a second; and approved her own bones, though they
were rather on the large side .
‘What a category!’ She sighed and laughed and
THE COMPACT
5
sat down on the hill-brow. There was a little pool
below. She lighted a cigarette and put back her hair
from her forehead, and considered herself for a
while, blowing away the wreathings of smoke that
she might see herself better. The crouched image
surveyed her with nice cool eyes that had a golden
twinkle in them: something peculiar in the pigmen¬
tation of her eyes, her father had told her—they
glowed, faintly, cat-like in the dark. Peculiar
enough, for they were a deep, dark blue. She had
nostrils that lifted and fell a little while she slept
or breathed deeply or smiled—they did so now. Oh
yes, and she could waggle her ears. She did so now.
Five feet eight inches in height, though that
wasn’t very observable in this attitude, and a pass¬
able figure—in Greek fashion, not the Chino-bat-
tered-Perso-corseteered figure of the moderns.
You couldn’t have that kind of figure with bones
rather big and archaic, like your teeth. . . . She
could see the brown detritus at the bottom of the
pool, and, leaning forward so, the collar of her
green dress that flapped forward to frame her head
and face, prettily, she thought, though immodestly,
for she could look down the dress of her reflection
to a gleam and shadow of shapely breasts. They
tilted a little, not white, but brown. That came of
the sun-bathing in Mexico.
A peewit flapped overhead. Gay raised her head
and looked at it, and forgot her reflection and her
GAY HUNTER
6
drowse of thoughts. Very readily in such surround¬
ings she could forget herself and her times. She
lowered her eyes from the curlew-haunted, wind-
haunted wastes of the Downs to the fringement of
terraces under her feet. In ancient times the pros¬
pectors from across the seas had been here, here they
had built their terraced fields up into the blow of
even such winds as blew upon her now. And before
their time, here in the world’s spring, the hunters
had hunted free and naked through forest and bush,
with no dream of that which awaited their kind in
the deeps of the future. So long ago, so long ago!
It was a fairy-tale and yet a fact that a little Ameri¬
can girl sat on the Wiltshire Downs and looked back
upon, remote from her world and even her work,
yet with a note like an ancient music sounding un¬
dying even in these times. . . .
These times: Gay looked back over her twenty-
three years of life, to crowded cities and desolate
countryside, to her years of reading and hearing and
debating, to her three weeks here in England.
Civilisation: this for which men had sold their birth-
this which they were so anxious to preserve!
She glanced at the sun. It had smouldered down
low over the indicators on the far-off aerodrome.
She must get back.
THE COMPACT
7
§ii
She had parked the hired Morgan from London
a little way off the road. Getting into it, she threw
away her cigarette and concentrated on the un¬
familiar gears, with their unfamiliar feel. A sud¬
den revulsion against the Downs had come upon
her. She’d go back to Pewsey and have tea and lie
on her bed and read up those notes on pottery
periodicity in the Toltec pueblos.
The road was deserted, fringed by long grasses,
dry and rustling. Sheep baaed far off and unseen.
Presently Gay was aware that the road was no
longer deserted. She had overtaken a man who
seemed to be in distress. He was squatting by the
side of the road, his head in his hands. His brown
hair was greying a bit, she noted, absently, as she
stopped the Morgan and got out of it, lithely, even
though her figure was so pleasingly un-modern.
The man raised his head.
‘Well?’
Gay said, T thought you were ill.’
T’m not.’
‘Sorry.’
She went back to the Morgan, wriggled into it,
and was just pressing the self-starter when she
heard him call to her. ‘Can you give me a ride to
Pewsey?’
8
GAY HUNTER
'Plenty of room,’ Gay remarked.
He got up then and approached. He was tall.
He might have been forty years of age, she thought,
from his skin at the neck, round and clean. But his
face was older—set with the lines of unhappy years,
with beetling brows and unhappy, cold, aggressive
eyes. He was in hiker’s kit—shirt and shorts and
rucksack. She noted he had small feet. (You could
not help noting things like that when someone else
sat beside you in a Morgan.) He disposed them
into as small space as possible.
‘Okay?’ she asked.
‘I’m all right. . . . Oh, hell!’
His hands flew up to his forehead, gripping it.
Gay took her hands from the self-starter. She was
a little startled, but not too much. In her handbag
was a bottle of aspirins. She fetched it out.
‘Try some of these.’
He took his hands from his eyes and looked at
the aspirins and then at her; and was suddenly,
violently and blasphemously obscene.
. blasted muck . . . ride in your con¬
founded bath-tub, not your opinion of my ailments.
Haven’t I had enough of the half-witted doctors
and their cures without you trying to poison me?
Blasted rubbish ’
Gay lighted a fresh cigarette, reflecting absently
that she smoked too much. ‘What’s the funny badge
on your shirt?’
THE COMPACT
9
‘Eh?’
They both surveyed the badge. It was in blue
and gneen enamel, a bundle of rods and an axe tied
round with thongs. The curlews called. The wind
had quietened away, awaiting the going down of the
sun. The man scowled.
‘The fascesd
Gay, starting the Morgan at last, said that she
saw that. And what did the fasces stand for?
‘The Fascists.’
‘I see.’ For a little Gay was polite and absent,
doing active things round a hair-pin bend. ‘Then
you’re a Fascist?’
He grunted. Gay was faintly amused. Then,
suddenly, she remembered the story told her by one
of the German delegates at the Americanist Con¬
gress—of his sister, a communist, who had had
her  She felt sick even now to remember it.
And this freak with the headache and the hiker’s
shirt was of the party that had been pleased to do
that. Gay stopped the Morgan with a shriek of
brakes. She was still polite.
‘Sorry I made a mistake. Will you get out?’
The man stared, his lips parting slightly. He
had pleasant teeth. He said, ‘Eh?’
‘Get out. I like to help people’—she tried to
speak lightly and indifferently, but the story of what
had happened to that German woman kept wheel¬
ing the ordure of its details around in her mind, and
10
GAY HUNTER
she felt that in a moment she would vomit—‘but I
really draw the line at people like. ... We won’t
bother to debate it. Will you get out?’
His lined face flushed deeply. ‘Too pleased,’ he
said. In moments of stress his intonation was
Oxford. Gay retorted in a burlesque Cambridge.
‘So nice.’
But the Morgan is a small machine. His legs
had become tangled in Gay’s raincoat, lying at the
bottom of the car. He tugged with one foot, then
another, bent down, swore. Gay had a desire to
giggle, her anger fading. Suddenly he desisted from
his efforts, his hands flying up to his head again.
... A minute later Gay was saying:
‘You poor man, I was a beast. Lean back here,
and you’ll be comfy. I’ll run you into Pewsey and
we’ll dig out a doctor. You look bad.’
The intermittent attack of pain had passed. He
hesitated a moment. His voice had lost its previous
roughness.
‘Thank you. Afraid I behaved like a lout. But
these infernal pains ’
‘Ophthalmia?’ Gay was coasting along in low
gear.
‘Something like that to begin with. My eyes are
all right, but I had a whiff of a test gas towards the
end of the war that upset a balance somewhere.
Only these headaches have grown worse in the last
three months.’ He winced again. ‘And I can’t sleep
THE COMPACT
II
—I tell you I can’t. . . . Sorry.’
‘No need to be. Must feel horrible. But surely
they’ve given you sleeping draughts?’
He sneered. ‘And imaginary sheep to count.’
Gay gave it up. After a little she knew him
glancing at her. He said: ‘You’re an American,
aren’t you?’
‘Gay Hunter, archaeologist. Father American,
mother English. Born Mexico City. Education:
none. Age: twenty-three. Father and mother dead.
Business in England: attending Americanist Con¬
gress.’
He drawled: ‘Don’t bother with your size in shoes
and your taste in underwear. I’m Major Ledyard
Houghton. Retired from Army with intermittent
ill-health a year ago. Half-pay. An officer in the
Fascist Defence Corps. Father and mother dead.’
‘The meeting of the orphans, in fact,’ said
Gay. ‘Any particular place you want to go to in
Pewsey?’
‘There was a sort of a hotel there—the “Peacock”
—I noticed passing through this morning. I could
get a bed there, I think.’
‘Sure to,’ Gay agreed. ‘It’s where I’m staying
and there seem to be plenty of empty rooms.’
‘Very good of you to take along anything so
repulsive as a Fascist.’
‘Yes, it is rather. But I suppose they’re not to
blame—in origin, anyhow. Bad anthropology and
12
GAY HUNTER
worse history, and the lunatic blitherings of Sig¬
mund Freud are responsible, not the funny little
Mosleys or Hitlers or Mussolinis . . . Yes?’
His eyebrows were fluttering again. His polite¬
ness had quite gone. ‘Your history’s on a par with
your accent.’
Gay was maddeningly complacent. ‘A very good
accent. Elizabethan, we Americans talk, you know.
. . . Well, here’s Pewsey.’
§ Hi
She abandoned him at the hotel entrance and
went and stabled the Morgan. The weather still
held j it was stiflingly hot in her bedroom, with the
ivy tapping against the window in the hot little
breeze. Gay took off her clothes and fanned herself
with some sheets of the report on Toltec pottery'’,
the while she read some of the others. Then she
rang for tea, and draped herself with the sheets
when the girl brought it up. The girl smiled, liking
Gay. Most people liked her, wistfully. There came
a thump of heavy boots entering the next room.
Gay raised enquiring brows.
‘Let that room at last, Miss,’ the girl confided.
‘Queer-looking gentleman.’
Gay stretched her toes and disembarrassed her¬
self of the Toltec report. ‘Mind if I disrobe? I
THECOMPACT 13
thought it might be the waiter, and Pd hate to
embarrass the poor man.’
‘He’d have enjoyed it all right, Miss.’
Gay nodded. (She was funny, but nice, the girl
decided.) ‘Suppose he might. And I wouldn’t.
What a wind we all want to blow away the cob¬
webs! . . . Let next door, did you say?’
‘Yes, Miss. Funny gentleman who can’t sleep, I
heard him telling the master.’
Gay recognised the description. ‘Well, he won’t
keep me awake with snores. Tray here, yes.
Thanks.’
By the time the darkness had rendered reading
out of the question, she had nearly finished the
report. She lay on the bed and looked at herself;
then whistled a little. To-morrow she would be fin¬
ished with this Wiltshire glimpse, and go back to
London by way of Nurse Geddes’ cottage at Pinner,
before she sailed for America. Dear, pleasant,
plump, admonitory Nurse Geddes!—who had
loved and tended and smacked her early days into
shape in Mexico after Mother died, and now, pen¬
sioned and retired, grew flowers, poultry, and a
schoolgirl complexion in a cottage that had for
happy adjuncts a large, lovely and quite useless
clover meadow and a night-view of London upon
the sky. ... It was Nurse Geddes who had taught
her that old rhyming play on her name, she re¬
membered:
GAY HUNTER
H
‘Gay go up, and Gay go down:
That is the way to London Town!>
She twisted around on the bed. London? Nurse
was welcome to it—and every other big town in
fact or fancy. Though one sometimes had a
moment’s passionate desire for New York, its lights,
a good theatre’s entertainment, a flaring headline on
a real news-sheet 
Only they had begun to haunt her these days,
newspapers. (Delayed adolescence, she supposed.)
Idiotic to let them do that and spoil her holiday
after all that work at the Americanist Congress.
Idiotic—but the stuff of them had begun to spoil
her lightest moments, with their dreary listings of
tariffs and bickerings, strikes and hunger-marches,
mounted police charges on London’s unemployed,
the drowsy mummings of the English parliament,
the growing poverty and cumulating horror of a
civilisation in the agonies of every civilisation’s in¬
ternal contradictions. War and the rumours of war
again, blowing up smokily from the four corners of
the world. Hunger and murder and famine coming
on seven-league boots, the beasts and savages of
civilisation gathering under the swastika flag 
Like Houghton. She shivered. Good thing it
had been no more than a road encounter. Some¬
thing about him as repulsive as about an unwashed
baby—more, babies didn’t know and couldn’t help
THE COMPACT
15
it, and did enjoy a bath so much once you held them
firmly and scrubbed hard, and twinkled coloured
bubbles in front of them—kicked and laughed and
enjoyed being clean and having lovely skins. (She’d
washed babies in Mexico.) But from Houghton
and his kind you couldn’t wash off the foul beliefs
and superstitions that came out of the dreary past
and equipped them with knives wherewith to cut
the throats of all the decent traits in civilisation. . . .
‘If you can cut the throat of a trait . . . my dear,
you want your dinner.’
She dressed for it in no more than a vest, step-
ins, and the thinner of her two frocks, found shoes
for her bare feet, and went down to the dining¬
room. The air was even more stifling here, though
the windows were wide open. A gramophone was
playing somewhere in Pewsey—playing a song
nearly as out of date as the Pewsey statues, in the
slobbery Oxford-cum-Cambridge accent in which
English lyrics are sung:
(Gaw-id sendew bahk toomee>
Oh-ver thah mitey seee—
Daily I wancheWj Oh, how 1 mishew—’
Oh, slop, slop, slop! What a poor wail out of the
dark and terror and stench and filth of those war¬
time years that she herself had never known. . . .
Mexico then, bright with tamarinds and bandits and
i6
GAY HUNTER
the sun: while the starved and scared women in
cinemas were weeping over that tosh, and going
home to lonely beds in the fug of just such rooms
as this. Poor things, poor things. What was Mother’s
English adjectival phrase?: ‘Too bloody.’ Worse
than that. (Gay, my dear, have a big dinner and
get back to the Toltecs and their pottery.)
She looked round the room and its sham antique
oak, all solemn lines of fiddley curlicues. A great
sloped mirror showed herself. Being still very
young, she looked at that self with attention, but
not too much. The room was deserted but for the
waiter bringing the soup. Then she saw Houghton
enter.
He had changed from the hiking-dress—perhaps
he had carried that lounge suit in the rucksack. It
certainly looked a trifle crumpled. And as certainly
it improved his appearance. Gay drank soup and
looked at him with a faint interest—he had good
shoulders and a straight back, and the cool hauteur
and rangy straightness of the English Army officer
of myth and rumour. As good almost as meeting
an ancient Mayan in the flesh.
Funny how much better the lounge suit was than
the hiking-shirt and shorts. But she’d thought that
often of the feeble attempts at rationalisation in
clothes that men and women made. The scantier
the garments, the more feeble and ridiculous and
lewd the wearers looked. The Victorians were per-
THE COMPACT
I?
fectly right and logical, bless their padded bottoms.
Either you clothed yourself or you went naked.
To sling shorts or the various pieces of a bathing
suit over this and that portion of your anatomy was
to make those portions suspect and taboo 
Houghton was standing beside her. He was stiff.
‘I understand the waiter would like us to share a
table and save him work. Lazy old devil. Do you
mind?’
Gay shook her head, eating tepid fish. ‘I don’t
think so.’ She turned away her eyes from another
fasces badge, in the lapel of the lounge suit collar
this time. ‘How’s the headache?’
He sat down, half in profile. It was a stern, good,
absurd profile. ‘Gone for the time being j but no
doubt it’ll come back. ... No, damn you, I told you
I didn’t want soup. A chop, man.’
This was to the waiter. He shook a little, old
and servile. Gay gently restrained herself from
flinging the remains of the tepid fish at the correct,
absurd profile. She had often to restrain herself
over bodily assault in matters like that. The damned
horror of any animal addressing another like that!
Then she saw the twist of Houghton’s face. Poor
idiot.
She said: ‘There’s a stunt in sleep-making that
my father and I used to use when we went digging
down in Central America. Ever hear of a man
J. W. Dunne?’
i8
GAY HUNTER
‘Eh? . . . No.’
‘He’s not a quack doctor or a psycho-analyst. He
wrote a book called An Experiment with Time, and
Father got hold of it. If you develop the trick you
can get to sleep quite easily—unless you grow too
interested in to-morrow morning.’
‘Oh.’
But Gay was not discouraged. It was two or
three years since she herself had tried those experi¬
ments at the edge of sleeping to peer into the doings
of the next day or so. Father had given it up. He
had said it was dangerous without elaborate precau¬
tions—funny father, the sternest and best of mater¬
ialists!—salt of the earth, the materialists, though
there was all this half-witted outcry against them
these days from the sloppily superstitious Quakers
who masqueraded as physicists. . . . Well, this
was how 
The old waiter sighed, peering round the edge
of the door. That young ’un from America was at
it with the gentleman. Bit sharp, the gentleman,
but you supposed he couldn’t be blamed. You were
getting old, and a bit deaf, though it made you
run cold to think of that, and that the boss would
get to know He looked again. Still at it, she
was.
Houghton said, ‘Sounds rubbish. How can you
look into the future—into a time that doesn’t
exist?’
THE COMPACT
19
Gay shrugged. She was a little bored herself, by
now. This bleak militaristic intelligence always
bored her—made flirting with ship officers and gen¬
darmes impossible. Kind of people who never
thought of the thrill of a kiss as the moment before
lips touched, but just the contact and crush and a
greedy suction. . . . ‘The point seems to be that
events don’t happen. They’re waiting there in the
future to be overtaken.’
He said ‘Rubbish,’ again grumpilyj then jabbed
at his chop and was suddenly loquacious.
‘By God, there would be something worth while
if one could have a glimpse of the future—project
oneself into it for no more than a blink. All this
modernist botching of society and art and civilisa¬
tion finished, and discipline and breed and good
taste come into their own again. Worth while try¬
ing half a night of sleeplessness to see that.’
Gay had been about to rise and have her coffee
on the verandah j but now she could not, looking
at him with bent brows.
‘Is that what the future is to be?’
‘Of course it is. Service, loyalty. Hardness.
Hierarchy. The scum in their places again.’ His
face twitched. ‘England a nation again.’
‘And beyond that?’
‘What would there be? Some dignity in historyj
the national cultures keeping the balance ’
Gay whistled. ‘Poor human race! Is that its
20
GAY HUNTER
future? Well, whatever’s awaiting it, I know it
isn’t that.’
^ome Amurrican Utopia instead, with every
nation denationalised and the blah of your accent
all over the globe?’
‘That’s just rudeness.’
He coloured, stiffly. ‘I’m sorry.’
Gay said: ‘Even to-morrow won’t show a glimpse
of anything as bad as that. Or beyond it. If we
sat down to-night and tried to glimpse the future,
we’d find most things we expect haven’t
happened ’
‘All right. Let’s put it to the test to-night,
according to the formula of this chap Dunne that
your father developed. Lie and try a glimpse into
the future—and see if it’s your Utopia or a sane
history that the future’s going to hold.’
Gay said: ‘Of course that’s just fantastic. You
can see only a little of your own future—^through
a glass darkly.’
He was holding his head again. He was really
ill, Gay thought. He said, with the rudeness of
pain and unease: ‘Afraid, like most softies, eh?’
Gay knew it was silly, but also the project was a
little intriguing. She shrugged. ‘All right. Let’s.
But—if we manage to see anything at all—how are
we to know when we compare results that each is
speaking the truth?’
‘I’m not a liar.’
THE COMPACT
21
Gay nodded, rising. ‘Lucky man. Well, Pll be
seeing you.’
§ iv
The heat grew the more stifling as the night
wore on. Ascending to her room at eleven, Gay
found the warmth swathing the place like a thick,
close blanket. ‘Like Coleridge’s pants, in fact.’
Coleridge provided one of her gayest memories:
‘As though the earth in thick, fast pants
were breathing?
‘Poor planet, how it must have perspired! And
I feel a bit like it myself.’
She took off her dress and step-ins and kicked off
her shoes and sat with her hands clasping her brown
knees, and looked out at the hot, stagnant night
of the Wiltshire Downs. Below, she heard the old
waiter closing up for the night, and the sound of
heavy footsteps enter the room next her own. She
thought: ‘The haughty Britisher with the head¬
aches,’ and sat remembering their pact. The fool-
ishest thing—especially as she didn’t feel in the
least in the mood for trying a neo-Dunne test to¬
night. . . . She picked up the newspaper she had
brought unread from the smoking-room and opened
it and began to read. The night went on. At mid-
22
GAY HUNTER
night she heard the clocks chime below, and woke
to the lateness of the hour with a little start:
What a world! Hellnblast, what a world! as
Daddy used to say in moments when it vexed him
overmuch. The cruelty, the beastliness, the hope¬
lessness of it. Not for herself—she stretched brown
and clean, and looked down at herself and liked
herself and thought of her lovely job among the
remains of the Antique Americans and her plan for
a couple of babies, not to mention a father for them,
and for reading a million books and seeing a million
sunrises. But she was only one, and a fortunate one.
. . . All the poor folk labouring at filthy jobs under
the gathering clouds of war and an undreamed
tyranny—what had they to live for? Even she
herself—would she always escape? unless she hid
from her kind in the busy world of men, sought out
some little corner and abandoned life like the folk
at Rainier, like the hermits of the Thebaid. Those
children of hers—would they escape the wheels
and wires of life any more than the children of
others? Or their children thereafter, and so on and
on, till the world was one great pounding machine,
pounding the life out of humanity, making it an
ant-like slave-crawl on an earth turned to a dung¬
hill of its own futilities. She thought of Houghton
next door—he was more than Houghton, he was
the brutalised and bedevilled spirit of all men, she
thought. And for them and their horrific future
THECOMPACT 23
they expected women to conceive and have fruit¬
ful bodies and bear children 
Suddenly the night outside seemed to crack.
Sheet lightning flowed low and saffron down over
Pewsey, lighting up the Downs, and flowing soft
in the foliage of the trees. Gay went to the window
and watched. The earth looked a moment like a
sea of fire, as though that Next War’s bombard¬
ments were opening their barrage. It was hotter
than ever.
She got into her sleeping-suit, put out the light,
and lay down with only a sheet covering her. So
doing, the view of the night vanished, for the
windows were high in the wall. She stretched her
toes and put her right arm under her head in the
fashion that always so helped her to sleep, and
closed her eyes.
Half an hour later she had tried most positions
conceivable and inconceivable. But the newspapers
were haunting her from sleep. She got up and
drank a glass of water—tepid water that seemed
to have dust in it. Low down over Upavon the
thunder was growling dyspeptically. She lay down
again, throwing off the sheet this time, and lay
open-eyed, staring into the darkness, young, and
absurdly troubled, she told herself, a little whipper-
snapper absurdly and impudently troubled over a
planet that wasn’t her concern . . . Except that
she hated the thought of those babies of hers, in the
GAY HUNTER
24
times to be, coughing and coughing up their lungs
as the war-gas got into them 
It was only then that she remembered again her
pact with the Fascist, Houghton.
§v
Dreams, and a floating edge of mist. (But you
must not dream. You must stay just on the edge of
sleep, concentrating. So that you might awake and
jot down your impressions of the pictures.) She
tried to rouse herself, but a leaden weight seemed
pressing now on her eyelids. Yet again she told
herself not to dream.
Outside the lightning flashed, forked lightning
as she knew through her closed eyelids. But now
the dream-pictures were mist-edged no longer, they
were jagged like the lightning. She knew herself
caught in a sudden flow of images she had never
tapped before—slipping and sliding amidst them
like a diver going over Niagara. Something sud¬
denly snapped and the pictures ceased. . . .
Bombardment. The sky burst and showered the
earth with glowing meteors. Great-engined
monsters roared athwart the earth. Tribes fled and
hid in dim confusion and climbed out again to the
burning day. Great temples rose to insane creeds,
and gangs of red dwarfs laboured at titanic fur-
THE COMPACT
25
naces. Peace flowed and flowered with winking
seasons, season on season. Then again the sky broke
and flared with terror. Now faster and faster went
her fall over and into an unthinkable abyss, in a
wink and flow of green and gold and jet. Ceaseless
and ceaseless.
Then something smote athwart the rapids, and
the pit opened and devoured her.
II. THE INCREDIBLE MORNING
§1
She opened her eyes and saw that it was not yet
dawn. There was a pale light all abroad the great
stretches of the Wiltshire Downs, forerunner of the
sunlight, but only a ghost of its quality. A little
rain was seeping away into the east. She heard the
patter of its going, light-footed, through the dark¬
ness into the spaces where the east was wanly tinted.
She sat up.
Close at hand a curlew called.
She was aware that she was still dreaming, for
the window of the room in the ‘Peacock’ was set high
in the wall, so that, lying in bed, as she lay now,
she could see nothing of Pewsey or the Downs
beyond. This was a fragment of night-time dream.
Drowsy, she lay back again, cuddling her face in
her arm, and reaching out her left hand to draw
up the sheets about her. Her fingers strayed un¬
certainly, finding no sheet. With a sleepy irritation
she sought further, and then sat up again. There
was no sheet. But something else had led her to sit
erect. Her hand had touched her own skin.
26
THE INCREDIBLE MORNING 27
She was naked.
She put out her hand in the dimness and touched
the bed. It was not a bed. She was lying on a bank
of earth—a grassy bank. It was wet with dew. Her
back and legs were wet and chilled with the dew.
She sat erect, very rigid, her hands behind her.
The curlew called again, very close at hand.
Wings flapped in the dimness, darkness-shielded,
and there came a splatter of something in a hidden
pool. Gay put up her hand to her mouth and bit
it.
She gave a cry at the realness of the pain. What
was it? Where ?
Hellnblast, she knew! Sleep-walking! Not
that she had ever sleep-walked before, that she
knew. But that was what it must be. She had got
out of her room and out of the ‘Peacock,’ and
wandered out to the country beyond Pewsey. What
a mess!
She rubbed her chilled self and put up a hand to
push back the hair from her forehead. Soon be quite
light—probably not yet four o’clock. She must get
back. With a little luck she might get back unseen.
The labourers’ wives would just be stirring to light
their morning fires.
She stood erect 5 and instantly sat down, gasping.
There was something strange in the morning air
that caught at her lungs, icily as though she had
swallowed a mouthful of snow. Now she became
28
GAY HUNTER
aware of another fact—the rate at which her heart
was beating. It was pounding inside her chest, in¬
sanely, and the blood throbbing in her forehead
with the rapid beat of a dynamo. Sleep-walking
and nightmare—Oh, what a fool!
She sat with her head in her hands, giddy, till
the world about her began to quiet into unquiver¬
ing outlines. Her heart was easing to normal pulsa¬
tions. Through her fingers she saw the dawn
coming on Pewsey.
And there was no Pewsey.
§ii
She sat in a great dip of the Downs, grassy and
treeless, houseless, without moving speck of life,
that she could see, north, south, east or west. In
the coming of the sun great hummocks at a distance
shed themselves of shadows, they seemed like great
tumuli as the light came upon them. A wind was
coming with the light, and blew cold with dew.
But it changed and grew warmer, blowing upon her
naked body, blowing her hair about her face. Below
the little incline on which she sat a stream that
wandered through the great hollow in the Downs
lost itself in a reed-fringed stretch of water: she
saw that it was a marsh-fringed loch, stretching its
reeds away to the foot of the tumuli.
THE INCREDIBLE MORNING 29
She began to weep, terrified and lost, watching
that bright becoming of the day. Hellnblast, she
was mad—mad, or in a nightmare still. Where
was her room and her clothes and that report on
Toltec pottery?
She closed her eyes, sticking them fast, gripping
her head in her hands. Then she dropped them
and opened her eyes. She gave a low cry.
A great beast had come snuffling up the hill
from the reeds and stood not a yard away from her,
gigantic in the half-light, with pricked ears and a
drooling tongue. Its musk smell smote her like a
blow. It had the bigness of a bear, though the shape
of a wolf. It gave a low wurr and dropped one ear.
Gay screamed, piercingly.
At that the beast backed away, growled blood-
curdlingly, then turned, clumsily, and trotted away.
Gay watched it with a breathless disbelief as it
entered the reeds. A grunt and yap emerged. The
reeds ceased to wave and move. Gay’s frozen silence
went.
‘Lost, lost—oh, Pm lost!’ She screamed the
words, knowing that someone would come and shake
her awake and help her—that chambermaid, per¬
haps. She stared about her wide-eyed, waiting that
coming. The day brightened and grew.
No smoke. No sign of a house or of human
habitation. She raised her eyes to the east and saw
against it a moving dot. It grew and enlarged,
30 GAY HUNTER
coming earthwards and nearer. She held her breath.
It was a great bird the size of a condor, and
something of the same shape, with a crooked beak
and immense pinions that beat the air with the
noise of a river paddle-boat. It might have been
twelve feet from wing-tip to wing-tip. It planed
down close to the earth, to the spot where Gay stood
and glared, uttered a raucous and contemptuous
‘Arrh,’ and wheeled up into the sky again.
A condor in England!
Gay began to talk to herself. At the first word
the silence of the deserted countryside seemed to
intensify, listening. Breath-taking and terrible.
‘I don’t care! This isn’t real, but I won’t go mad!
I won’t, I ’
She realised she was dreadfully thirsty, her lips
grimed as with ancient dust. She glanced down at
her body and saw it the same, covered evenly as
with a thin sprinkling of soot. With a desperate
courage she looked towards the loch. The
beast ?
She picked up a stone in each hand and ran down
into the water. It caught her and almost choked her,
deep. She dropped the stones and splashed and
swam, gasping. Something in the water caught at
a foot, slimily, but she kicked it away. When she
swam back to the shore again and climbed, gasping,
from the icy embrace of the water, and wrung that
water from her hair and wiped it from breasts and
THE INCREDIBLE MORNING 31
body and legs, she felt as though she had sloughed
more than the covering of brown soot-dust. Wiping
the water from her eyelashes, she raised her head
again, knowing that surely the icy dip would have
restored her sanity as it had cleansed her body.
Around her were the unfamiliar, treeless, unin¬
habited hills.
Then she saw something white rising up from the
foot of the incline where she herself had awakened.
It elongated and stretched, cruciform-wise. It was
suddenly rigid.
It was a man, naked as herself, and staring at her
with dazed and astounded eyes.
It was Major Ledyard Houghton.
§ iii
Her first impulse was to turn and run. But that
was one too ridiculous to follow. Absurdly, she
remembered a story from some Victorian romance
of the heroine, nude, discovered by a man, and the
modest female covering her face with her hands to
hide her identity. . . . She giggled and sank down
on the grass.
‘Thank goodness there’s someone else in this
mess. But however have we got into it?’
‘Damned if I know. I woke and saw you swim¬
ming down there ... if I am awake.’
32
GAY HUNTER
‘Don’t worry about that. I’ve fought it all out
for myself, and you can take the results on trust.
But I do wish you’d sit down.’
‘Why?’
Gay clasped her knees with her hands. ‘So that
we can talk. And you’re rather—undraped.’
He had an exceedingly white skin. It turned a
rich crimson, face, neck. . . . Gay turned away her
eyes, politely, from survey of its further possibilities.
He slumped down in the grass.
‘Oh, damn it!’
He leapt up again. He had sat on a gorse-bush.
Gay put up her hands to her eyes and giggled help¬
lessly.
Giggling, she heard him say, hardly, ‘If you’ve
got hysterics, you can get out of them. I’m off to see
what’s happened.’
He was. He had jumped to his feet again. He
had broad shoulders and shapely hips, except for
one, with a great scar, like that of a branding-iron,
across it. Gay stared at the scar, herself standing up.
‘Where can you go? . . . And where did that
happen to you?’
He stared over his shoulder, angry and ludicrous.
‘Eh? What? What happen?’ He coloured again,
richly. ‘War-time wound.’
‘I see. And where are you going?’
‘To find ’ he stared around, ‘some house.’
‘Does it look as though there are any?’
THE INCREDIBLE MORNING 33
It did not. The fact seemed to sink into their
unevenly-beating hearts. It was a land wild and for¬
gotten. No human feet had trodden it, or voices
called here, or the busy world of men reached out
a hand here for long ages. The sunlight ran its
colours up and down the near hills, gay with gorse.
Far off a peewit wailed its immemorial plaint.
There was no mark of cultivation or sign of human
kind. Gay said, very quietly:
‘Something has happened to us. I don’t know
what. But we’re here, lost, as though wte’d been
newly born. If we’re going to search out anything,
perhaps we’d best do it together.’ She shaded her
eyes with her hand, looking towards the tumuli.
Without much hope: ‘There might be something
to help us in those mounds.’
They set out, almost side by side, across the
spring of the grass. In Gay’s mind was a bubbling
tumult of thought and speculation, backgrounded
by a horrible Fear which she closed away. That
wouldn’t help, she’d to keep sane; and keep up
with the headache man; and be thankful she’d a
decent figure under these shy-making circumstances.
She glanced down at it, nicely browned, and felt
absurdly cheered. Houghton swung beside her in
silence, his neat, thinned Greek profile rigidly
towards her, his eyes fixed ahead. She suddenly
realised that he was elaborately and painstakingly
not looking at her. Also, that he was wishing, with
34
GAY HUNTER
an angry embarrassment, that she would not look
at him.
They came in silence to the foot of the great
mounds. There were three of them, matted in long,
coarse grass. Gay went through the space between
the nearer two and saw beyond merely such rolling
hill-country, rolling deserted to the horizon’s edge,
as lay to the west. She heard Houghton breathing,
coming round the corner.
‘They’re just hills.’
Gay shook her head. ‘Mounds, I think. I’ve
dug ancient ones in Mexico, and they’ve much these
shapes, ruined buildings with a thousand years or so
of the blowing of sand and earth on the top of
them ’ She stopped, appalled. ‘Oh, God!’
He barked, ‘Eh?’—it must have been his tribal
war-cry—staring about him. But Gay was merely
looking blankly at the mounds. She said:
‘I don’t know much of the Pewsey country, but
there were no mounds near the village last night.
None marked on any archaeological map. If these
have taken years to accumulate, then ’
For the first time their eyes met, and she saw
herself globed in the light grey eyes of Houghton,
shallow, puzzled eyes, faintly red-rimmed. She saw
her face, strained and white, in that reflection, above
her brown throat. . . . Houghton looked away.
‘Then this can’t be the Pewsey district.’
But it is. That hill over there—I saw it as I
THE INCREDIBLE MORNING 35
went to sleep last night—if it was last night.’ She
felt suddenly breathless and sat down. ‘Listen, what
did you do when you went to bed last night?’
‘What? Tried the formula of this Dunne rubbish
you talked about.’
‘Did you have any success?’ Gay’s voice sounded
far away to herself.
‘Stuff like nightmare after a bit. Half-dozing,
I suppose. The lightning cracked into the stuff and
made my headache twice as bad. Then I slipped
into the stuff again—damned rubbish. Woke up and
saw you.’
‘This rubbishy dream stuff—did you have a sen¬
sation of going at a tremendous rate—slipping over
the brink of a precipice?’
He scowled in thought. ‘No. Something—like
going up a spiral staircase, and lights winking in and
out from the windows. Anyhow, what does it
matter? What’s it to do with this—blasted insanity?’
‘I’m not sure—yet.’ Gay Hunter still felt breath¬
less, that, and queer, as though she was about to be
sick. ‘But I’ve a guess—oh, hellnblast, it can’t be,
it can’t be!’
‘All this is rot to me. Look here, if we’re going
together, we might as well start. I’m going on—to
get clothes somewhere, and back to London, what¬
ever has happened here in Wiltshire.’
Gay stood up, slowly, a queer look on her face.
‘All right? East?’
GAY HUNTER
36
‘That’s the direction of London, isn’t it?’
‘Yes, that’s the direction of London. Or was.’
‘Eh?’
She gripped his naked arm. ‘What’s that?*
That was a movement in the long grass at a dis¬
tance of ten yards or so from the mounds—a move¬
ment that ended in a tall, blonde woman, unclad as
themselves, with a scared, astounded face, rising into
full view and staring at them with horrified eyes.
Gay blinked her own eyes at the sight. Had the
whole damn landscape been showered with un¬
draped females in the night? Oh Lord, she was
going mad 
iLedyard!)
Houghton stood halted, staring, a dismayed,
agonised, smoking-room-story-blush in effigy.
‘Jane!’
Gay slumped down in the grass, too wearied with
surprises even to giggle. ‘Do introduce us.’
‘Eh? What? Oh Lord, Jane! . . . This is Lady
Jane Easterling, Miss Hunter.’
§ iv
So that was how.
Lady Jane Easterling, her hysterical story
brought to an hysterical end, was now sobbing into
her hands, having nothing else to sob into.
THE INCREDIBLE MORNING 37
Houghton was patting her shoulder, tentatively.
Gay, for lack of the consolation of either pat or sob,
pulled a long grass and bit at it, and stared at her
own shaking fingers.
So that was how . . .
It had been a confused enough story (she was the
kind of spoilt woman who confused stories and most
other things, Gay thought, with a slight cattishness),
but the main outlines not too blurred. Lady Jane
the lady patroness of the local Fascists. . . . Lady
Jane with a house near Pewsey. . . . Houghton a
guest at her house. ... A tiff. . . . Houghton off
on a propaganda walking-tour. . . . Houghton
and his headaches brought back to Pewsey in the
Morgan. . . . Houghton making the compact for
a neo-Dunne test with an impertinent American girl,
and then ringing up Lady Jane from the hotel and
the two of them indulging in an orgy of reconcilia¬
tion over the telephone—an orgy in which
Houghton had told this bored, idle woman of the
method by which he was to seek sleep. And Lady
Jane, being bored, had gone to bed and amused her¬
self in like manner 
(Oh hellnblast, Daddy, what a mess! And to
think I once laughed at you when you talked of the
risks in neo-Dunne!)
The sobs were dying away. Certainly a lovely
sobber—a little younger than Houghton, perhaps,
pre-Raphaelitish even to the short, haughty lipj
GAY HUNTER
38
white and gold. . . . Houghton was proving con¬
soling.
‘This is just some idiot accident, Jane—some local
upset in conditions. We’ll push east and soon get
help, Reading or London or nearer.’
‘Oh, Ledyard, you’re sure? I’d go mad in this
desert. . . . And all through the filthy trick this
girl started you on!’
‘Rubbish, nothing to do with that stuff. Eh, Miss
Hunter?’
Gay shook her head, standing up. ‘Let’s set out.
Nothing? Sorry. I’m afraid it’s got everything.’
III.
EVEN THE STARS
§1
They halted that night on the fringes of a great
forest east of Pewsey. Perhaps this was where
Kingsclere once had been. Treading through the
long grass, they neared the black cluster of trees,
gigantic in the departing light of the sun. When
near, they saw they were of an unknown species,
tall, smooth-trunked, like giant wands, and bearing
far on their crests clusters of plumag'e like palms.
That plumage was waving and whispering in the
summer wind, and they saw far down dark, treey
aisles to distances where the light failed completely.
In those dim depths the ground was carpeted with
a pine-needle-like detritus. Gay halted, staring
down a corridor.
‘Better not go ind
Gasping, Lady Jane sank down at the foot of the
nearest tree. Houghton glanced over his shoulder,
breathing deeply. ‘Nod
Gay also looked back. But the giant bear which
had roused them from their berry-picking a mile or
so away was nowhere in sight. Gay had raised her
39
GAY HUNTER
40
head, crushing the wild strawberries into a hungry
mouth, her lips red with the stain of them, to glance
at Houghton, and Lady Jane, and had caught sight
of the horrified apprehension in their eyes. Then
she had looked over her shoulder and seen the great
bear—the size and shape of a polar bear, but brown
—snuffling on its hind-legs and waving its head and
shoulders to and fro, undecidedly. Gay had never
been aware she could run so quickly. She had
almost overtaken Lady Jane. Then she had halted
and looked back. Houghton was cursing the bear
shakily, and standing in its path, covering their
retreat. Oh, the damn fool 
She had run back and seized his arm. ‘Come on,
you idiot!’
He had said, ‘Run, damn you!’ and to the bear,
‘Get off!’
The bear had yawned. They had turned and run
together. Beyond the patch all three had looked
back and seen the beast following them, at a canter,
snuffling in their tracks, the hair about its neck
erected in a ruff. Gay had glanced down at her
heels and understood. She was leaving a trail of
blood-specks from a thorn-scratch. She had stooped
and wiped her heel. When next she had looked
back, the bear was halted, on its hind-legs, pawing
the air again. It had lost the trail.
Now they must find somewhere to put up for the
night.
EVEN THE STARS 41
Houghton was evidently thinking the same. ‘But
where? There’s been no sign of a house all day.’
No house: no people: no sign of a railway track:
no sign of grazing kine or the smoke from a har¬
vester’s pipe, no sign of roads or rails or all the busy
life of the world. At noon, by a spring that burst
from the earth, they had halted to eat wild plums—
plums growing from the side of just such another
tumulus as reared its head by the place where they
awoke. Pulling at a cluster of plums, Gay had
pulled away with it a clot of earth, and something
that had for a moment a shape, and then fell into a
handful of dust. She had caught up a little of that
dust and examined it. Lady Jane regarded her with
a cold distaste. But Houghton came to look—with
less strain in her presence than in the early morning.
Already, she had thought, raising her head and
glancing at him, they were accepting each other,
naked and ashamed, with indifference. (Thanks,
perhaps, to Lady Jane’s chilling chaperonage.) He
had asked: ‘What is it?’
She could tell him that. ‘Iron-dust.’
‘Iron-dust?’
‘Yes. It goes readily.’ She had peered into the
tumulus wall, and then shivered in spite of herself.
‘Part of a railway embankment, perhaps.’
‘What? That’s rot, of course.’
She had nodded. ‘Yes. Rotten iron.’
‘Miss Hunter is a wag, Ledyard.’
D
42
GAY HUNTER
Just after they finished their meal he had jumped
to his feet and started to rave, beating his head with
his hands, and going lurching like a blind man
among the mounds. Lady Jane had run after him,
startled. Gay had paused in her berry-munching
and regarded him, bored.
‘Stop it, Mr. Houghton! ’
He had stopped, wheeling on her with murder
in his eyes. She had felt a quake of fear, what of
his size and that look.
‘Stop it! Who began it? You and this damned
experiment that has pitched us into this nightmare.
Stop it? By God, Fve a good mind to wring your
neck.’
She had glanced from his maddened face to Lady
Jane’s expectant one (how the woman did detest
her!), then round the silent, deserted countryside,
eerie in its quietness under the noonday fall of sun:
‘You two would find yourselves rather lonely if
you did.’
That had quietened him. He took shape as a bully
almost automatically—a courageous bully, however,
Gay thought as they stood now and peered in the
depths of the sunset forest. Most bullies, in fact,
were courageous—a horrid moral mistake!
The light grew dimmer while they hesitated.
Then Gay said ‘Listen!’ very softly.
It came from far away in the depths of the forest
—remote and strange and lovely, drowsily and
EVEN THE STARS 43
clearly, the croon of a ring-dove’s note. Houghton
glared impatiently towards the sound.
‘Only a dove.’
‘I know. But it might have been a condor. . . .
What are you going to do now?’
‘Damned if I know.’ His hand wandered up to
his head, and then hesitated. ‘Funny. I haven’t had
a spot of headache since ’
‘Since the nightmare began. Perhaps one doesn’t
have headaches in nightmares. I’m going to camp
just here, anyway.’
Lady Jane lay exhausted where she had fallen,
at the foot of the nearest tree. She was sobbing
again. Houghton went towards her, diffidently, and
bent down with a hand on her white shoulder:
‘Jane ’
Gay turned to her bedmaking. She was scratched
and tired and had no one to take her shoulder and
say ‘Gay’ in a soothing Oxford ha-ha. But, absurdly,
she felt almost happy. A sudden lift of the wind
sent all the plumage, the silky plumage of the
strange forest trees, quivering with a strange moan¬
ing sound. She looked up at those ferny crowns and
down through the dark corridors again.
What lay within or beyond?
And suddenly she knew it was nothing terrifying,
even though it might be a pack of wild beasts of
unknown shape and ravenousness. They could do
no more at the utmost than kill her and eat her!
44 gay hunter
And, she thought philosophically, while she pulled
the long grass and twisted it into shape for a pillow,
hadn’t that happened often enough to others since
the first men came wandering into Europe twenty
thousand years before? Naked and lost in an im¬
possible countryside in an impossible England—it
was now you realised how little and how much your
life was worth. All the fears and dreads you ever
had—had been for the things you now lacked:
clothes and books and cigarettes and jewels and
marcel waves and sweets—not for yourself at all!
She stood upright, panting a little, taking her
breath while she thought that: She had no more fear
of the world, naked and lost, than a naked baby
new-born!
Lady Jane was being consoled. They were having
a perfect orgy, Gay thought with a little twinge of
lostness, in spite of her genial assurance to herself.
Nice to have someone cuddle you, discreetly, and
tell you it was all right, and they’d soon reach some
place with clothes and food.
When they wouldn’t.
Beyond the murmur of the voices of Lady Jane
and Houghton she heard the trill of a stream and
felt suddenly thirsty. She called, T’m going for a
drink,’ and went down the edge of the trees by a
little hill. Here, in the sunset, she came on the
stream, osier-fringed, with a clear, sandy bed.
Against that bed she saw trout gliding. Presently
EVEN THE STARS
45
the reeds at the other side broke and a water-hen
sailed out and across the slow flow. Gay looked after
it, and then, bending to drink as an animal drinks,
caught sight of herself.
She considered that self for a little while, and
saw her lips quiver. Damn young to be launched
out in the wastes of time and space, with a vexing
intelligence; and without any cuddles.
The light was dying as she took her way back by
the tree-boles. The sun burned like a far fire down
through the remote tree-corridors. Lady Jane sat
shivering and cuddling herself under her tree while
Houghton, with some deftness, arranged a shelter
of broken plumage-branches he had collected from
the forest-floor. He said, ‘Where have you been?’
Gay’s voice was equally low: ‘Having a drink.
There’s a stream down there.’
‘Oh! And I—I feel so dreadfully thirsty.’
Lady Jane’s throaty contralto, starting on its normal
note, trailed into a murmurous wail. Houghton
glanced from her to Gay. The latter hesitated a
moment. Then:
‘The water’s quite close. There’s no danger.’
She could feel their gaze on her back as she went
to her bed. Lady Jane drawled, with a sudden
return to normality:
‘What a funny and charming accent! Did you
say it was New York you came from, Miss Hunter
—the Bowery?’
GAY HUNTER
46
Gay lay down and yawned, and pulled the
blanketing swathes of grass over herself. ‘Pity you
weren’t properly smacked in your young days, Lady
Jane. Good night.’
There was a silence. Then Houghton said,
<Er—good night.’ Presently Gay heard a rustling
of grass, and looking rightwards saw them disappear
down towards the stream.
Had a nice figure, the girl. Pity she was the type
she was. Funniest kind of parasite ever evolved by
the species in these modern days 
These modern days!
What days were they? She cuddled the grass
closer up to her chin and watched the sky. Slowly
the painted colours of the sunset faded off. A deep
grey followed and then more slowly all the
horizon rims grew black. Darkness came flowing
out from the forest, wave on wave. Far off among
the trees an owl hooted, oddly homely the sound.
The black of the sky was changing to a deep blue.
Gay heard the sound of the footsteps of Houghton
and Lady Jane returning through the grass. She
lay quiet.
Where were they? And what time were they in?
What would they find to-morrow?
She knew quite well what had happened—it was
something like this her father must have feared,
when he spoke of risks and precautions. They had
dreamt themselves forward into the times to be,
EVEN THE STARS
47
through the dusty curtain that overhung the future
of the twentieth century. Something propitious in
the air and conditions of last night—if one could
think of it as last night! What night had it been,
the last one to come down over this wild land where
condors and bears wandered,, and palm-trees were
roofed like pines? And how far from that evening
in Pewsey when the three of them had last seen
sunset?
Fifty years? A hundred? More than that. The
country had changed beyond recognition, the two
English people said. For roads and railways to dis¬
appear argued the passage of a great stretch of years.
It was easy to say that to oneself, cuddling down
here in the warmth of the grass—easy, unless one
realised that this self one loved and liked and
laughed at was—lost in the deeps of time, unbe¬
friended, in a world where the men who survived
might be an alien and a terrifying species. Beyond
that forest.
Beyond that forest.
She turned over on her shoulder to look at it.
It was quiet and voiceless. What lay beyond—what
strange world of men in this lost century? She
thought of books of speculation she had read on the
future—books of the early Wells, of Flammarion,
of their hosts of imitators: books that pictured the
sciences mounting and growing, piling great crystal¬
line pyramids of knowledge and technique into alien
GAY HUNTER
48
skies, with men their servitors, changing and alter¬
ing with them, physically and psychically, mislaying
legs and intestinal tubes, sprouting many arms, be¬
coming bisexual, becoming as strange and repulsive
gods dominating a strange and repulsive earth. She
thought of the fantastic beings of a play, Back to
Methuselah, by one of the quack prophets of that
remote time—(the remote time in which she her¬
self was born!)—who were bred to long lives of
thousands of years and spent them in meditation on
the Oneness of Life! What a eunuch’s dream! Or
the younger Huxley, with a machine-made world
and machine-made humans, undergoing a fantastic
existence conditioned of the bleak lunacy of their
author’s anthropological beliefs. . . . Worlds
without end that had been foisted upon the future.
And which, if any, had that world accepted?
She thought of another who had stirred the his¬
torical dove-cotes of her time—Spengler, with his
theories of cyclic catastrophe, of the rise and fall of
cultures, inevitable and unceasing. His slick, quack
arguments, built of poor reasoning and worse
research, had left her unmoved, but how they had
moved her contemporary world! What a brainless
and barren world that had been, headlessly search¬
ing for a way of life! How had they solved it, what
had happened to them? To Roosevelt and Hitler
and Mussolini and Stalin and Theodore Dreiser
and Frau Krupp and Chiang Kai-shek and Pavlov
EVEN THE STARS
49
and Einstein and the prostitutes in Broadway and
the publishers in Fourth Avenue and the war-
lunatics in the asylums and the little folk on the
Middle West farms and the landlord of the ‘Pea-
000^—and all they suffered and believed and
imagined undying, tremendous, divine? How had
the centuries dealt with them? . . .
Beyond the forest, to-morrow.
The stars were coming. The Milky Way was
banded tremendous across the sky. She moved her
head and looked where the North Star pointed as of
yore—but was it quite as of yore? She felt her heart
beat high in her chest as she looked, crouched upon
her elbow.
For Charles’s Wain had altered his ancient shape
—he bulged more steeply up the sky, as though
smitten a great upwards blow. Her eyes wandered
from constellation to constellation. In Hercules she
saw a great star shine that had not been there last
night 
Last night! Oh, God, how many nights ago?
Before the stars altered their shaping and grouping
hundreds and hundreds of years must have passed.
Hundreds? Thousands, rather. So many that they
might never learn—so many that the human race
might have grown incomprehensible, alien, strange
beings who would slaughter them as unclean
animals, as German peasants of the twentieth cen¬
tury would have slaughtered a Heidelberg man
GAY HUNTER
50
had he arisen, great-browed and chinless, unmum-
mified from some primal pit. Oh God!
And, as she crouched there in terror, slowly the
moon topped the strange forest. Its light came
down the corridor of trees and she saw it high and
golden, and laid her head in her hands and wept.
It was nearer, larger, a different moon.
§ii
In the middle of the night she awakened to the
sound of a scream. It was the voice of Lady Jane,
uplifted in that oddly asinine, cultured haw:
‘Help, help! Ledyard!’
Gay leapt to her feet and found the night a cold
shower of a night—it was as though she had leapt
out under a cold shower. The moon was sinking,
and in its light, grass-scattering a little distance
away, she saw Houghton rise up as well. Lady Jane,
hand at mouth, was screaming wordlessly.
They saw the reason. A great black panther
which had come out of the forest and awakened
Lady Jane by licking her nose. The scrape of its
tongue had brought her out of sleep to the glare of
two tremendous, yellow eyes above her. The beast
had sprung away, and stood now coal-black and tail¬
switching in the moonlight.
Houghton and Gay recovered simultaneously.
EVEN THE STARS
51
They shouted and made at the panther. It could
have made mincemeat of both of them. Instead,
with a surprised fuf! it turned and slunk away
through the tree-boles. They halted, panting,
Houghton trembling and glaring.
‘Blasted stink-cat!’
Lady Jane was in hysterics. Gay walked over and
prodded her ribs and legs in search of wounds, and
put up a hand to her face. Instantly her hand was
bitten. She pulled it away, and administered a slap
which instantly finished the hysterics. Instantly she
found Houghton beside her.
‘You callous little bitch! What are you hitting
her for?’
Gay yawned sleepily. ‘To keep her quiet.’
‘If you yourself ’
‘If I’d been rescued from an amour with a pussy¬
cat I’d keep quiet about it.’ She felt both sleepy
and tired. Also, suddenly, she wanted to cry. ‘I’m
going back to bed.’
‘You can go to the devil.’
Such a funny little squabble under the sinking of
that alien moon, the strange world, tenebrous, await¬
ing a momentous dawn!
§iii
In the early morning she found the plovers’ eggs.
52
GAY HUNTER
She had been roused by the cheep of sparrows,
pecking within a foot of her head, and, rousing, had
remembered instantly where she was. Sparrows!
But of course they would hardly change—sparrows
and swallows were almost eternal, unless the great
steaming jungles came back to the earth. She lay
in, the quietude of the dawn and looked at the little
birds. The dew was sparkling. Beyond the chirp¬
ing of the sparrows, far off, a peewit wailed.
She got to her feet and looked towards the place
where Lady Jane slept, and then towards the spot
where Houghton had lain down the previous night.
The latter spot was a ruffled straw desertion. Up
already? Then she saw that Houghton and Lady
Jane, inadequately shielded by their covering of
grass, were sleeping in each other’s arms.
Sensible people. For the first time in her
acquaintance with them in the last twenty-four
hours, she felt friendly towards them. Looked nice,
cuddled there.
She took her way down towards the stream where
she had drunk last night. A little mist ebbed away
from its banks. The water was icy cold as she
plunged into it and squatted and paddled, for it was
not deep enough for her to swim. As she squatted
and splashed and rubbed the night-time tiredness
and hayseed dust from her skin she felt her back
tickled by the flirting tails of the little trout.
Friendly little beasts.
EVEN THE STARS
53
She got out on the bank and wiped herself with
her hands, inadequately, glanced back and upwards
towards where the other two slept j and then
turned and ran down by the forest-edge, in the sun¬
light, running to dry herself.
Presently the fun of that carried her feet to
racing speed. She fled her own shadow into the
west, over the tussocky grass, running light and free
—goodness, never so free before in her life! Run¬
ning, she was aware of all her body pringling to
life, and sank down at last by a solitary bush in the
plain, panting, her skin quivering, dry and comfort¬
able and a very good skin. She remembered the
stick and cling of even the scantiest bathing-dresses,
and how she had always loathed them. Freed from
that, anyhow.
Then she heard something panting at her elbow,
and turned her head.
Running, she had half-imagined she heard the
scamper of feet behind her. Now it was plain it had
been no imagining. The beast sat a yard away, re¬
garding her with laughing eyes, with tongue lolling
out and quivering, serrated jaw-skin. Gay forgot
the entire strangeness of the place and time.
‘Why, you dear!’
It was only as she put her arms round his neck
and cuddled him that she realised what she had
done. The brute was no dog: it was a wolf.
Her arms stiffened. Thereat the wolf licked her
54 GAY HUNTER
intimately, so that it tickled. Gay laughed. Un¬
believable, but a fact. He was tame!
They sat and regarded each other with great
friendliness. The bigness of a wolf, dark-grey, with
a wavy yellow stripe along the belly, the wolf or
dog had a bright, inquisitive right ear and a droop¬
ing left one apparently badly mangled in some en¬
counter. His gaze on Gay was not the bland, eager
gaze of a dog, however, but a gay, friendly, inde¬
pendent one. What freak beast was it?
4You may have had a master, but he s left no
mark. Or are you just amused and tickled to see a
member of the Americanist Conference of the
twentieth century running about unclad in your
own? . . . Well, what are you going to do?
The great beast had got to its feet. It looked as
big as a St. Bernard. It glanced at Gay, snuffled
the air, and prepared to depart.
‘Don’t, for goodness’ sake. Couldn’t you dig out
some breakfast for me, seeing I’ve come such a long
way?’
Absurdly he seemed to understand. He trotted
away, back towards the stream, turning his head
every now and then to see if she followed. Close
by the stream the air whirred and fluttered with
plovers’ wings. The beast nosed about in the grass,
sat down, and began a rapid and enjoyable scrunch¬
ing. Gay peered over his shoulder. It was a plover’s
nest.
EVENTHE STARS $5
They finished off the raw eggs between them.
Wiping her small mouth, Gay remembered
Houghton and Lady Jane and searched for another
nest. Presently she found one with three eggs and
set out up the stream. The beast trotted in front of
her, halted, sniffed. Gay topped the rise to see
Lady Jane and Houghton just about to enter the
avenue of pine-palms together. At the scuffle of the
beast’s approach they had halted. Gay did the same.
‘Going to leave me?’
‘We thought you had left usd
This was Houghton. But he had flushed dully.
Lady Jane shrank behind him at sight of the wolf,
till Gay called out he was tame. He went up and
sniffed delicately at the heels of the two, then
sneezed profoundly, and turned a questioning head
to Gay.
‘All right, friends—more or less. . . . Pve
brought you people some eggs.’
Lady Jane stared at them in distaste. She looked
very lovely, Gay thought. White and gold. ‘But
however are we going to eat them?’
‘Suck them, the same as your grandmother.’
Even naked, Lady Jane could smile an aloof
amusement for such gawkish flippancy. And now,
lowering her eyes a little from that fine face and
torso, Gay saw that she was no longer naked. In the
morning or during the evening she had woven a
grass and rush skirt, now draped round her waist
56 GAY HUNTER
and reaching to within two inches of her knees.
Lady Jane nodded.
‘Don’t you think you’d better do the same?’
Gay glanced at Houghton. The shameful por¬
tion of his anatomy also was concealed. Abruptly the
situation had changed. They were two people clad,
with responsibilities, and already poise, even while
they stood and sucked raw eggs. Gay realised sud¬
denly the nakedness of her smooth skin under that
appraising glance of Lady Jane, and for a minute
felt daunted. Then she glanced again at the grass
skirts and began to giggle, very helplessly. The
wolf-beast snuffled and came and licked her shoulder
as she sat down. Gay wiped her eyes.
‘Sorry, but you both look as funny as—And why
bother with the things? Especially in this weather?’
‘We’ll soon be nearing London, and there’s
bound to be people about,’ Houghton said. Lady
Jane was looking at Gay with coolly upraised brows.
‘Elementary decency—especially when you have
such an oddly brown figure.’
Gay nodded to her with a little smile. ‘We do
detest each other, don’t we? Especially as you know
that I have rather a nice figure—intriguing, not
just obviously lovely, like yours. But frankly, I
think you look indecent in these things. I’m a
human being—but you two look like savages. Even
in London you’ll look odder than I. Especi¬
ally ”
EVEN THE STARS 57
‘Yes?’ Lady Jane Easterling wiped her mouth,
as delicately as she might, with a bunch of grass.
cDid either of you look at the stars last night?’
‘The stars? What on earth for, my good girl?’
Gay shrugged. ‘Oh, well. Look at them to-night
and they’ll tell you things. Rather appalling things,
I imagine. Here, Wolf!’
The beast had wandered off, tree-investigatory,
in the old canine convention. Some things sur¬
vived even the moving of the stars. . . . Now it
stopped and regarded Gay with a bright, humorous
eye. She resolved to trust to its leading, rather than
the opinions of the lady secretary and organiser of
the Fascist Defence Corps.
She and the wolf entered the forest together.
Lady Jane Easterling and Houghton looked at
each other, then followed.
§ iv
For a space of two miles or more they trod down
those forest corridors on a carpet of pine-humus.
Here the light, even the early light of morning,
came but dimly, and the air was choked with the
acrid smell of the trees—the smell of pine and palm
commingled (and poor old Kipling not here to ecsta¬
size!). The wolf scampered ahead and came back
now and then to pad by Gay’s side. Once she ruffled
GAY HUNTER
58
his head and at that he snapped at her, with
gleaming teeth, only just missing her finger.
Not so tame. She went on more soberly by his
side.
Then, and very suddenly, the forest opened into
a great wide space, circular, tree-guarded, without
grass or bush or growing thing. It was an uneven,
undulating surface, a surface of blown cones and
rotted tree-plumage, but somehow Gay had the
notion of its perfect flatness underneath that earthy
deposit. One of the pine-plumes had fallen near
at hand. She picked it up and on a sudden impulse
began to dig through the humus.
The wolf halted and sat down, watching. Hough¬
ton and Lady Jane came up. Lady Jane raised
amused eyebrows:
‘Whatever are you at, now?’
She spoke as to a somewhat disgusting child. Gay
continued to dig. At a depth of about a foot and a
half the plume branch scraped sharply, as on metal.
Gay enlarged the hole, flinging out the dirt with
her hands. Nor had she been mistaken. Under her
eyes shone a dull gleam. She scratched it, the green
encrustation. It was copper, or some alloy of
copper.
She told that to Houghton and he bent and
looked. It was an eerie place. A great circular floor¬
ing of copper lay here in the midst of this lost
forest—for what, by whom placed there? Lady
EVEN THE STARS
59
Jane Easterling moved impatiently.
‘Oh, do let’s go on. What does it matter though
there’s copper here? It’s no use to us.’
‘No,’ Houghton assented. But he was evidently
worried by that great stretch of treeless, bushless
track, as they left it behind. He cleared his throat,
addressing Gay with difficulty.
‘If you would mind telling us, Miss Hunter—
what was it that was peculiar in the sky last
night?’
Gay glanced at him with a smile, a smile of sym¬
pathy. Poor man. Lady Jane’s man. Poor in both
respects! But relations were strained enough with¬
out saying so. Instead:
‘Just that the moon’s larger—that means nearer
than it used to be—and that one or two of the
constellations have altered shape. You know what
that means?’
‘I think so.’ He obviously knew nothing about it.
Lady Jane was listening with her usual polite
amusement to this boring and loquacious child. Gay,
swinging forward in that jaunty schoolboy stride
of hers, sought carefully for the right phrases:
‘It’s just that we aren’t in the twentieth century
at all. In the neo-Dunne test we all three went
beyond it—by some accident. We’re far in the
future. Stars don’t alter their appearance and
grouping from the surface of the earth until the
passing of long ages. And the moon was nearing
6o
GAY HUNTER
the earth very slowly in the twentieth century—a
foot or so every hundred years, I think. It means
that we’re in a time at least as remote from the
twentieth century as it was from the days of the
people who built the Egyptian pyramids—more
probably far remoter.’
Even Lady Jane understood this. She said, in¬
credulously: ‘And what is the rest of the fairy-tale,
Miss Hunter?’
Gay shrugged: ‘Oh, a country without roads or
railroads or houses. With polar bears turned brown.
With black panthers licking people’s noses at nights
—with this wolf, here.’
Houghton’s brick-red face had paled. ‘You
really believe, Miss Hunter, that we’ve travelled
forward through time?’
Gay felt an odd compassion for him. ‘I know we
have.’
‘Then—my God, Jane, there mayn’t be any pur¬
pose going east. There mayn’t be even London
there.’
‘Nonsense, of course there is.’ But she had begun
to drag, sore-footed. ‘If only I had shoes!’
Gay was humming. Houghton said, irritably:
‘For God’s sake, would you mind shutting that
off or else singing it aloud? It’s getting on my
nerves.’
Gay said ‘Sure,’ and raised her voice. The wolf
came growling to her side. The forest stirred from
EVEN THE STARS 6l
its sleep—how long since it had heard a human voice
raised in singing?—
‘Gay go up and Gay go down:
That is the way to London Town!*
IV. THE MOUNDS OF WINDSOR
§1
But they did not make London that day. They
were not to make London for many days. For
beyond the forest—they reached its boundaries
when the summer sun stood high at noon—some¬
thing bright red and shifting, vermilion, a smoulder
down in the east, caught Gay’s eyes. She stopped
and looked at it, a hand to her eyes, her hair blown
about her head, a brown, sturdy figure in the flow
and wisp of great cloud masses rolling down from
the north. Summer rain coming. But what was that
thing in the east?
Houghton and Lady Jane also wondered that.
They stood a long while, the three of them, staring
and speculating, Gay perforce included in the group
in the puzzlement of the moment. She dropped her
hand with a sigh.
‘Miles away. We’ll just have to walk on till we
see. Meanwhile, I’m hungry.’
Lady Jane sank down. ‘Do see if there’s any
fruit, Ledyard.’
The wolf had disappeared. Presently, as Gay
62
THE MOUNDS OF WINDSOR 63
and Houghton spread out through the grass, rather
hopelessly, for they seemed to have come to a wide,
bushless stretch of llano, he came shivering the
grasses and laid something at Gay’s feet. It was a
large buck hare—a perfect small deer of a thing.
Gay’s mouth watered.
‘You’re a dear. But we’ve no fire. Couldn’t you
dig out a basket of strawberries instead?’
The wolf lay down and rubbed his nose on his
paws, and snuffled, still regarding Gay with his un¬
winking gaze. She patted his head, thoughtlessly,
forgetting how he had snapped at her. But this
time he endured it, philosophically. She called to
Houghton and held up the hare to his gaze. His
protest was a repetition of hers to the wolf.
‘But we’ve no fire.’
‘I know. But that thing over there’—she pointed
to the wandering vermilion flicker that rode the
horizon where once Sandhurst or Wokingham had
been—‘looks like fire of some kind. Suppose we
tramp on and see? There are no berries here.’
That was self-evident. Gay carrying the hare,
they returned to where Lady Jane Easterling was
squatted upon the grass. She had plucked more
grasses and was busily plaiting them. Houghton
explained Gay’s proposal.
‘But I can’t possibly. I’m too tired to walk a
step.’
‘Afraid you’ll just have to.’ Houghton was
GAY HUNTER
64
suddenly, to her, for the first time brusque. ‘There’s
nothing else for it.’
Lady Jane displayed a sudden common sense. Gay
abruptly realised that the woman was, in her own
way, adapting herself to conditions just as rapidly
and completely as that naked brown figure which
clothed itself in the name of Gay Hunter. ‘Oh,
right.’ She regarded her plaiting with some anxiety.
‘Go right now, what?’
‘We’d better,’ Houghton growled. ‘I’m hungry.’
They set out through the grass. Looking back at
the end of half an hour or so Gay saw the strange
forest sinking down on the skyline in the west. The
vermilion flicker grew brighter in the east. Now
they saw that it held all the forward skyline not
alone, but ran in a thin vignetting of colour
southwards as well. They were walking into an
angle of the thing. Still it was impossible to
name it.
Gay’s feet and thighs began to ache. Presently
she breathed with some difficulty and saw that it
was the same with the two stray Fascists. Abruptly
the wolf halted, so that Gay nearly stumbled over
him. He was smelling the east. Now he refused
to go further.
Gay coaxed him for a little while, while Houghton
and Lady Jane went on. Then she gave him a last
pat, and went after the other two, once turning to
wave to the friendly, unaccountable beast. Presently
THE MOUNDS OF WINDSOR 65
she heard a long-drawn wolf-howl diminuendoing
into the north.
§ii
So, in the early afternoon, they came through the
last of the grass and crossed a waste stretch of land,
long burned black of all vegetation, the very mould
and the earth consumed, leaving only the primal
rocks, and came to the verge of the great depression
in which played unceasingly the vermilion flame.
The air even at that great distance—for it was many
miles away in the heart of the great saucer-shaped
depression that the flame played—was alive with
cracklings and spittings, and a waft of wind blew
on them once a whiff of mephitic gas which caused
Houghton to cough and cough until he was cough¬
ing blood, and vexed even the normal lungs of Gay
and Lady Jane. Then, treading as near to the edge
as they might, they looked across the great gulf that
yawned where once the rich wooded lands of
Wokingham waved green.
Suddenly, in some far time, and for an area of
many miles, the earth had vomited upon the
heavens, leaving a great cavity where mist and fire
now played in remote and scattered pools. Only the
distance of the forest fringe had led them to believe
the line of fire was continuous. Now they saw it as
GAY HUNTER
66
the joint effect of a score of craterlets in the boiling
tumult of the interior. Continually the air shook.
For a long time Houghton and Lady Jane found
it too appalling for words. Gay had half-expected
that something like this had fathered the winking
vermilion light they had seen on the horizon. But,
even expecting it, the reality was dreadful enough.
She dropped the hare and put up both hands this
time to peer across that hellish gulf in the green lands
of England. But the crater mists cut off all view
of the other side. It might stretch for a dozen miles.
Lady Jane said suddenly, startling them all: ‘It’s
horrible. But Pm still sickeningly hungry.’
Houghton tried to speak, coughed again, tried
again, and succeeded.
‘And that fire’s too far off for any hope of cook¬
ing. Impossible to go down there. Miss Hunter—
don’t be a fool! ’
Gay had started off, hare in hand, towards the
crumbling black edge of the great saucer. Some¬
thing there, a rise and flow of the earth, had at¬
tracted her attention. She stepped cautiously, barely
cautiously enough. Suddenly the earth gave way
under an advancing foot. She leapt back just in
time, for, with a slither and gurgle, the surface
flowed away. Steaming, a spout of mud arose from
the ground and poured over the black brink. Gay
put down her hand and then withdrew it. No need
to touch it. It was boiling.
THE MOUNDS OF WINDSOR 67
She turned and called to the other two.
‘Very handy. We can cook the hare here.’
§iii
All that day, as the afternoon wore to evening,
they coasted northwards, seeking to escape round
the rim of the great depression. Distant to the
right, unbegun, unending, the muffled explosions
went on in the craterlets. Riding those gusty sounds
came once a shower of rain—boiling rain that
scorched their bodies so that they cried out and ran,
and thereafter drew further from the lip of the
saucer, into country where the waste grassland pre¬
sently changed character into straggling clumps of
beech-trees. Here great mounds rose from the earth
in the evening light, and here, twisting amidst these
mounds, they came to the bank of a stream. Some¬
thing ip the shape of the place as the light drew in
caught Houghton’s attention. He stopped and
stared and then turned to Lady Jane.
‘By God,’ he said, ‘it’s Windsor.’
Gay had never been there before. But now she
sought back in history-book lessons. ‘Didn’t your
kings once live here?’
Houghton’s hand went up to his face, to wipe his
forehead. ‘I had a brother on guard-duty here last—’
he swore shakily, ‘I was going to say last week.’
68
GAY HUNTER
Lady Jane shivered. 'Oh, it’s a nightmare, it’s
impossible! Where are we going to shelter?’
Remote to the right the great fires were now
pringling the darkness. The sky had become over¬
cast. Gay, searching amidst the mounds, found a
place where a thin stream ran down to meet that
attenuated Thames. She called to the others and
they came and stood beside her.
It was a sloping hole in the earth. Houghton got
down on his hands and knees and crawled within.
Presently his heels re-emerged.
'It’s a room—once the room of a house. I think
we’ll be all right in here.’
They crept in. As they did so the last of the day¬
light went. Crawling in, Gay heard a low swish of
disturbed grass and a patter of multitudinous feet.
It was the coming of the rain. Her hand encountered
a leg. Lady Jane said, 'Would you mind not claw¬
ing me?’
'Sorry.’
They crouched in darkness for a little while,
listening to each other’s breathing and the blind
fall of the rain outside. Then suddenly a great flare
of sheet lightning ran amidst the Windsor mounds
and fizzled and crackled at the door of their cave.
Shielding her eyes from the bite of the light, Gay
saw their shelter flood-lighted a moment.
A great enduring pillar of stone lay drunkenly
athwart the roof. That it was which held up the
THE MOUNDS OF WINDSOR 69
masses of debris^—had held them up through many
ages. The walls were the merest slabs of bare rock,
worn away by time even in this place untouched of
wind and rain. And beside the place where she
crouched lay a half-eaten human cadaver.
At first she thought that a trick of her eyesight,
then lightning flared again, and for a long moment,
with a cool dispassion, she sat and stared at the thing
beside her. It had been a man—it was the mummi¬
fied body of a man, the face shrivelled, the eyes
starting horribly from the head, the neck pinched
black, a ghastly simulacrum of humanity. Beasts
had devoured a great stretch of the stomach, but
she saw even the torn intestines twisted black, as
though an acid had been poured in them. She stared
a frozen horror.
Houghton and Lady Jane had also seen it. Lady
Jane screamed, piercingly, and made for the en¬
trance. Houghton swore shakily, cried to her to
stop, dived after her. The next flame of light
that came at the entrance to the shelter showed
no trace of them. Gay crouched in a shivering
indecision.
If the beast that had been tearing this body came
back?
Crouching, she made for the entrance. In that
moment the lightning again flared, forked lightning
this time, and suddenly the shelter quivered and
rocked and was blinded of light. Rock debris and
GAY HUNTER
70
earth fell on her hands and face. A slithering
rumble fell away into the night.
A landfall had closed up the cave entrance.
Gay heard the cadaver snuffle beside her, and the
hair rose at the back of her neck. She set her teeth
against that imagining, heard again the snuffle, and
fainted.
§iv
It seemed to her many hours afterwards when
she awoke. It was pitch-dark still, and the air had
grown close and dank, many times breathed and re¬
breathed. She put out a hand against the encom¬
passing wall of darkness, and then drew it back
with a cry, for it had touched the face of the
mummy.
She sat and shivered, trying to think. Surely
Houghton would come back and clear away the
earthfall? Would he? Would he know what place to
try? Would he care to? Was he himself still alive?
Now the air grew still more stifling. Presently
she drowsed away again into unconsciousness. When
next she awoke it was with the tongue of a beast
licking her face, and a hairy body crouched against
hers.
She started away with a cry. The beast beside her
growled. Then she saw a segment of the darkness
THE MOUNDS OF WINDSOR 71
faintly sprayed with light, and dived for it. The
beast did the same. Tangled, they scrambled out
and looked at each other.
It was the wolf.
The morning was coming over mounded Wind¬
sor. Far up the attenuated Thames a snipe was call¬
ing. The air was clean and sweet with the night¬
time rain. Gay Hunter picked herself up from the
grass and leaned against the side of the mound and
wept for a little, watched by the bright eyes of the
wolf. Then she saw that his chest and forepaws
were matted with mould, and realised what had
happened.
Tf you won’t bite me, Pd like to hug you. In
fact, even if you do.’
The wolf submitted, shyly, again licking her so
that it tickled. Gay rubbed the spot and laughed,
hugging him closer.
‘Alive, really alive. Oh, goodness, and just
because you followed me! There was never quite
a morning like this before, or air like this, or a
nice furry face like yours—or anyone so good to
look at as I am, was there, Towser? Come on, I’ll
race you!’
When she sank down panting and exhausted, the
Windsor mounds were in the south; in the east the
fires of the great saucer were dim and fading in
the morning light, but, barring progress in that
direction, there arose to view now, with purple
-72 gay hunter
heads bright in the morning light, a great brake of
giant thistles. They towered to a height of twenty
feet, high and still in the air that was sweet with
the smell of them, for they were in flower. Rabbits
lolloped on the edge of the brake and the new-
christened Towser growled carnivorously at sight of
them. No other beast or human being was in sight.
Houghton?
Lady Jane Easterling?
They had vanished as completely as though
swallowed by the storm. Gay went down to the
reed-fringed Thames and lay and drank water there.
The wolf drank beside her, and she saw their
joint images reflected back in the water, shakenly,
from the little eddies that drifted from their mouths.
Lost! She was lost and alone in a deserted Eng¬
land, naked, in company with a lone wolf.
8 v
Famished and weak that afternoon, she and the
wolf came on the great herds of wild pig.
They were grunting and rootling and squealing
in the groves of a stone-oak wood. The ground was
thick with their droppings and thick with acorns,
and the air almost equally thick with their smell. It
smelt like a Chesterton-delighting congress of the
genus Pig. The nearer brutes hardly roused at all
THE MOUNDS OF WINDSOR 73
at the approach of Gay and the wolf. Evidently
wolves did not hunt pigs. Towser sniffed warily,
wurred, and gave them a wide berth. It was Gay
now who felt carnivorous.
‘If only I had a decent butcher’s equipment ’
She might as well long for a Lewis gun. The
porkers grunted as they passed up the forest aisles.
Gay picked some acorns and tried to eat them, find¬
ing them tough enough fare. The pigs were not
the beasts of piggeries and sties of Mexico or Mil¬
waukee, but hairy and athletic-looking specimens,
guarded here and there by great boars. One of
these, with wart-like obtrusions on his nose, rose
from a pleasant mud-slough as Gay and the wolf
passed and screamed at them. Gay looked back.
The boar was sharpening his tusks on the ground.
That operation completed, he launched himself,
galumphing, in pursuit.
Gay took to a tree, scraping her skin as she fled
into the higher branches. The boar had neglected
to learn tree-climbing in his youth and panted and
screamed disappointedly around the trunk. None
of the rest of the swine paid any heed. Gay imagined
Towser had deserted her, but next minute saw him
worrying at the boar’s heels. The boar turned
round, eager for battle.
It was an ungenteel and odoriferous encounter.
When Gay slipped down at last the great boar,
minus its throat, was slobbering out its life on the
GAY HUNTER
74
ground. The wolf fell twice and then pulled itself
up to its feet, and, standing gingerly, began to lick
its wounds. The pigs rooted and grunted around,
undisturbed. Gay, very weak, sat down beside
Towser and cleansed his wounds while he snarled
at her apologetically.
Then they both turned towards the dead boar.
§ V1
Moving restlessly in stomach-ache that night on
the outskirts on the stone-oak forest, she heard
Towser also moving. Raw boar was having as
uneasy a reception in his interior as in hers. She
rubbed him consolingly, and he licked her. It was
near morning.
Early in the dawnlight she saw a line of hills
come marching down from the north.
V. RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS
§1
They were the Chilterns. By noon that day she
was deep in the grassy midst of them. In those deso¬
late hills no birds sang, though once she and
Towser paused to watch a great condor sweep over¬
head. Towser snarled and crouched close to the
ground.
‘Looking for other game,’ said Gay. CI think
these are the Chiltern Hundreds. Where do we go
from here?’
Her voice sounded strange in that silent land.
Sometimes the warning would come to her, if this
should go on—on and on—she would become in¬
sane. She sat down and considered it while the sun¬
light drowsed down upon her brown back and bent
head. Supposing she were the last human being
left alive? There had been no sign of any in all the
journey from Pewsey—apart from the mummified
cadaver of Windsor. None anywhere. The human
race might have passed from the earth. And she
might go on wandering these hills and llanos for
months, years yet, never see a human face or hear a
human voice, till madness and death came on her
75
76 GAY HUNTER
and she too passed. Why try to live at all?
She spoke again, aloud, to herself, to Towser: fI
think I know the answer to that. Though it’s only
half an answer, and half a lie, and I’m saying it to
console myself. The answer’s just—try and think
it in words so that you won’t go mad next minute—
because it’s nice to go naked and be yourself, not
any one else. Nice to have the scuff of the skin of
your legs against one another. Nice to have nice
breasts like mine in the sunlight. And watch the
blood in your hand. And be free. And the fun of
lying down and standing up and going there and
coming hither without a single article to carry—
without owning a thing in the world. And the good¬
ness of that raw pig I ate last night, and the taste
of water out of a stream with a throat really parched.
And squatting in grass and watching the moon,
though I’m so damnably frightened at panthers.
Because of all that. A Testament to Life. And I’ve
pinched some from the King’s Canary, dear old
Bridges. . . . But ’
But, even so, if there were no objective to her
wanderings? Then there strayed through her mind
again that fragment of a nursery rhyme Nurse
Geddes would sing down in Mexico when she was
a baby:
go upy and Gay go down:
That is the way to London Town!*
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 77
She must try and get out of these hills and make
London.
It couldn’t be more than thirty or so miles away,
London—or the place where London had been.
She rubbed her aching feet. Perhaps with a stick—
what a fool she had been not to gather herself a
staff back there in the oak forest!
She stood up and Towser did the same. He was
getting tamer, though still independent. And sud¬
denly it came on Gay with a shock of realisation
that made her almost sick with gladness, that she
couldn’t be the last human being after all. Some
were left, some still sufficiently like her in kind to
tame wolves to their service as dogs. Else Towser
would never have behaved as he had done. He
must have been someone’s dog—somewhere.
Sure? She looked again at him. He had little of
the dog about him. Was it just a freak chance that
he had adopted her, as the she-wolf Romulus and
Remus? If he had had a master, why had she seen
no signs of human beings?
CI give it up, Towser. Ever see anyone like me
before?’
He cocked his normal ear at her, then looked
away, mildly bored. As she got to her feet he also
stood up, but stiffly. The wounds from the fight in
the pig-forest still troubled him. Gay patted his
head, and the two of them limped on again.
To-morrow they would turn south-east.
78
GAY HUNTER
§ ii
Next morning when she awoke the wolf had dis¬
appeared. She called and called from the hollow
where she had lain down with him beside her, but
he did not return. She climbed up in the dew of
the morning to look from the summit of a hill, and
so saw the Chilterns spread out before her, rolling
in undulation like an outline map. South was the
glimmer of the great volcanic fire, north a mantling
of dark green upon the horizon that was doubtlessly
another forest. East was a shimmer of mist the sun
was driving before it out of the low country of
Thames-side. Into the west was a land of shadows,
a land of grassy llanos.
‘TowserP
She searched till she found a pool, and squatted
and drank and then set out eastwards, very hungry.
As the day rose so did the heat. Her head began
to ache in sympathy with her feet. Then she came
on a great stretch of moor covered with blueberries.
She knelt down and gathered them and stuffed them
in her mouth in a passion of hunger, the acrid taste
of them more lovely than anything else she had ever
known. Eating, she heard a scuffle in the grass, and
looked round, and promptly had her face licked by
Towser. Tasting the blueberry juice on her face,
he sneezed. Gay had her arms round his neck, scold-
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 79
ing him, when she was aware of being watched by
other eyes. She turned her head.
He was halted at a distance of six feet or so
away. He leaned on his unstrung bow. He was
about Gay’s own height but even slimmer, his skin
much darker. He had a girdle with two arrows and
a knife in it. Otherwise he was as naked as herself.
She raised staring eyes to his face.
It was a young face, a haunting face, friendly
and puzzled, with a broad brow and the downy
beginning of a beard. The hair was hacked short
in front and ended in a bang behind. His lips were
full and red, startlingly red in the brown face. He
might have been her own age or a little more.
Gay said, in a still, quiet voice: ‘Who are your’
The broad brow under the short-cut hair
wrinkled in puzzlement. Then he said, very slowly
and haltingly, as one speaking an alien speech:
T am Rem. Wolf was my dog. But he went away.
Then he came back last night and has led me here.’
T’ll cry in a minute. Please, am I mad? Are you
really human? And—English, speaking in English
—you can’t! Or what century is it, what’s hap¬
pened to the world?’
He shook his head. Then he let the bow drop
and squatted down in the grass. She had a sudden
thrill of fear. He said, T do not understand. Only
the dying Voices speak this speech. And they grow
fainter every hunting season as we come back to the
8o
GAY HUNTER
Place of Voices. The Old Singer says that when he
was young the Voices were still very loud. None
care to listen to them now. But Id
Gay nodded. CI see. Voices. And they’re grow¬
ing fainter. I’ve a fellow-feeling for them. . . .
What do we do now?’
He looked at her, puzzled. She saw the startling
breadth of the space between his eyes. He said,
uncertainly:
‘Do?’
Gay nodded. ‘Am I your prisoner? Where are
you going to take me?’
He said, ‘Prisoner?’ and sat and thought, squatted
dark-brown and still, like a figure from the caves
of Ajanta. But suddenly it came on Gay that he
was like no man she had ever seen. He was not
merely a man of her century, naked, and browned
by the sun: he was someone completely alien—in
gesture and notion and the look in his eyes, with
a body strange in control and movement. He said
‘Prisoner?’ again in the high, rather singing voice
in which he had spoken—the accentuation of one
with unfamiliar speech. Gay said, shakingly:
‘Yes. Want it plainer? You’re a man. You’re a
savage. You’re stronger than I am,, I suppose. Am
I going to be taken and raped? Or eaten?’
He gave it up. Apparently he found her entirely
incomprehensible. He said, ‘I do not know where
you are going. The Folk’—he waved a vague arm
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 8l
north-eastward into the Chilterns—‘are there.’
Gay stood up. ‘Then for goodness’ sake let’s look
them up.’
He stood up beside her. He was two or three
inches the taller. He smiled and put out a hand on
her arm. Gay stiffened and then set her teeth. Here
was where things began to happen. . . .
A moment later she broke away from him, pant¬
ing. Her skin was tingling. It had felt as though
an electric dynamo were stroking her. Yet he had
been inoffensive enough. His brow wrinkled again
at her jump. Gay said, stammeringly:
‘I hate—being pawed. Always have done. Well,
are you coming?’
§ iii
They halted at noon in a grassy dip a mile or so
south of the new forest that Gay had seen on the
northwards skyline. Gay sat and watched him make
a fire to cook the great bird, like a turkey, he had
shot with his bow an hour or so before. It was quiet
and still in the midsummer heat. Towser squatted
panting: Rem’s skin glistened as he knelt with a
flint and a piece of iron pyrite brought from his
girdle. He gathered dry grass and struck and struck
the two instruments together till a spark was con¬
ceived and gave birth to a smoulder. Then he blew
82
GAY HUNTER
upon it and gathered dried gorse-bush roots
scattered around, and so made his fire. He did not
speak. He had spoken hardly at all in their north¬
wards tramp through the Chilterns. Gay lay back
on the ground with her hands under her head and
watched him, in drowsy appraisal.
So this was how it had all ended: all the great
things of that century out of which she had come, all
the skill with machine and tool, the giant bridges
and the great furnaces, the airships that clove the
sky, the silent, gigantic laboratories, the dreams and
plans and hopes—ended in a naked savage with a
flint and steel lighting a fire to cook his food amidst
the ruin of a desolate England! All the futures that
that twentieth century had envisaged had been but
dreams—collapse, and a return to savagery the
outcome.
That Rem was a stray, a freak, she did believe
for a moment. He had the mark upon him of one
of a recognised and acknowledged community. So
much indeed she had gathered from his words—a
community of hunters who came south with the
summer and in winter went north into some waste
where another Great Fire lighted the sky per¬
petually. The England of Shakespeare, Newton,
Avebury—it had ended in nakedness, brown skins,
and a bow. . . .
Towser thrust his nose against her, questioningly.
She patted his head, and lay still in the sunlight,
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 83
an arm round his neck. You could not be sad long
in this flare of sunlight, over a battle lost long ago.
Suddenly you realised how tired you were—sleepy
and tired. Till that bird had cooked 
She was shaken awake by Rem. The bird wTas
ready. She awoke sun-tired and blinked drowsy
eyes. They sat side by side, the three of them, and
ate the unauthentic turkey while the sun wheeled
over to afternoon. Then Rem wiped his fingers on
the grass and picked up his bow. It was time to go.
But south of the forest they came on a great
stretch of heath, growing a plant that seemed to Gay
faintly recognisable. Then she saw that wild hogs
had been here, rootling in the earth, and that the
waste stretch of giant weeds was a great potato-
patch. Tubers lay round. She pointed to them.
‘They are good to eatd
The hunter halted and looked at them, then
shook his head.
‘They kill—here, so close to the Great Fire. They
began to kill in the days of the Voices.’
‘Kill? Poisonous?’
‘They are not good. They kill.,
Gay knelt and scooped one from the ground and
broke it open. She found it a strange potato. It had
developed a core. The core was a dull red hard¬
ness. Strange transformation of the potato! Poison.
Poisoned potatoes. How? How long ago?
Impossible to know. Impossible perhaps ever to
GAY HUNTER
84
know. She glanced up at the brown flanks of Rem
and found his eyes upon her. He smiled, bearded, a
strange, alien boy, and Gay found herself smile in
return. For a minute she knelt there among the
poisoned potatoes, smiling at him in the sunlight.
Then he put out his hand and slowly she put hers
into his. Something dim and symbolical as he raised
her from amidst the evil tubers of an hebetic past.
. . . He turned towards the forest.
She left her hand in his. Footsore though she
was, she was aware of a sudden lightness. Oh, what
did it matter, that time long past? How much had
anyone lost when that battle was lost? Why, in this
dead England even your toes—dead things, Lord,
how dead things toes had been!—began to live,
to thrill and be suddenly in harmony with the life
in the grass they pressed, in the flare of the sun. As
though all your life you had been a living mind in
the body of a corpse, till that accident of a neo-
Dunne night!
They had come to the straggling beginnings of
the trees. The fingers dropped away from hers.
With their doing so, her tiredness came back,
queerly. He was a helpful boy, if only he would
say a little more. What now?
He glanced at her and then at the trees. She also
looked over their crests. Fleecy masses of clouds,
not the great thunder-clouds that had caught her
at Windsor, but masses like carded wool, were roll-
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 85
ing down from the north. With their coming came
a chill in the wind. The forest shoomed and mur¬
mured. Rem beckoned her to follow him and turned
sideways, skirting the trees.
So it was she came to the chalk cliff that verged
upon that oak forest—it seemed as though its end
had been carved abruptly away, as though at the
stroke of a great axe. It fronted westward, and
mosses faced the chalk here and there, its face was
crumbling and ancient. But as they drew nearer Gay
saw that her imagining had been more than
imagining. Other agencies than those of wind
and rain had once played upon this rock. She
paused below it and put up her hands to shade her
eyes, remembering those pictures carved by Darius
in commemoration of his victories on the rock of
Behistun.
The figures had been deeply incised into the face
of the cliff, and then, perhaps, the incisions faced
with some staying acid, for the incisions were a dark
green, as through a spreading stain. Yet, even so,
many thousands of years must have passed since the
sculptor carved those figures, for they were half
overlaid by the rain-drip of the chalk, though the
cliff-brow itself served as a shielding overhang.
Time had stroked them with countless hands and
would yet obliterate them. So doing, it would
obliterate perhaps the foulest thing ever emerged
from the diseased mind of men.
86
GAY HUNTER
Gay lowered her eyes, in a sickened shame. The
beauty of the human body she knew, its ugliness as
well, the beauty and ugliness of love and lust she
had read of, talked of, if never herself endured.
Sometime she had envisaged them as mighty
adventures awaiting her in the future—thrilling and
terrible and tremendous, the lust as the love. They
were the ultimate and lovely mystery, she had
thought, gay little materialist, seeing all mystic
philosophies and hopes as the play of diseased
reflexes only, the wind and gusty regurgitation of
human life. And all the world, whatever the names
and sickened stomachic dreamings of gods and
heavens and hells and codes they had shielded be¬
hind, had believed with her in the tremendousness
of lust and love. Even this sculptor had believed.
But he had made of them a foulness and a Satanic
abomination on this cliff-face. Centuries ago. In an
agony of hate and disgust he had portrayed them.
... It was hate, hate insane and dreadful, from
which Gay turned shamed eyes. The power and the
sickening beauty of the thing would etch a repro¬
duction in her mind for ever, she thought. She—
she who had been so liberal and so unshamed in
everything—she did not dare lift her eyes to Rem.
Till his silence grew unendurable. Then she
looked up, slowly. He was looking not at the
sculpture, but at her, the same ghost of a waiting
smile upon his lips, awaiting hers. He had' dis-
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 87
covered her smile and was waiting for it to come
back. It did not. Instead, Gay seized his arm. She
thought, CI must look like one tingling blush, but
this has to be settled for good.’ She pointed up at
that dreadful caricature on the cliff-brow.
‘Look! That picture. What do you think of it—
you and your people?’
His eyes followed the direction in which she
pointed. She watched him. He looked puzzled. He
said, ‘Picture? I do not see a reflection.’
‘But in front of us—up there, on the cliff!’
Only at the end of a minute’s gesticulation did
she realise the truth. For him the picture did not
exist. It was a mere scrawling and indenting upon
the face of the cliff. It had for him no relevance
at all, human, divine, or demoniac.
§iv
They camped under the Horror. The rain had
come on—long, wavering pelts that fled over the
brow of the cliff into the space where the firs stood
with bayonets to receive the flying charges of the
rain-cavalry. Gay padded about collecting wood
and feeding the fire that Rem had made, pausing
now and again to watch that combat of tree and
rain. Now with the rising of the wind and the sink¬
ing of the sun a red smoulder over the tundra, the
88
GAY HUNTER
voice of the trees arose, strumming and hesitant
at first, but with deep under-notes that played one
upon the other and mounted and mounted, as
though seeking some final tremendous rhythm.
There was no sign of Rem. He had gestured to
her to heed to the fire and had vanished into the
forest with Towser.
Gay’s short hair streamed about her head. She
felt no cold—her body was becoming attuned to
the blow of wind and the flare of sun alternately.
Her hands, rested upon her hips (she suddenly
realised the attitude), seemed so much part of her
body there she had had no consciousness of attitude.
She put up her hand through her hair and heard it
crackle as with electricity. Lovely shampoo. . . .
‘And I’m hungry. I hope he brings back a young
elephant.’
He brought back instead eggs, great pheasant’s
eggs, and his girdle full of plums. Towser came
shooting in advance seeking the shelter of the cliff.
The hunter’s brown body was pelted by the sting¬
ing rain-drops as he ran for the fireside—the water
coursed from him in a little spray. Then he and
Gay stood and smiled at each other, till she sud¬
denly remembered that thing carved upon the cliff
above them, and her face froze. Silly, but she
couldn’t help it.
He said, slowly and carefully: ‘We will cook the
eggs and eat them.’
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 89
Gay looked round. fBut where’s your skillet?’
He shook his head, gave up the unknown word,
and knelt down to scrape a hole under the fire. Into
this he laid the eggs and dragged a light coating of
earth over them. Gay thought: Hhey’ll probably
crack, and we’ll have to eat them with the earth as
salt. But he ought to know what he’s doing. . . .
Hellnblast, I’m going to have a shower-bath as
well! ’
She ran out into the pelt of the rain. As she did
so the sun shone and wheeled on her for a moment,
pelted by the flying raindrops. Rem stared. Towser
stared. All the Chilterns stopped to stare, enter¬
tained.
She ran back into the shelter of the defaced cliff-
side and sank down by the fire to dry herself. Rem
squatted cross-legged at the other side. Towser
sniffed and lay down, his nose pointed towards the
fire. They awaited the eggs. Suddenly the un¬
reality of it touched Gay, fleetingly, only a moment,
yet as with a frozen wing-tip. Herself, Gay Hunter
of New York and Mexico City, seated naked here
under an English cliffside, in a ruined and aban¬
doned England, in the company of a naked savage
and a wolf! And seated—to an onlooker it would
have looked like a family group in the beginnings
of the world.
Beastly, that, as Mother would have said. And
yet, why? He looked a nice boy, and cuddlesome,
G
90 GAY HUNTER
if it wasn’t for that feeling of unreality that came
upon you in the oddest moments in his presence.
Some dragging maladjustment of the time-space
continuum—the thought and the knowledge that
when you were growing up a young woman in
Mexico of the twentieth century that curved,
beautiful body there was not even dreamt of, was
not even seed in a womb, seed in the womb of any
woman for thousands of years to come. That know¬
ledge it was dragged upon your eyelids and your
brain every now and then. . . .
Dimly she remembered out of a far gulf the sing¬
ing of a poet:
‘Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting;
The soul that rises with us> our life’s star,
Hath had elsew>here its setting,
And cometh from afar;
Not in entire forgetfulness.
And not in utter nakedness,
But trailing clouds of glory do we come
From God, w>ho is our home:
Heaven lies about us in our infancy!’
Poor Wordsworth! Great Wordsworth! But
he’d never envisaged a scene like this. How very
shocked he’d have been—after his French days, at
least. The boughs on the fire gave a crackling noise
and fell in, and Gay started from her dream. Rem
bent forward and raked away the embers and was
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 91
picking out hot eggs and handing them to her.
His skin seemed capable of withstanding any degree
of temperature. Gay’s was less well inured. She
dropped the egg and blew upon her fingers.
‘Idiot!’
He looked puzzled again, then smiled. He did
more than that. He chuckled gravely. Suddenly
the full humour of it came upon him. He lay on
the ground and wept with laughter. Gay stared an
astounded resentment, and then laughed herself.
It was very contagious. Towser growled, laughing.
There was not a humorous thing within miles, but
they laughed till they were tired. Then Rem was
as suddenly serious again, cracking off the shells of
the eggs and eating them by the simple expedient
of popping them one by one into his mouth. Around
rode the desolate Chilterns, under their garment
of rain.
Near sunset that rain cleared. Gay, for urgent
and personal reasons, abandoned the hunter and
climbed up and around the cliff, motioning Rem not
to follow. He said, ‘Yes,’ and nodded. The
elementary decencies still survived. Under her feet
the grass was wet, yet warm, tickling her live toes
as she ran up the hill. Here were bushes, gorse,
and some berry bushes she had never seen before.
All the sky was banded greatly in amber. She sat
down and looked over the forest to more hills be¬
yond, and then west into the far llanos that
GAY HUNTER
92
shrouded the ancient England from the sight of
the sun, far down under mould and humus and the
dust of the years. It was very quiet, the sunset
quiet.
She put her hands up before her eyes to look in
that colourful silence. As she did so, a cricket began
to chirp, quite near at first it seemed, then receding,
the little beast hopping away, exploratory into the
west. More clouds were coming from the north,
but for a little the sunset’s colour resisted them, and
the lost girl waited and watched that deepening tint¬
ing of the western sky—food-filled, and contented,
filled with a macabre sadness as well. And she
remembered other sadnesses, those passing sadnesses
of adolescence, from which her father had been
wont to rouse her in Mexico with sardonic jollity.
If only this were the sadness of adolescence, this
sadness for a world that had passed.
And in a sudden vision, as though torn from a
kinematographic reel, she saw the lines of faces in
Broadway of a night, in the Strand of a night, down
the white BouP Mich., down Plaza Nacional,
and dimly backgrounding those dim hosts the
great buildings and lights of their time. So
strong they had seemed, enduring for ever, built
of the blood and sweat of the hosts, outlasting cen¬
turies. And it had been no more than a seeming.
How had they all ended and passed? (For she
was sure they had passed.) And how long ago?
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 93
Would she ever find out? Perhaps the Voices that
Rem talked about would help her. . . .
And herself?
Oh God, she had not thought about herself!
She might live for fifty or sixty years yet—how?
Roaming the countryside with a wolf, eating fruit,
climbing trees—she would go mad! Life an eternal
picnic—it was the kind of thing that sick little
imaginative novelists had dreamt of in the smoke
and squalor and the unemployment queues of the
fourth decade of the twentieth century. But how
impossible—for life—in any life. Yet, what else
was there here, what else could she do?
And a sudden panic coming upon her at that
thought, she jumped to her feet and ran down the
cliff to the side of the fire where Rem was squatting.
He jumped up at the haste of her approach, looking
over her shoulder and snatching at his bow. She
beat on his chest with demented fists.
‘No, no. Not that! There’s nothing after me.
But—how am I to live, what am I to do? What do
you ever do? Hunt and rest and eat and sleep—Pd
go mad, we did other things long ago! I come from
long ago, I tell you! Thousands of things, you
hear!’
He stepped back a little, bewildered. Gay’s hands
dropped. She was weeping. The hunter understood
tears. He took her in his arms. . . .
A moment later she shook herself free.
GAY HUNTER
94
‘Oh, damn! This is ridiculous—crying on the
shoulder of a naked savage—crooning at me, too,
instead of rape and cannibalism and all the good
story-book things ... I wish—I wish handker¬
chiefs at least had survived^
But they hadn’t. She wiped her face, grubbily,
with her hands, and sat down. The wolf, Towser,
came and snuffled and thrust his face in between
breast and thigh, and snuffled again, consolingly.
Rem had squatted down again, his hands clasped
behind his head. It was nearly dark.
The rain whispered, coming on again. Looking
over her shoulder, Gay saw its grey pelt pass over
the trees to the grass-lands beyond—The empty
pastures blind with rain, as someone had written of
just such a scene. The night was now quite near,
and in the closing in of the shadows the fire-glow
ran up the face of the cliff and flickered on the filthy
masterpiece of an aberrant genius—flickering it into
an insane and monstrous life a moment, so that it
spewed its foulness upon the forest. Gay lowered
her eyes and looked at Rem,, found him watching
her with half-closed eyes. Of what was he thinking?
‘What speech do you speak—not the one from
the Voices that I am speaking—but your usual one?’
He thought this over for a little while. Then:
‘The Tongue of the Folk.’
‘Say some.’
He said some, crooning it, some song, perhaps.
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 95
It sounded strange to Gay’s ears, yet with a vague,
far trace of familiarity here and there. She began
to question the hunter as the darkness deepened
around them, comparing word for word the English
speech for grass and trees and wolf with that which
the Folk spoke. There could be no doubt—the
hunter spoke a simple agglutinative tongue, without
tense or time, such tongue as the Europe of her day
had long abandoned. Where had it come from?
Whence the ancestors of Rem himself?
She asked him that, but he did not know. They
trod dimly on the fringe of an uncertain understand¬
ing a while, and then desisted. She asked him where
the Place of the Voices was, and he raised himself
on an elbow to point north of the dripping forest.
Gay questioned that gesture with upraised eye¬
brows: ‘To-morrow?’
‘Perhaps to-morrow.’
Perhaps to-morrow. She looked up at the sculp¬
tured filthiness. Would the Voices tell her anything
of that or the times that had made it? And what
were those Voices? Dying Voices? . . . Useless
puzzling. She found that she was very sleepy. So
was Towser. He had appropriated the best place
in front of the fire. She nudged him to move, and
he did so with a sleepy, dissatisfied grunt. Oh God,
what fun to sleep on a mattress again!
Gay lay down and curled herself almost like the
wolf. Rem squatted staring into the fire—strange
GAY HUNTER
96
figure there, like a figure from some Early Egyptian
relief. Something ached in her heart, looking at
him—a kind of aching wonder, a desire. Then she
closed that away, with sleep pressing her eyelids.
She called:
‘Good night.’
He said, ‘It will rain all night,’ after a glance
at the sky.
§ v
It did more than that. Sometime in the night the
wind veered several points. Gay woke in the sting¬
ing pelt of ice-cold rain and for a time was horribly
confused as to place and circumstance, and crawled
half-erect and stared at the fire. It was dying to a
low smoulder. Over in the shelter, directly under
the lee of the cliff, the hunter and the wolf were
sleeping side by side. As she moved erect the wolf
snarled and then, recognising her, lowered his head.
Gay poked the fire and, dripping, ran in under that
shelter.
Here it was dry and warm, with the firelight
flinging a dull glow on the stretched bodies of Rem
and his wolf. The space was narrow and she
crouched back against the wall. As she did so a hand
came out of the half-darkness upon her leg, closing
around it.
RAIN IN THE CHILTERNS 97
It made her heart jump. Then she saw the hunter
was awake. He made unmistakable motions: she
should lie between him and the wolf.
A long moment Gay stood and looked down at
him, seeing this moment and its chances so clearly,
seeing this adventure to which she gave herself.
Then sleep brought down its veils, obliterating
heroism and risk and regret. She slipped down be¬
tween hunter and wolf, thrusting her long legs
towards the fire. For a moment she lay rigid, and
then turned her head towards the hunter.
He put an arm across her, a sleep-warm arm.
The fine hair on it tickled her skin to a sudden thrill.
She bit her lips, sleepily panic-stricken. All right.
If only he would get on with the business 
The arm did not move. She glanced at his face
in the flicker of the firelight.
He was fast asleep.
For a minute the relief of that drove sleep from
her eyes. Then a wonder came on her, a whimsical
dismay. Was she as bad as that—funny and brown,
Lady Jane had called her? So bad that a savage
on a raining night refused to play the fitting role
to which any pornographic novelist would have
assigned him? And she had thought she would be
rather sweet to sleep with!
Then she saw the blue shadows under the hunter’s
eyes. He was dead tired. They were alive—in a life
real at last, in a life, it seemed, where you slept at
GAY HUNTER
98
least, fully and completely. Probably loved in like
manner—breath-taking thing to think of, that!
The arm was heavy, but warm upon her. She put
up her hand to that relaxed hand and gave it a little
squeeze. The hunter turned away from her, still in
sleep.
Blessed boy.
She cuddled closer to him at that, a hand upon
his warm hip. He had a nice and seemly and well¬
shaped hip. Her own fingers relaxed. She fell
asleep.
VI. THE DAM
§1
When Gay awoke on a morning three days later,
she found herself surrounded by a score or so of
naked brown bowmen.
In the space of those three days she and the
hunter and Towser the wolf had wandered a slow
way in and out through the Chilterns. Early on
the morning of the first day they had come to a
great stagnant lake, and as they bathed in it there
arose near Gay a beast like a tiger, it seemed to her.
It was a giant otter. It had snarled at her, terrify¬
ingly, while Rem shouted and made towards the
scene with loud splashings. So close it had risen that
its soft coat had almost brushed Gay*s arm. She had
dived. So had the otter. Fortunately they took
opposite directions, and fortunately made for oppo¬
site banks, leaving Rem and Towser to follow more
slowly.
‘What a damnable beast!’ Gay had said, wiping
water from herself with her hands. ‘Are there many
like that?’
A reminiscent look had come into the hunter’s
99
100
GAY HUNTER
eyes. ‘There are the great dogs of the north,’ he
had said, and tried, unambitiously, to tell her of their
great-maned ferocity. Gay had wrinkled a puzzled
brow at him. Lions? Could they be lions?
At noon they had come on a strawberry paradise.
Great strawberries rioted and throve despite the
clinging waste of weeds. The hunter and Gay sat
and ate like—like the greediest of children, she
thought, wiping her stained mouth as she stood erect
again in the flare of the sunshine. The sunshine was
much warmer than once it had been, she noted. Was
the sun larger—or nearer? It seemed the same to
her hand-shaded eyes. But what a summer!
Yet, that day and the next, she made notchings
of calculations on a stick she now carried—marking
the notches with a stone. The days were short—
definitely shorter than once they had been. Some
great change had smitten the earth since the days
when she drove the hired Morgan up through the
Wiltshire Downs. Perhaps the men of the ages
between had actually succeeded in righting the poles
—setting the earth upright, so to speak—before
disaster overtook them.
When had that been? How? Useless question!
Then she remembered how in her own far time
the earth was said to be still but slowly recovering
from the effects of the Fourth Glacial Age. Per¬
haps this was the midst of the heyday that had
awaited her times. The earth had grown a great
THE DAM
101
sunshine garden again, yet with no such increase
of moisture as to bring back the tropic jungles. And
that mighty civilisation that might have so gloried
and adventured in this Arcady had vanished away
and was not even a dim remembrance.
For Rem knew little or nothing of it—or would
tell her nothing. He would tell her little of even
the Voices from which he had learned his English—
he had learned it according to some formula orally
preserved in the bardic traditions of his Folk—and
equated it with meanings in his own agglutinative
tongue. But he told that this habit of heeding to the
Voices was dying out, even as the Voices themselves
were dying. Gay asked why, and he said because the
Folk had tired of the Voices. . . . They were just
a foolish crying in the dark.
He told her that the second night of their camp¬
ing, in the midst of a great cane-brake, the fire
crackling and spluttering as they fed it idly with
cane-joints. ‘It was some unhappy time that came
on the Folk long ago,’ he amplified. ‘When Great
Beasts killed them and they themselves were mad.
So are the Voices mad. But they pass, and we
endured
He said it in his low sing-song, and abandoned
the subject, stretching out a hand instead to stroke
Gay’s leg. He liked doing that, not shyly, or im¬
pertinently, or desirously. Half-wittedly, rather,
Gay had thought at first, with a touch of impatience.
102
GAY HUNTER
But now she was less sure. He seemed rather to do
it with a concentrated enjoyment of the sensation of
touch of which her own blunted nerve-instruments
were incapable. Standing on the verge herself, she
glimpsed for him a passionate enjoyment of such
things, exquisitely sensuous as great music to the
peoples of her time. He was not the blank-minded
child she had once thought. Instead—
She put down her hand on the hand on her leg.
fSometime you’ll tell me all about how to live. I’d
love to know!’
He lay still, his hand on her leg and his eyes
remote. Didn’t he ever want to sleep with her, Gay
thought, sleepily? Should she tempt him and see?
It would have been very easy in the ancient world.
She thought of all the technique of display and
coquetry and attraction in use among the women of
her time. Hellnblast, what a waste of life it had all
been!—the jewels, the henna’ed finger-nails, the
frou-frou of silken skirts, the leprosy-powdered
faces, the stained lips—all for the purpose of
attracting a male to the supreme purpose of fertilis¬
ing the female! Yet thousands of those women who
had dressed and painted and ogled had done so with
a dispassionate calculation, giving their favours for
substantial returns, or perhaps giving them never at
all, carrying on the maddening technique with no
thought of ever bringing the act to fruition. . . .
Beasts. Goodness, those must have been the Great
THE DAM
103
Beasts of whom Rem’s folk had their tradition!
She had looked up from the cane-brake to see the
stars bright and unclouded that night, marching
their hosts east, strange hosts in a strange sky.
Where was she herself being led—where could she
ultimately go? And automatically the jingle from
nursery-days answered her:
‘Gay go up and Gay go down:
That is the way to London Town!y
If there were a London—as Houghton and Lady
Jane had so passionately believed. What had hap¬
pened to those two—dead or astray like herself?
She squeezed that hand on her leg.
‘You were a dear to find me—you and Towser.’
He said something in his own language that she
could not comprehend. His eyes questioned hers,
lightedly. She shook her head.
‘You may be questioning my age, my religion—
you know my sex—or my taste in light literature.
I don’t know. Or my name. I never told you my
name.’
He said, ‘What is your name?’
‘Gay Hunter.’
It was only as she said it that, for the first time
in her life, she recognised the barbaric quality of
her name. Here, in this milieu, it might sound no
more than a descriptive nickname. And in that sense,
indeed, it was obvious that Rem took it.
GAY HUNTER
104
is a good name,’ he said in his accentless
sing-song. (You are the Gay Hunter and I am Rem
—the Singerd
‘So that’s what it means. Singer? Sing some now,
then.’
He shook his head. ‘I sing for the Folk.’
So that was that. No sociabilities. She pushed his
hand away fearlessly and curled up, enjoyably, to
sleep—without bed, blankets, sheets, or (she
thought, drowsily) a care in the world.
§
Then, wakening, she found the hunters round
about her.
They had trooped in with the dawn-light, drawn
by the smell of Rem’s fire in the cane-brake. A
score or so in number they squatted on the ground,
a circle of savages watching Gay Hunter awake,
with that owlish, malignant stupidity of the savage
in their gestures and look. Slowly the light grew
stronger as Gay lay with bated breath and watched
the circle. Then she saw the faces more clearly.
With the passing of the last of the night, the last
of her fears, foul-born in that age out of which she
had come, went by as well. She sat up and shook
the dew from her hair. Rem and the wolf, after
a first glance at the savage new-comers, had taken
to sleep again.
!(tp
THE DAM
105
Savage?
They were just a collection of brown-skinned
hunters, quite naked, tired from a night’s hunting
(one carried a pig, and several carried birds), wait¬
ing for the courtesies of a fire and welcome.
She got up and poked the fire. The circle did
not move. Dried thorn-canes lay around, and she
fed the grey ashes, kneeling to blow upon them.
All the air was fresh and keen, alive with a twitter¬
ing of birds. As she lay full-length upon the ground
and blew at the ashes,, she felt a hand upon her, and
for a moment, as with Rem, lay rigid. Then she
turned round slowly and looked at the hunter. He
smiled and yawned, stretching his arms elaborately.
(He was shy!)
They began to speak among themselves, not
loudly—in order not to disturb Rem, Gay guessed.
She could make nothing of the long, agglutinative
roll of speech. Some words seemed to be addressed
to her, and she shook her small dolichocephalic
head at the brachycephalic heads of the hunters.
Most of them seemed neither young nor old, of
medium height, berry-brown, long-legged, with
little body-hair, but clustering bangs of brown and
black hair about their heads. Some were stained
and splashed, as though from hunting through fords
or rivers. One had a missing hand that made her
shudder, so crudely it had been doctored. They had
low, broad foreheads and eyes like Rem’s, the eyes
H
I06 GAY HUNTER
of people hardly individualised in the sense that the
twentieth century had understood individuation.
They were impossible, but they were real enough,
this group of folk into which time and a fantastic
accident had brought her.
She tried English on them: <WeVe no food, and
Pm hungry. Shall we cook the pig?’
Such of those as were not dozing looked from
one to the other with sleepy, questioning eyes.
Evidently Rem was almost the only one who had
the speech of the Voices. But at her gesture one of
them understood. He came forward and began to
dig a pit in the earth to roast the pig, much as Rem
had done earlier with the eggs. Gay, pressed by
elementary needs, took herself out of the encircle¬
ment and went down through an opening in the
cane-brake. She heard the scuff of feet behind her,
and looked round and saw a young, bronzed figure
following.
‘Go away!’
He grinned, shyly, and went. Gay resumed her
course through the brake, her breath a little quicker.
Though she felt inclined to laugh. If Rem were
slow, there seemed others who were speedy
enough 
When she came back Rem was awake and the
encampment astir with a hum of voices. The sing¬
ing of the birds in the brake was blindingly sweet.
Some of the hunters were lying on their backs, listen-
THE DAM
107
ing to it. One was mending a bow. But the most
were engaged in answering a fire of questions from
Rem. There was something exciting in the air,
though it had not moved that dreaming speculation
from Rem’s eyes. At Gay’s appearance the talk
quietened. All stared.
She began to blush, angrily: then laughed. Rem’s
grave face broke into an answering smile. The en¬
campment grinned and resumed its conversation.
Her advent from the twentieth century had been
accepted.
But there was apparently something else more
difficult of acceptance. The pig, in an hour or so,
was excavated and eaten. The impertinent young
hunter who had shown an inclination to follow Gay
earlier in the morning came and sat down beside
her and hacked off a succulent piece of pork for her
delectation. Gay took it on a leaf, and ate hungrily.
Flirting had survived all else.
But now there was a movement to be afoot. Rem
stamped out the fire and the hunters caught up their
sparse gear. Rem led the way out of the brake and
the others followed. Gay and the flirtatious hunter
brought up the rear.
Where now?
§ fii
She received her answer before the coming of
I08 GAY HUNTER
night. All day, hunting slowly and spreading out
fanwise in the process, they loitered northwards,
but evidently with a fixed enough objective. Once
they roused a bear—a great creature at which two
or three arrows were loosed. It snapped them off
and charged the attackers. They scattered with yells,
but closed in again about the beast. Gay, squeam¬
ishly, did not look on at the last incident. Rem
joined her here.
4Where are we going?’
‘To the Place—they want me at the Place.’ His
eyes wrinkled up, and he looked at her strangely.
‘There are others.’
‘What others?’
He shook his young, bearded head, uncommuni¬
cative as ever, and rejoined the hunt. For lunch
Gay had a piece of warm bear-meat, sweet and rich.
Unfortunately, it made her sick. The sympathetic
and flirtatious young hunter—his name was a
wooden clatter of syllables, Allalalaka—insisted on
coming with her behind the bush to hold her head!
Then, the party again in motion with the wearing
of the afternoon, they came on the edge of the great
Dam once excavated in the heart of the Chilterns by
the antique men of a time that had yet been in the
future of Gay’s twentieth century.
She was never able to guess the purpose of that
giant Dam or the interlocking maze of corridors and
passages at its upper end in which the Folk now
THE DAM
109
sheltered when they came hunting here in the sum¬
mer. Perhaps it had been a new water-reservoir for
London. Perhaps to feed some other city now long
dust and rubble. It had a dizzying depth, especially
at the far end under the corridors, a width of four
miles or so, and a length of perhaps five. Great
boulders had rolled down on it from the sides of
the hills. Heath and grass had encroached upon the
floor of it, here and there. But it still endured to
shape, though the feed at the head of its five miles
stretch was broken and the once-prisoned waters
long gone. Only midway of it now a shallow stream
flowed and murmured, gradually wearing out a
channel for itself, through a substance that seemed
otherwise everlasting.
Standing above the Dam in company with the
hunters, Gay gasped, thinking for a moment that
here at least, men must still be capable of great
engineering feats. Then she saw the antiquity of the
Dam. Had it been made of any kind of stone, even
andesite or diorite, like the great ruins left by the
pre-Inkans in Peru, it would long since have
crumbled to dust. But instead, it was made of metal.
No more than the purpose of the Dam, was she
ever to discover the alloy of which that metal was
made. There seemed to be copper in it, for, beyond
the points and pilasters of the Dam, over the ruined
passages and corridors that the Folk had made their
shelters, there lifted up into the afternoon air,
no
GAY HUNTER
fragile, tremendous and lovely, a great tower some
four hundred feet in height. Its upper reaches
shone a dull green—the green of much-weathered
copper, and bushes and then forest towered behind
it. It was lonely, gigantic, terrifying, five miles away
in the afternoon stillness.
Gay wondered what it could be, and sought out
Rem.
fIt is the Place of Voices.’
They scrambled down the slopes of the Dam till
they reached the bottom, the strange metallic floor¬
ing of the great reservoir. In the air hung the blue
smell of smoke. No herds were pastured in this
secure hollow—she was to discover that the Folk
knew nothing of—or cared nothing for—herds or
tame cattle. Then, up at the broad end of the Dam,
she saw fires winking as the evening came on.
It was almost dark before they reached those fires,
glimmering in the bowels of the hills through the
ruins of the Titanic metal masonry. Here stood
great columns, of metal, imbedded straightly still in
the dull metal floor of the Dam. Beyond showed
the entrances, weather-smeared, but hardly weather¬
worn at all. And in those remote chambers, where
perhaps once purifying chemicals had been stored
to mix automatically with the waters, the hunter
Folk had made their shelters, bringing there their
weapons and fires and women and children, their
slow, easy drift through summer days, their waning
THE DAM
III
attention to the Voices of the Tower. . .. The flirta¬
tious hunter, Allalalaka, helped Gay up over masses
of metallic rubble to the mouth of one of the
corridors.
Above its entrance was carved an inscription.
Suddenly Gay realised how old it was, how far
off it was. She could make nothing of the script,
except a faint letter here and there. It looped and
wound, its secret lost in the technique of some alien
writing.
She looked back over the deserted Dam, a wild
pity holding her heart. Poor devils, poor people,
those who had built this and dreamt of this, with no
foreshadowing of the desolation their hands would
make! A wild crying and running under the sun,
under the moon, under the slow-changing stars, and
civilisation had passed from men like a strange
dream dreamed by a hunter’s camp-fire, betwixt the
time of his nodding and the low growl of his wolf-
dog beside him, as some intruder trod in the night.
Young Allalalaka pulled at her hand.
Inside the ancient underground reservoir she
found some three or four hundred naked men and
women and children, the smoke of their fires, and
Lady Jane Easterling and Major Ledyard Hough¬
ton tied with thongs to an ancient metallic pillar
from the floor.
VII. SUNSET
§i
Lying on the verge of sleep, she remembered the
words she had spoken to Lady Jane:
‘They’ll probably cut your throats. I hope they
do.’
‘By God, you little bitch ’ Houghton had
said, strangledly.
She had turned away, leaving them hanging in
their thongs, watched by the brown, wide-eyed
hunters and their women. . . . Some of the women
as pretty as I am, Gay had thought, interestedly.
Prettier even, confound them. And had smiled at
one, very young and slim, with a whimsical thought
about her:
‘In the twentieth century, my dear, but for the
grace of God and a father with a large income, they’d
have covered over those nice knees and thighs of
yours with wisps of clothing, and made you posture
on a stage in a music-hall—to excite scrubby little
clerks into wonderment about what was under the
clothes. Instead ’
Instead, she was as lovely as a deer. She smiled
back at Gay. The flirtatious hunter came smiling as
112
SUNSET
US
well. She gathered that she was invited to sit and
eat roast pig. Only when they glanced to the bound
twain by the pillar did something else come into
their gay, dreamy eyes. Gay shivered. She had
done nothing herself, and even were she in danger,
she didn’t think she’d shiver. . . . But Houghton
and Lady Jane had probably only a short time to
live.
From the babble of Lady Jane she had gathered
little of what had happened till Houghton took to
barking out his version in short, parade-ground sen¬
tences. . . . Windsor—that night—two of them
caught in the rain. Came back in the morning—no
sign of you, Miss Hunter—decided you must have
gone on on your own.... So they set out themselves,
and after four days’ wandering fell in with some
of those filthy savages. Didn’t try to attack, but it
was a sickening business being in their hands, un¬
armed. Danger to Jane. So that night, while the
hunters slept, Houghton had tried to steal their
flint-tipped spears. Unfortunately, one of them had
awakened and made a grasp at his spear. Lady Jane
had crept behind him and smothered his face so that
he couldn’t cry, and then Houghton well, there
had been nothing else for it. They had taken another
spear and a bow, and crept away from the camping-
place, Houghton wiping the blood of the hunter
from the original spear. Then they had made east,
and camped, with no fire—they couldn’t make one
GAY HUNTER
114
though they wanted to. The savages must have
tracked after them. They jumped on Houghton
while he slept and tied him up, then Lady Jane, and
drove them up through the wilderness to the edge
of this Dam ’
‘And what are they going to do to us now? You
seem to be friendly with them, Miss Hunter. My
hands are hurting. Do get them to release us!’
This was Lady Jane. Gay had looked at her, in
her tattered grass skirt and her filth-stained body,
and suddenly had had a vision of that hunter killed
by her and Houghton—one of these kindly, remote
savages who had companioned herself. And it was
then she had replied:
‘Pm damned if I do. They’ll probably cut your
throats. I hope they do.’
Unkind enough, that, she thought now, turning
uneasily on the nest of grass she shared with the
naked, slim girl who had befriended her. Poor
devils, she might have done something for them.
. . . She peered through the eddying smoke. The
fnes were dying as the night wore on. From where
she lay she could see Houghton and Lady Jane, still
tied to the pillar. Lady Jane was sagging forward
in her bonds.
Gay stood up and went in and out the fires till
she stood beside them. Houghton whispered,
hoarsely, ‘She’s fainted.’
Gay nodded, and looked round the great culvert.
SUNSET
115
Overhead arched the roof of strange, green-crusted
metal. In nests by the fires the hunters slept, men
and women and naked, rosy-brown children. Yet
they did not all sleep. She saw the firelight shine
in eyes, regarding her, and for a moment had a
thrill of fear. Then that went past. She went up
to one of the fires and picked up a utensil from
which she had seen them drink. It was no more than
a twisted leaf—a leaf of some great plant she did
not know. At the carved door of the culvert she
hesitated, wondering how near water might be.
Out here, the night stung fresh and bright. Over¬
head was the glory of the stars. Very far off in the
south some great beast was baying the moon—far
off in the lower end of the great abandoned Dam.
Listening for a minute or so she heard the gurgle
of water, darkness-concealed, and made her way
down towards that. It seemed a long distance. Once
she fell and bruised her elbow and swore, and that
helped, jerking the sleepiness from her eyes and
mind. So at last she came to the edge of that stream
that poured out of a circular metallic opening and
meandered away through the quiet of the night and
the bosom of the ruined land—with a sharp trilling
it moved off into the darkness—rejoicing, through
the hushed Chorasmian waste, said a stray phrase in
her mind. She bent down and filled the leaf.
When she had attained to the great cave-culvert
again, she splashed water in Lady Jane’s face, and
116
GAY HUNTER
then gave her some to drink. Then she went again
for water, this time for the parched Houghton.
He gulped and spluttered as the water went down
his heat-dried throat. ‘Very decent of youd
‘Rot. Any of these people would have done the
same—if you hadn’t started murdering amongst
them first.’
‘Don’t lecture me, damn you. Filthy savages!
By God, if I ever get loose among them—look here,
they give you freedom enough, you could easily get
a knife.’
‘And cut you loose—and get my own throat cut?
No, thanks.’
They were speaking in whispers. Lady Jane
joined in now. ‘We could get away while they’re
asleep, and go down east again, on the road to
London ’
Gay drew a long breath. Hellnblast, would they
never learn? ‘London? You think there’s still a
London—after seeing these people?’
‘Of course there must be—some central place of
authority.’ This was Houghton. ‘These are just
animals—beasts. I’ve seen sickening sights to-night!
One of them with two women ’
‘There’s no need to make me feel sick again,
Ledyard. Can’t you persuade this girl to get us
away?’
Gay was angry by now. ‘No, he can’t persuade
this girl, damn you. But I’ll see what I can do with
SUNSET I 17
one of these hunters about you—he may plead for
you. He speaks English.>
‘What?’ Houghton moved and pulled at his
bonds. fI thought as much. These are no more than
some stray tribe of Gipsies. One of them knows
English, eh? If we could get to London 1
‘You’d find it a place full of sea-gulls, most likely.
. . . Good night.’
They whispered after her urgently, but she paid
them no heed, going back to her grass couch by the
side of the girl who was sleeping so soundly.
As Gay sank down beside her, she turned round
and took Gay in her arms.
§
When she woke the cave was deserted but for
herself, the young girl, and Allalalaka. Into the
mouth of the culvert poured the early sunshine. She
heard the sound of far voices. There was the stench
of much fire—burning and cooking in the air.
The girl—her name was Liu—had cooked pork
for her, and Allalalaka had brought water in a leaf.
They sat around her and talked in soft syllables,
and peered at her now and then, and laughed, and
evidently enjoyed her greatly. Gay smiled back.
Nice people—even if the hunter was a flirt. The
nicer for that, perhaps. If she were a man, though,
IlB GAY HUNTER
she would flirt with Liu from dawn till dusk—and
do more than flirt! . . . She stopped eating, looking
down the culvert.
Lady Jane Easterling and Houghton were no
longer tied to the pillar. Outside, beyond the de¬
serted doorway, came the far cry of voices.
Rather sick, Gay got to her feet. Liu got up,
gesticulating that her guest was surely still hungry?
Gay, with a wry smile, put her aside. What was
happening out there to those two? Torture?
A remembrance of nameless bestialities, read,
and shuddered upon, passed through her mind. She
stumbled down the culvert and out of it, the other
two at her heels.
Far below, in the overplash from the stream, a
shallow lagoon had formed in a corner of the Dam.
It was to this that the entire horde of the Folk had
betaken themselves. Men were swimming and mud-
larking with the women. Some women were running
in and out of the water with the naked children
poised on their shoulders. The children screamed as
they slipped off. Gay’s eyes were drawn to yet an¬
other scene.
This was a group of men directly below the
culvert mouth. They seemed engaged in hurling
objects into the water, retrieving them, and hurling
them in with an unabating enthusiasm. White ob¬
jects. Gay sat down and laughed and laughed till
she wept. Liu and Allalalaka laughed with her.
SUNSET
119
Then the three of them went down to watch.
By then, however, the ceremony was over. Ex¬
hausted, spluttering and panting, Houghton and
Lady Jane Easterling, minus their grass kilts, lay
on the edge of the lagoon surrounded by their grin¬
ning jailers. Gay saw Rem and pushed a way
through the throng to his side.
‘That was fun. But—what else are you going to
do to them?,
His grave smile came twinkling in eyes and lips
at sight of her. He put out his finger to stroke her
arm, and that Gay endured. She was accustomed to
such things now. She rather liked them—the cat in
her, she supposed. She repeated her question, stand¬
ing in the centre of the group. Gasping like stranded
fish, Houghton and Lady Jane listened from the
ground.
Rem shook his head. ‘There is nothing more.
They are better now. They were madd
Gay nodded, solemnly. ‘They were mad. Is this
how you always treat the mad?’
‘Unless they kill and kill. Then we kill them.’
An elementary and obvious justice. Gay said,
‘Can they get up now?’
Rem nodded. Gay looked down at her fellow-
travellers out of the twentieth century.
‘They’ve finished with you. Got off lightly, I
think.’
Lady Jane was in hysterics—angry hysterics—and
120
GAY HUNTER
Houghton, sitting up, began to comfort her. For
reply he received a stinging slap in the face. The
hunters grinned. Rem grinned. It was an enormous
joke. The shout of mirth went echoing down the
great deserted Dam.
‘Idiots!’
But, saying it, she was aware of something break¬
ing within her. Allalalaka, Liu, and Rem stared their
wonder. She was suddenly, angrily, and inexplic¬
ably weeping.
§ iii
The Old Singer of the Folk was very old. He
had seen eighty south hunting seasons, he told to
Gay as she squatted by his side in the blue shadows
cast by the towering metallic walls on the floor of
the great Dam. Presumably that was eighty years.
But now he had grown so feeble and blind that the
hunters had to carry him south this time, out of the
rugged north, past the Echoing Pits, to this imme¬
morial Place of yearly pilgrimage. . . .
Gay lay full length on the ground, her small
breasts on the ground, her chin cupped in her
hands, and listened. The great Dam drowsed.
Some of the hunters had long vanished into the
morning haze. Some of the children still cried and
played about the shore of the lagoon, but their voices
SUNSET
121
were muted in distance. The women had climbed
out of the Dam, berry-hunting. Rem had dis¬
appeared. Lady Jane and Houghton were nowhere
in view—probably they were inside the culvert,
seeking sleep and solace for their wounded pride....
Silly asses. Nice to have found the Old Man—
Allalalaka had done that for her, bringing her to
where he sat dreaming in the shade, and speaking a
few unintelligible words to the ancient—a little
shrunken man, lifting sightless eyes to Gay’s face.
Then he had spoken in English:
‘You are the woman of whom Rem told me?’
Gay had said gently: ‘I think so. I know Rem.’
He had nodded and patted the ground beside him.
Gay had squatted down. Relieved, the flirtatious
hunter had betaken himself after his comrades. The
Old Singer had sat silent and remote a long time
after that. Then:
‘Where do you come from that you speak Eng¬
lish? What is your Folk?’
Gay had chewed at the leaf of a dock, growing on
a driftage of earth gathered on the great metal floor.
‘I don’t think I should tell you that. You wouldn’t
believe me.’
The thin ancient had looked puzzled. ‘Not
believe?’
‘You would think I did not speak the truth.’
‘But I also am a Singer—as Rem is. Therefore I
would know your Song.’
122
GAY HUNTER
Gay had tried to work this out. ‘Then only
Singers don’t speak the truth?’
‘Surely. They set tales upon the truth, to make
it more true.’
‘Sounds sophistry to me. Don’t others ever fail
to speak the truth?’
He shook his head. ‘Why should they?’
Why indeed? Gay looked around her, stretching
her arms and toes. A strange gladness came on her.
It was not only her clothes she had shed! . . . She
said, ‘Then perhaps I am a Singer, and also have a
Song to tell. But I would like to hear yours first—
not a Song, but the truth. First, is there any other
Folk than this?’
He nodded. He was very old and full of mem¬
ories, told in that sing-song English of perhaps two
hundred words vocabulary. . . Folk? There was
the Folk of the North—perhaps equal in number
to themselves, the Folk of the Place. The Northern
Folk sometimes came down as far as the hunting
grounds of the Place Folk. But they preferred their
own hunts—far away, among the great beasts. They
hunted these beasts with long spears, and in the
Dark Days, because of the cold, wrapped themselves
in the skins of beasts.
‘And do the Northern Folk and your Folk never
fight?’
‘Once I fought a Northern man. It was for a
woman. And when we had finished fighting she said
SUNSET
123
she would have neither of us. So we were sad, and
went away on a lone hunt, and missed the season,
and wandered through dark countries for three sea¬
sons. But that was long ago.’
‘But does your Folk never go to war with the
Northern Folk?’
‘War? . . . That is only in the madness from the
Voices.J
Gay raised her head to look away up over the
frowning bastions of the Dam at the Tower raising
its four hundred feet of airy metallic structure into
the noon heat a quarter of a mile away. She re¬
solved she would have that place investigated very
shortly. . . . The Old Singer was reminiscent:
‘He was Gara, the Northern hunter with whom I
wandered. He was killed by a panther beside the
Great Western Water. We came on that Water in
a time of frost and mist, and it was painted with
pictures. It was as we stood and watched the pic¬
tures that the panther leapt on Garad
Some unimaginable Scotchman. . . . ‘What were
the pictures?J
‘It was as of another country, but like our own,
that hung in the skyd
Ireland. Probably that had been Ireland. Sud¬
denly Gay’s inward vision lifted. Not England only
—Ireland—America, China, the great wastes of
India and Africa—this fall and passing of civilisa¬
tion must have come on them all. But was that cer-
124
GAY HUNTER
tain—might this not be a single land abandoned
while civilisation went elsewhere? She asked the Old
Singer if he had ever been to the Great Water in
the South?
He shook his head. ‘But once a woman I knew
went there—she and her lover—and they came to a
high cliff and saw a land remote across the Water.
There were great beasts in the waters also. They
went there because of the old Song of the Last Man
who came from that country^
Gay asked when that had been, and heard a dim
story of a story handed down through countless
generations—of a man who had crossed that water
on the drifting branches of a tree, and landed, and
survived, and strayed up here to the Place, and had
been adopted by the Folk. He had been as them¬
selves, but of different speech.
France. A lost Frenchman. Years and years ago,
an accidental driftage of the winds and tides. Gay
thought of the busy shipping that had once crowded
the Channel, of the hum and roar of the aeroplane
in which she herself had crossed to Paris for a week¬
end. And now it was only a dream—a song long
past.
The sunset of humankind. . . .
She looked up at the wizened ancient, brown and
tough and naked, with his thin, gnarled hands and
perfect teeth, lithe and compact,, a Singer and hunter
nearing even death: and for some reason remem-
SUNSET
125
bered the last old man she had seen in London. It
had been outside Paddington Station, and he had
been selling match-boxes on the kerb—a battered
old man with a face like a decaying fungus, green
and horrible, his rags foul and slovenly as though
they also were decaying, his eyes—they had made
her almost sick, his eyes, the hopeless fear and death
in them. Thousands of old men like that, in every
city of civilisation. That was what it had meant for
the masses of the people since they built the first
Pyramid—toil and taboos and slimy food and a
slimy death. And now, in the sunset of mankind—
this wind and sun and this old hunter!
‘And now,’ he was saying, ‘you will tell me your
song?’
§ iv
So she told it, trying to tell in simple words of
that world out of which she had come and the means
through which she had come. She told of the com¬
pact with Houghton and Lady Jane and their
awakening on the mounds of Pewsey a week before j
she told of their terror and dismay at finding them¬
selves in the strange country in which they had
come. . . . The Old Singer of the Folk sat and
listened and nodded his head. He was very old.
There seemed an odd note in the queer sing-song of
his Voice-learned English as she finished.
126
GAY HUNTER
‘And before this coming to our Times—how did
your Folk live?’
So Gay tried to tell him of that as well, to picture
the great cities with their crowdings of traffic, the
wheeling lights of Broadway and Piccadilly, the long
roads that scarred the countryside, the massed chim¬
neys of factories, unemployed men in long queues
awaiting tokens for the purchase of food, the thunder
and clang of the railway stations, the bright wheeling
of aeroplanes against sunset skies. She fell in a dream
and a vision herself as she talked, seeing and remem¬
bering so much of her life: she told of the march of
the sciences, and how disease and death were fought j
the great works of the great Singers, the great men
who taught the kindlier religions. And then she
found herself telling him of the Wars. . . .
When she had finished she thought for a long
time that the ancient was asleep. Then he opened his
sightless eyes:
‘That was a Song.’
For a little she did not understand, then he said
again, with peculiar stress, ‘That was a Songd
‘It’s the truth/ Gay said.
‘It is a Song—but an evil Song. Like those that
the Voices once told in the Place here. But now they
are stilling one by one—every hunting season one
or the other is stilling. Soon all of them will be
dead, and the Folk come no more to this Place. Rem
and I are the last of the Folk to learn the tongue
SUNSET
127
of the Voices. When we pass, that also will pass.
And the Folk do not hear the Song you sing, Gay
Hunter.’
‘You mean I mustn’t tell them of where I came
from, how I came here?’
‘It is a mad Song. Rem may hear it; he also will
know it mad—a thing that belongs to the past ages
of our Folk. Now there are other Songs.’
Gay lay and thought, with her head in her hands.
There had been the ghost of a threat in the ancient’s
voice. And suddenly, though he said nothing more,
she realised why. He knew that her story was no
mere ‘song.’ He knew it the truth—dimly—and
he would hold her from telling it. Perhaps in his
youth there had been Singers who also knew the
truth of such things as she told—passed down
through generations of bards and story-tellers. And
now it was fading from the minds of men—allowed
to fade, gladly to fade. She said:
‘I am not the only one who has come. There are
two others.’
‘The Folk know that they have been mad, for
they killed. So they will not heed them.’
Gay said, with sudden resolution, ‘I cannot
promise—not until I have heard those damned
Voices.’
The still figure hardly moved, though the grey
head nodded. ‘Rem will take you to hear them at
sunset.’
128
GAY HUNTER
§ V
Far into the west the sunset was dying in a shroud,
a fleece of flame. Below cowered the westerning
forest, and the colour dipped and played like birds
through the thick-leaved boughs. All the air was
very still as Gay and the hunter climbed up the
winding paths worn by the feet of millennia from
the floor of the Dam. Gay breathed deeply and
looked down, and saw the evening parties of hunters
winding back across the deserted Floor. They
looked like ant-men in that great depth.
Then, the sunset in her eyes, she turned and
looked again at the Towerj and, as she looked,
heard in the stillness the lap-lap-lap of a lapwing’s
flight.
Now she saw that it rose, immense and airy, from
a great metallic substructure besieged by bush and
flowering scrub. Through this wilderness led the
vestige of a path, but one long untrodden, for thorns
reached their tendrils across it and the grass grew
lank and high. It was a desolate, dim place, and
very silent.
She glanced at Rem, leading the way. A kind of
solemnity, though no fear, had fallen across his
dreaming remoteness. She thought, ‘Anyhow, you
have nice flanks,’ and found that homely fact com¬
forting in this eerie place.
SUNSET
129
So it was they came to steps, and from these to a
great empty doorway. Once, above the architrave,
there had been inscribed some saying of the antique
men. But it had been set on the metal in some kind
of enamel, and only here and there did the winding
scrolls persist, enigmatic, untranslatable. What had
they said, what told? What had been the purpose
of this Tower above the great ruined Dam?
Now she found herself within the threshold.
Here the dust—metallic dust—lay inches thick.
Somewhere high in the structure a beam of the
departing sunlight rayed down from the roof, and
she saw all the place dimly in its radiance that
reflected away, faintly and ever more faintly, into
the corridors of metal, into the dull-gleaming
masses of apparatus that stood in silence and disuse
on either side of the doorway. She had never known
much of mechanical contrivances—and a ghost of
regret stirred in her because of that fact, and then
passed. How it would have helped her, in this maze
of wheels and long, gleaming rods and time-un¬
touched pointers and dials!
Then she saw that some indeed of the great
machines were not time-untouched. One had had a
cup—of glass or some such sand-product—and it
had broken and spilled from itself some material
that left a wide stain on the metal containers. There
were other structures that fell away lopsidedly, lean¬
ing on their neighbours, with bars and keyboards
130
GAY HUNTER
grotesquely askew. These, she guessed, had had
subsidiary parts made not of the yellow-brown
metal, but of more perishable substances—wood or
steel or glass—known to her time. . . . She lowered
her eyes from the bewildering array to Rem, who
had halted beside her. He was looking across the
great dusty floor at a machine that rose like a giant
organ remote in the dimness.
Towards it Gay now saw that a track had been
worn in dust—towards it and none of the other
machines. Yet the silting and moving of the dust,
in the winds that played from the doorway and
ventilation-hole, had sprayed a thick covering over
even that track. Gay asked a question, and, asking
it, gave a little cry and grasped at Rem’s arm. For
the question was caught and spun and re-echoed
savagely about the building, till it seemed to Gay
it must be shouted abroad all the sunset country¬
side:
‘When did you last come here?’
‘The Old Singer brought me here three hunting
seasons ago.’
Three years before. . . . Gay looked into the
dimness and then again at Rem. He nodded and
they crossed the dusty track together. Crossing,
their coming, soundless though it was, stirred great
clouds of bats in those remote darknesses. The air
grew alive with the fuff-fuff of their wings. And
now, within touch of the great organ-like machine,
SUNSET
131
Gay saw that all around the floor and the walls were
thick with the droppings of bats. Then she saw a
grislier sight. Over to the right lay a skeleton. An
outstretched, bony hand reached up to a thing like
a typewriter keyboard. A key had been wrenched
down and remained down. ... It had all hap¬
pened years before.
Rem paid it no heed. He had halted in front of
the thing like a great organ. But it was no organ,
though Gay never saw its shape plainly, though her
mind retained a blurred impression of voluting
spirals and great pipe-like structures reaching up
into invisibility. At the height of a man from the
floor two little levers—they could not have been
more than a foot in length—projected from the
machine through narrow, dusty slots. Rem was look¬
ing at those; then he turned his shadowed, amber
eyes.
‘This is where the Voices speak. There are many
Voices—beginning many tales, some in words that
we do not know. Once they thundered, the Old
Singer has told me, but now they are sometimes no
more than a whisper. You must pull this stickd
He pointed to the right-hand lever, and then
squatted in the dust. Gay stood and stared at the
dim machine.
What would happen? What was she to hear?
Any whisper at all of her own times and the in¬
numerable voices that had cried through them of
132
GAY HUNTER
the things that would come to the world? What
profit, indeed, to hear those Voices when all of
which they told and hoped was no more now than
dust a-blow in a ruined Tower, a whisper at night
as the dark came down?
So she stood a long time in hesitation, the strayed
young American girl in the Chilterns Tower j then
she put up her hand to the lever Rem had indicated,
and pulled it down—it came with a little click—and
herself sank down in the dust by the side of Rem.
At that moment the beam of sunlight suddenly
vanished, and far off, through the open door, Gay
saw the day dying from the land.
VIII. THE HIERARCHS
§1
It must have been towards three o’clock in the
morning when Gay, lost far away in the depths of
the forest beyond the Dam, raised her head from
her arms. A breath of night-wind sighed in the
trees, but as she looked up she saw the stars paling,
and low in the east a smoulder where the moon
had gone down. She covered her face with a moan,
and sank down on the unseen grass again, remem¬
bering the horror of that Voice that had whispered
and whispered in the ruined Tower as the moon rose
over the Chilterns.
Great patches had faded from her mind (pro¬
tective instinct had seen to that), leaving only a track
of remembrance like the slime of a snake’s passing j
but others remained searing her mind as with red-
hot coals. . . . She covered her ears to shut her¬
self away from the encompassing silence.
Tt was a lie that the Voice told—horrible
lies!’
That cool, cynical Voice—had it been capable of
lying?—It, with its tale of the culmination of the
133
134
GAY HUNTER
world’s civilisations and their last downfall in war
and riot? It had been the weary Voice of civilisation
itself, whispering from the dust, dust only, without
any rosy guisings of flesh that had guised the foul
thing it outlasted. . . . She remembered now, she
and Rem squatting in the dust, the whirr and
whisper as some needle apparatus had engaged on
some unimaginable record. At first the Voice had
been in no language that she knew—though that
meant little. She knew only a few of the European
languages. It might have been Russian, Chinese,
Esperanto, Volapuk. It had gone on for a long time,
a whisper, but a genuine re-echoing, she had under¬
stood even then, of a human voice that had once
breathed on the apparatus of the strange machine.
Thousands of years before. . . .
The Tower had grown ever darker as they
listened j and in a little she had been unable to see
even the brown face and figure of the Singer, Rem,
beside her. And then, abruptly:
‘I have been commissioned by the [indistinguish¬
able] to make these records for the breasting station
by the Chiltern Dam. They are made in some haste
and confusion, for it is now only a matter of a day
or so (we think) before the attack of the Trans¬
atlantics. Already most of the European Great
Centres have been obliterated by atomic bombs, and
only the fact that the Fascist Federation has sent
its fleet to delay the Transatlantics still saves
THE HIERARCHS
135
London. But we do not imagine that our immunity
will last long. The Army of the Communes is on
the march from the north, and everywhere the sub¬
men have risen, destroying the ways and killing and
devouring the overseers. So the Great Council has
made direction for the making of this record and
others to place in the unburnable station protected
by its water-belts. It seems that the end has now
come in the north as already in Australasia and
Africa, and the War Plagues are following the out¬
break. . . . Our chemists are still attempting, and
so far unsuccessfully, to cope with the poisoning dust
that comes from the atomic bombing. . .
The Voice had died away then, a little silence had
followed, and then another Voice had taken its
place, this time in a strange, twisted German—a
German fined of its nouns and with a slimmer and
easier verb than Gay remembered. It did no more
than repeat the substance of the first record in Eng¬
lish ^ then again came that English Voice. It plunged
into a rapid survey of the rise of the Great
Hierarchies.
They had risen, it seemed, several hundred years
before that time in which the Voice spoke, at a time
when humanity had been at the cross-roads. . . .
There were innumerable interpolations here, and a
point where the whisper had failed entirely. Then
it resumed, history-telling, with a cold brevity.
‘So the great order of the War States arose, and
136 GAY HUNTER
the sub-men were allotted to those classes from
which the Hierarchs drew their helots and ser¬
vants. The great problem of surpluses was solved,
and everywhere the Hierarchies entered into con¬
trol of those States that have made our civilisation j
so that in comparison with them the greatest achieve¬
ments of the earliest scientific age of the old Christ-
age superstition are little more than the fumblings
of savages in the dark. We have measured the stars
and sent ships to the planets, we have prolonged
life and mitigated death, created new life in the
test-tubes of our laboratories, altered the periodicity
of the seasons, reached in the arts the verge of a
world that definitely marks a new and subtle trans¬
formation of the human mind. But now it seems
that all this glorious fabric may be either completely
or partially levelled in the Revolt of the Sub-
Men ’
The moon had come up and Gay had raised a blind
look to it as the Voice whispered on and on—of those
Sub-Men, their world-wide revolt, the condition of
their lives, how they were mated and bred in pens,
and looked to with a scientific care. . . . Once Gay
had crept away into a corner of the dark building to
be ill, and had thought of running from the
Tower. But the Voice pursued her, whispering and
whispering, and again she had trodden back through
the dust to listen. Rem had sat like a statue carved
in darkness—she stumbled against him and his hand
THE HIERARCHS I37
had caught hers and guided her to the ground
again. . . .
Now the whispering Voice was in a blur of tech¬
nicalities of which she could make nothing—it was
whispering at a gabble innumerable formulae and
recipes it believed of supreme importance for mem¬
bers of the Hierarchies to know should they survive
the debacle. Gay caught a vague glimpse of great
machines and skyey towers and the roar of aircraft
in an alien sky, the mixing of metals and the making
of booksj then all drifted away in a sudden jar of
the machine j and again an alien language took up
the tale.
So through long hours it had seemed to go on,
she sitting it seemed in a giant auditorium, watching
the play of the last centuries of civilisation: how
men had grown as no beasts that had ever lived—
splendid, immense, terrible, and cruel: while under¬
neath festered the Sub-Men, the Ancient Lowly.
That Voice whispered of the Hierarchies’ triumphs,
their tremendous wars, their passions and pleasures.
. . . Once Gay fainted while it told of their
pleasures. Then it told of the suppressing of a
former revolt of the Sub-Men—an international
revolt—how thousands of the Sub-Men had been
crucified up and down the stretches of the Atlantic
coasts. Now War had broken out, to an extent never
suffered before, between the Hierarchies, and every¬
where the Sub-Men had risen in a last tremendous
GAY HUNTER
138
revolt. . . . And these were the last records, the
last records; but before the Hierarchs perished this
was their Testament of Life, these the things by
which they lived 
It was, Gay remembered now, at the whisper of
the second code in that Testament that she had
found the listening unendurable. Something had
seemed to crack in her brain as she listened to the
filth that the Voice whispered. She had jumped to
her feet and fled—fled from the Tower out into the
moonlighted world beyond, with the trees waving
dark against the dim horizon. To those trees she
had turned with racing, heedless steps—anywhere,
anyhow, out of hearing of that abomination in the
Tower. The trees—the trees—God, for the shelter
and danger of the trees!
Once, far behind her as she fled and ran and
stumbled down alley-ways of the forest, she thought
she heard someone cry. But that crying faded
and presently died from her hearing.
§ii
So it was as the dawn came that Gay got to her
feet and fled north again, through the hill and
jungle of that England lost far in time. She had no
plan or route in mind—for hours it was no more
than a blind scurry through a shadowed day—away
THE HIERARCHS
139
from the sight or sound of human kind.
Kneeling that afternoon by a stagnant pool, she
looked at her reflected self—that self that had some¬
times so pleased her—and shuddered with a cold
disgust. What a foul thing and unclean was the
human body, fit house for the sickening cruelty and
shame of the human mind. . . .
‘Filth—I shall never forget it, however long I
live, wherever I live. Why should I go on living at
all?—sick as I am with it, God, so sick! Beasts—
there were never beasts like the human beasts that
have been. . . d
She remembered then the great heroes of the
human march in the far-off times before her own
century—Akhnaton and the Christ, Spartacus, the
Buddha: those who had believed in the triumph of
the kindly and the free, those whom men had taken
as beacon lights for two long millennia. And their
dreams had sunk into pits of slime, devoured and
befouled in a more cruel aberration of the human
spirit than the blood-sacrificing Aztecs ever knew.
For that all the ages had visioned and hoped—for
that horror whispered by the Voice in the Tower.
‘But it’s finished and ended—that civilisation that
became a nightmare. Now, at least there are no
crucified helots lining the Atlantic shores j even the
names of those people are no more than dying
whispers. ... I suppose after all there was a God.
And He endured men till they sickened Him, and
140
GAY HUNTER
then wiped out that crazy building of toys like a
nurse a cruel child’s toy-prison. Ended and
finished.’
Where would she go, where could she hide, in
what place in the hills where never again she would
be sickened by the sight of a human face? Some¬
where—some place she would get to—till the winter
came and killed her.
And, with that resolve, a strange new freshness
came on Gay’s tired body.
She would go west.
§ iii
That night she was awakened by the crackle of a
broken twig below a hesitating footstep.
She raised her head. It was Rem; behind him in
the moonlight glimmered the eyes of his wolf.
IX. PERSEPHONE
§i
He said:
‘I followed you from the Tower.’
That, she thought, too plain to need comment.
Then an involuntary shiver of disgust came on her,
looking up at the naked figure standing in the moon¬
light. She had thought she had escaped them all—
and here was this fool, this brainless savage with
his nakedness and his bow and his dog and his eyes
of a moron—following her even here. She said:
‘Go away. Go back. I don’t want you.’
He stood still for a second, then turned about, the
wolf at his heels, and disappeared into the leafy
corridors of the forest.
She had not thought she would be taken at her
word—so immediately. Something stung in her
throat and she swallowed and blinked back the tears.
Then rage came in place of dismay. The fool—the
degenerate clown! She wanted nothing to do with
him—never wanted to see him again! He and all
the crowd of the Folk who sheltered in the culverts
above the Chiltern Dam—what were they but
142
GAY HUNTER
degenerate survivors of that catastrophe that had
smitten the last civilisation of the filthy human race?
Degenerates, slow-witted and beastly and cool
because they were brainless. And that fool Rem—
she blinked angry tears—the worst of the lot.
An owl screamed close at hand. A little shiver of
fear seized her. What if there were panthers in
this forest?—or bears? Hadn’t she best climb a
tree?
Odd how the will to live went on! She, who had
looked on suicide only a day back with passion and
purpose, was now afraid of a very obvious and plain
and useful death! Killed and eaten by a beast, she
would serve at least some useful purpose. This dis¬
gusting fear of the disposal of one’s body 
She lay and thought, in the moonlighted forest,
of all those fearful dreams that had smitten men
on death and the hope of survival beyond death—
the cavemen of France and Spain who buried their
kind wrapped in red earth, the colour of blood, that
blood might revivify them to new hunting-grounds j
the clownish kings of the early Nile and their
gigantic sepulchres, the pyramids j Zoroastrian ex¬
posure; Keltic fire-burning—a scum and a leprosy
on the mind of men, that fear and care for death.
What part had she with it—she, who had renounced
her kind and all their filthy preoccupations?
‘Damn you,’ she whispered to the waiting forest,
‘come and kill me, then! ’
PERSEPHONE 143
Far off, in the depths of the trees, a jungle-cock
crowed drowsily in its sleep.
/
In the week that followed, in that same daze of
indifference, she lived such life as in memory was
to leave her breath-taken with amazement.
She wandered on, west and north-west, indifferent
to her surroundings, through land of hill and rolling
grassland and recurrent forest. She came once to a
blackened tundra where a great fire had been; and
set out to cross it, indifferent to the fact that she
might die of hunger. And she did not die, for mid¬
way was an unburned copse—a copse of apple trees,
and a clear spring of water. So, perforce, she fed,
and went on again, after an indifferent glance at
herself in the water of the spring. So glancing, she
had seen a soiled, sooty gnome, like one of those
horrific pictures of the mourning women of the
ancient Indonesian Islands.
In a path in the bush she came on a great bear.
The beast snuffled at her and growled warningly,
half-rising on his hind legs. She heard herself
laugh, and did not moderate her pace, her eyes
bitter and blind as she went towards that awaiting
death. Then the bear, sniffing the air in the direction
from which she came, shambled away, grumblingly.
144
GAY HUNTER
into the bush. She passed on.
She climbed a great tree one night to a leafy
bower and lay there under the dew and the stars.
It was the night of a great fall of shooting stars—
the Leonids, she thought, and lay awake, pricked
to a faint interest in the celestial performance. Then
she had laughed drearily—what were stars to her,
what had men ever seen in them but their own
fancies? And she had ceased to play with the cloacal
fancyings of men.
Sometimes she heard herself singing, singing like
a lost soul in Hades, a dim Hades of a pagan faith.
Then she would wander on in a numb silence. Now
she was in country alive with game. Long, one even¬
ing, on the verge of a great treey park, she stood
and watched wild cattle at graze, great herds of
them with their bulls and calves, dun beasts, with
here and there speckled, shaggy monsters that might
have been descendants of the Highland cattle of
antiquity. It was an unhunted land. The beasts
hardly raised their heads as she set out to cross the
park through their midst.
Next day she recognised the country through
which she travelled. It was the Vale of the White
Horse. South, crowned with rain-clouds, rose again
the Downs. Now the weather had changed from
its undeviating sunshine, and long streamers of mist
covered the land each morning. Now she went
slower, for a certain weakness had come on her with
PERSEPHONE
145
the lack of food, the indifferent food she ate. She
was aware of various disgusting bodily incon¬
veniences. A wild taggle-haired creature looked at
her from this pool and that, with staring eyes and
a strained, starved face, and she looked back now
at the reflection with a vague interest, lying long
whiles (they seemed long hours), to stare down
at that mirrored self that had once given her
delight. Before 
She got to her feet and staggered on again. Late
in the afternoon of the sixth day she found a fault
in the chalk hills and crept in there. Some seismic
disturbance had gutted the rock of a great handful
of chalk, leaving a place rocky and inhospitable
enough inside, but yet a place where she could die.
A little river wound out of the chalk below. She
drank there, and then groped her way into the cave
with the last of the light.
§ iii
From long, tormented dreams in the days and
nights that followed she came back but slowly to
the outside world, to life again, to hearing that
sweet, unending shrill of the stream, night and day,
the hours of sun and the hours of shadow, the hours
when Rem sat at the cave-mouth and sharpened an
arrow, his face dappled in the fall of shadows from
GAY HUNTER
146
the beech tree near; the hours when the dark came
down and she heard him breathing beside her, the
wolf Towser lying across the cave-mouth; the hours
when the cave was pelted with rain,, and she looked
out on a steaming landscape. . . . Deep and haunt¬
ing the rill of the stream went on.
Only slowly, disentangling dream from fact, had
the consciousness come on her that Rem and the wolf
had followed her and found her—dying, she sup¬
posed, a strayed Persephone in the Hades of her
own imaginings. She had been conscious of hands
below her and about her, of herself being moved, of
a time—it must have been night—when the hunter
was kindling a fire against the cold. She had lain
and watched him with wondering eyes, and then
slipped away into sleep. Sleep—she seemed to sleep
and sleep as though to make up for the wakefulness
of ten millennia!
But at last, one morning, she was strong enough
to sit up, in the nest of grass the hunter had made
her, and ate earth-baked rabbit and half-raw eggs—
milk or soup was beyond the hunter’s reach. (Milk,
indeed, that most unnatural of foods, was unknown
to the Folk.) She found herself with a ravenous
appetite and the sun shining on an early morning
landscape; and Rem, amber-eyed, squatting a little
distance away.
‘How did you find me?’
‘I followed you/
PERSEPHONE 147
‘My tracks—the marks I had left?’
‘I was always with you—a little distance behind
you.’
She sat and wondered about that, her hunger a
little appeased. ‘Then—then that was why the bear
—oh, days ago—slunk off into the bushes. . . .
And I thought it was my own ferocity scared it!
And that was why ’
Lying back again, she thought of a multitude of
whys. But she would not bother much about them,
now. Goodness, how good it was to be alive, even
though she felt dirt-engrained from head to foot and
the cave was smelly with human habitation! She sat
up again, slowly.
‘I don’t think I can walk yet. Will you help me
over to the door of the cave?’
For a moment he did not understand. Then he
came and bent down and picked her up. He picked
her up as easily as though she were a child. She
said:
‘That was neat. Just down on our doorstep,
please.’
Still he waited, holding her, not moving. She
raised her head, reluctantly, slowly, and looked up
in his face.
Clown? Savage? Degenerate? Moron? . . .
With a catch of breath she realised she had never
looked deeply in those amber eyes before, into deep
golden pools where shadows and strange images
GAY HUNTER
148
moved and changed and took fresh being—end¬
lessly, unceasingly, not as the thought-images of the
men she had known, confused and mixed and
broken, but with the assurance and sweep of clouds
in the sky. And out of them one thought shone and
abided a moment, so that she looked at it, strangely,
yet not afraid, with a kind of quick wonder. She
said, again, though this time in a whisper:
fI think you’d better put me down.’
He carried her then to the mouth of the cave,
and propped her there, and she closed her eyes to
the sun-dazzle. Then he came back and packed
grass about her and under her, and still with eyes
closed she let him do that. She heard him moving
about the cave, and looked up and saw him with
his bow and two arrows in his hand.
‘Hunting?’
He nodded. For a moment they smiled at each
other, and again that odd breathlessness took Gay.
Then he was walking away from the cave. The wolf
Towser got to his feet, but Rem gestured him back
towards the cave. Gay realised the reason—he was
to protect her.
Yawning, the wolf came back and lay flat in the
sunlight, bright eyes on Gay. She put out a brown
hand on his head, still staring after the hunter. Rem.
The Singer.
‘Goodness, Towser, and I thought I hated all
men! . . . But I suppose I’d forgotten so much
PERSEPHONE
149
I learned—centuries ago. Rem the real man: not
those poor ghosts who lived long ago and still
whisper in the Tower. Rem ’
He would not bear thinking about, too intimately.
She closed her eyes and began to move legs and
arms and fingers and toes. They had been cramped
and stiff, but now she could feel the run and trill
of blood awakening within them—magic and
strange, as if in rhythm with the trill and quiver of
the water in the hidden stream beyond the cave.
Beyond that stream the great valley rose and
quivered, southwards, up to the lone heights of the
Wiltshire Downs. Somewhere, as on that first morn¬
ing at Pewsey, curlews were crying.
‘The Woman Who Came Back. After Many
Years. ... I could stand as the moral of a dozen
novelettes. Many Waters Cannot Quench ’
She stopped that amused whisper and ruffled
Towser’s head. ‘Somehow that last quotation’s in¬
appropriate—to laugh at, anyway. How long do
you think he’ll be, Towser?’
The wolf lifted up questioning eyes, yawned, and
dropped his head to his paws again. Gay nodded,
drowsily.
‘Sorry to be a bore. Anyhow, he’ll be safe
enough. Wake me when he comes.’
She was sun-tired and sleepy still when Rem him¬
self awoke her. The sun was slanting towards after¬
noon. And a portion of a slaughtered calf was
i50
GAY HUNTER
grilling on sticks in front of the fire—the smoke
wound up blue, pencilled and still from the fire.
Gay looked from the meat to the hunter, and rubbed
her eyes.
‘I feel I could eat all that calf. . . . Do you
know that in the times from which I came, Rem,
there were people who were horrified that animals
were killed and eaten?—horrified that they were
cleanly killed and eaten, and yet took it quite as a
matter of fact that their own fellow-humans starved
in diseased slums. Long ago, before the days of the
Voice—what did you do with the Voice, by the way?’
‘I moved the other stick, and the Voice stopped.
Then I followed you.’
‘I know you did. You’re a dear. Anyone ever
told you that before?’
He pondered this, and shook his shapely, bearded
head. ‘Deer?’
Gay said, ‘Not the running kind. The static.
Don’t let’s bother. How long have I lain in the
cave?’
He counted that back carefully: ‘Seven days.’
Gay thought: ‘So it’s a fortnight since I ran away
from the Tower. It feels like but I’m beginning
to disbelieve in time altogether. . . . No, I don’t
want food yet, I’ve decided. Oh, I’m quite well.
But I want a bath instead. You couldn’t make love
to me unless I had a bath—could you?’
He was puzzled. ‘Make—love?’
PERSEPHONE
151
She stood and regarded him lightedly, a hand on
the side of the cave in case she should grow dizzy
again. Had he never heard of the word? Not from
her; not from the horrific record of the whispering
voice. ‘You don’t know what “love” is?’
He shook his head, the amber eyes kindled from
their remoteness, a little, nevertheless, as he looked
at her. Gay said: ‘Well, I’ll teach you—sometime,
maybe, if I ever succeed in scrubbing down to my
own skin. I’m a horridly immodest female; but
you shouldn’t have followed me and rescued me—
and then looked at me like that!’
He stood and watched her run down to the stream
and gather great handfuls of chalky earth by its bank
and slip out of his sight. A noise of splashing came
up to the cave. The fire crackled softly. He fol¬
lowed the bather.
§ iv
They played a splashing game for hours in that
stream and the osiers that fringed its side. The wolf
ran and frisked about them, and roused a hare, and
went off in chase of it. Gay scrambled out at last
to the bank, and looked down at herself, and liked
herself again. She felt very tired from the un¬
wonted exertions—hips and spine ached. Rem came
to where she lay and put out his hands on her. She
said, startled:
GAY HUNTER
152
‘What?’ And then: ‘Oh, massage? Do, lots of
it. I could do with new bones!’
She felt in a few minutes that her wish had come
true. Presently it had done more than that. She
wriggled away from those firm, suave hands. Who
would have thought a hunter would have such
hands? Dangerous—at least for the moment. She
addressed his solemn face:
‘I was once afraid of you, Rem. Long ago. Re¬
member that meeting we had among the berry-
bushes? And later. . . . Afraid of all kind of
things. Wasn’t I a fool? Pm not afraid now.’
He said: ‘Sometime I will teach you the speech
of the Folk, and you will forget all that the Voices
tell. The Voices are dying.’
She stretched her hands and then put them
behind her head and leaned back on the warm grass
in the lighted summer day. ‘Sometime you’ll teach
me all that. We’ve years to teach each other.’ She
sat up. ‘Goodness—but have we? You may have
done all this just because Pm a freak and a curiosity
—not wanting me at all.’ She stared at him dis¬
mayed and shameless and earnest. ‘Do you want to
sleep with me?’
He did not understand the euphuism. She
thought of another word that the Voice had used
in place of that shameful snigger of the twentieth
century, and using it, saw herself, globed and
earnest, in the hunter’s eyes. Then her image
PERSEPHONE
153
vanished, and in its place came hurrying a multitude
of lighted torches. . . . She moved away a little.
‘So you dod She was shamelessly relieved. ‘And
for always
‘Always—while I shall want tod
She paused, in doubt of that; and then nodded.
‘Reasonable and sane. . . . No, but not yet. My
dear, can’t you allow a strayed female out of the
abysses to remember just a little of the slushy
romance that once guarded such lives as hers? Your
whole life is a song: ours—the flopping dirges they
were!’
The wolf came back through the bushes and laid
a hare at Rem’s feet, and looked up into his face with
such earnestness it was obvious that he at least had
missed his dinner. So Rem and Gay stood up, Gay
white still beside the brown hunter, and returned to
the cave to bestir the fire. With the so doing a
fury of housekeeping energy came on Gay. She
gathered a handful of twigs and swept out the cave
and its litter, and brought in grass for two new
grass beds, and— She looked about her. There was
nothing else for her to do.
Strange place for a bridal chamber—a cave in the
hills without even a bed, a wardrobe, or a dressing-
mirror. No place of tradition or antique custom to
hide one from the other, furnishings, goods or
possessions to worry over or have pride in. (But
sometimes that fact faded from your mind, so sane
154 gay hunter
and earnest was this existence, and you had to say it
over to yourself again and again—stark! Starker
than ever the souls in the Christian God’s day of
judgment!) Instead 
She thought of the brides throughout the thou¬
sands of years of civilisation—the willing and un¬
willing, the child-brides of India, the obscene rites
of betrothal and marriage, veiling and unveiling,
the dirty jests and the lewd comments. She thought
of fantastic rites of sacrifice, of brides who gave the
first night to a priest or a stranger, of the seigneur’s
right in ancient France, of all the strange, unclean
garmentings that had swathed the delight and
beauty—oh, and she supposed, agony, of something
clean and natural and terrible as sun and wind.
... So she supposed it was, she had never known.
She looked at Rem, recumbent, cooking, long-
legged and naked and brown, his muscles rippling
like long snakes as he moved, his head wet and
glossy with the splashings in the stream. For a
second something cold held her heart, so alien and
strange he looked. And then that vision of him
with twentieth-century eyes quite went from her,
never to return again.
Abruptly, far south on the scarred edges of the
Downs, lightning flashed a long jagged tooth. Gay
started, with a leg of hare in her hand—almost
jugged hare in the start. Shame if it came rain now
after a day like this.
PERSEPHONE
155
Come it did, however, the clouds piling all the
southern sky in black cumulus through which the
lightning played. Then it swept up north in driving
sheets, the rain, and the three of them drew back
in the cave and watched its coming, hissing. Gay
looked round for utensils and goods to retrieve
from outside. There were none. She sat down and
clasped her knees, on the edge of the cave and the
spit of the rain, and watched the wet closing in of
the evening.
The long silences of such evenings—silences
which once men had had to seek as they sought gold
and glittering stones! Silence in which nothing cried
but the lapwings, no sound to be heard but the brill
of a stream going home to the sea, and far and
away, in the east, the belling of some stray bull of
a Titan herd. ... It had grown dark, quite sud¬
denly, the night coming down with the rain in a
little hiss that fell on the fire the hunter had brought
half-way within the cave-shelter. How blessed was
his silence as well—one could roll oneself in the
cloak of it and dream for ever, as he did himself.
But this evening 
She put out a hand and it clasped round his foot
in the fire-sprayed dimness. A very young foot,
athletic and hard, but the skin of it as young as her
own.
‘You’re the singer, Rem, and you sing only for
the Folk. But isn’t there anything you can sing
GAY HUNTER
156
for ourselves—just this once?,
A hand came down into the light of the fire and
settled firmly on the hand on his foot. And then,
without warning, crouched where he was, he began
to sing.
It was in alien words of which she knew nothing.
She knew little indeed of any kind of singing, and
she thought that once (in her half-forgotten world)
that voice of his would have been an untrained con¬
tralto, strangely girlish emerging from that
rounded and vigorous throat. But it rose into an
easy ecstasy of which she had never heard the like—
as though his whole being sang, not lips and palate
and chest only, but every fibre of his body, till the
cave was filled with the melody of the sound and,
like a gigantic trumpet, flung the sound out into
the raining night in a triumphant psean. Higher
and deeper and richer it rosej and now, though she
knew as little as ever of the words, the meaning
seemed clear to Gay, in great stretches and flashes
of vision and recognition. . . . She saw the play
and wash and laughter of water in the sun, she
heard the crying of hunters in the hunt, smelt the
smoke of the great forests on fire, heard the beat
and drum of blood in a body that raced the sunrise
in the spring when the first beech-buds put out. All
these, and the heat and din and drum of summer he
sang, the voice of the rain and the voice of the stars,
innumerable the voices of the stars, his song grown
PERSEPHONE
157
austere and white and terrible. And the melody
dropped and changed and the day came again and
the day was the bridal day of the earth—clouds
on the earth with their sweeping rains that laid seed
for fruit and flower, the mating cattle in their great
pastures, the mating of birds in the deeps of the
woods, the mating of all living things that turned
in strained delight to the supremest ecstasy. He
sang the rivers and the hills and the sky, and all life
brought to passion and the bridal bed and the love¬
liness of love. . . .
Gay could find no words when he had finished—
could do nothing but still clasp that foot in a kind
of frightened exaltation. Then he said, breathing
deeply (she could feel the clean sweat pringling
on his body because of that passion of singing that
had been his):
‘Sing for me.7
‘I? Oh, what could I sing but wasn’t futile and
foolish in comparison with that? Singer, we had no
Songs—except sometimes old things, peasant things,
before they broke the minds and hearts of your
ancestors in the mills of civilisation. Little scraps
and fragments, and they grow dim for me already.’
‘Sing one for me.’
Then she remembered and sang for him a
German song of her mother’s, a song of the low
Elbe and the mists and ripening sun there j and
Criebe, that was sung in Provence. And last of all,
158
GAY HUNTER
a verse of Swinburne’s that her father had set to
music and had once declared was the loveliest thing
ever written by that tormented, castrated poseur:
tI hid my heart in a nest of rosesy
Out of the sunys way, hidden apart;
In a softer bed than the soft white snowys isy
Under the roses 1 hid my hearty
Why would it sleep not? why should it starty
When never a leaf of the rose-tree stirred?
What made sleep flutter his wings and part?
Only the song of a secret bird.y
When the echoes of her own singing had died
away, Gay felt the hunter’s hands on her, firmly,
gently, shaking her from that world of dreams. She
rose and stretched and looked down at the fire,
heaped with rotten branches and half-sodden
bushes. It burned with a low and a clean smell, into
the wastes of the raining night. She stretched her
arms and turned for another look at that night.
No stars, no moon: but she heard, shrill and un¬
broken, the voice of the stream. She turned from
it, glad.
‘And now I suppose it’s the great moment. And
even now I must joke about it to hide its face. Soon
be love, Rem, and I—I have never known it before.
. . But, O Singer of Persephone, if you knew the
relief it is that you can’t say, “I love you!” ’
X. THE MOON IN AJALON
In the days that followed it seemed to Gay that
the world stood still to listen to that song of a
secret bird in her heart. It was not only the magic
and wonder of the fulfilment of her body: it was
as though she were all the starved and cheated
women of all time who had mated in shame, inade¬
quately, hemmed in by codes and taboos and shames
—she was their justification, in her their dim, sad
lives found harbour. She would stare at herself
with secret wonder, those hours of rain and sun¬
shine, and shut her eyes fast, and open them again—
surely she had dreamt it all! . . . And there would
be Rem and his wolf—real as the hills, and more
enduring, the hills could crumble to dust—hearing
that song of a secret bird as she herself heard it un¬
endingly.
‘“Sun, stand thou still over Gib eon; and thou,
moon in the Valley of Ajalon.”>
They tramped and explored and flirted and fled
and hid from each other for miles around the wild
land that drew to a focus in their chalk-pit cave.
They spent long hours in the stream and drying on
the bank, half-awake, half-asleep, with the sun upon
them and sometimes the rain, and delight in both.
159
l60 GAY HUNTER
One night Rem took her back through the eastern
forest fringe to the edge of the great llano. As
they neared it she heard a thunderous bellowing,
and in the starlight saw a sight she would never
forget. The great herds of wild cattle were in
migration, southwards, moved by some common
impulse, mysterious and unnameable. Every late
hunting season, the hunter told her, they went south
like this, a bronze-black torrent. At their flanks and
their heels in the dim light Gay saw the shapes of
slinking carnivores—panthers and bigger beasts,
greatly maned. They followed the herds and paid
no heed to Gay or her hunter or the wolf that
squatted growling at their feet. Gay stared after
the great cats incredulously. It was impossiblej but
it was a fact.
They were lions.
How had such beasts ever come to England—
lions or panthers? But the days were shorter and
warmer than once they had been, and in the collapse
of the civilisation of the Hierarchs such beasts might
have broken out of zoological gardens or the like—
there had been many such gardens, she had gathered
from the whisper of the Voice in the Tower. Great
beasts had been pets of the Hierarchs. More than
pets. She shuddered with disgust at remembrance
of those sickening revelations of a devilish cruelty
and curiosity that had bred neo-human monsters
for sport in that world which the Sub-Men rose
THE MOON IN AJALON l6l
and murdered. Oh, well that they murdered it and
left it clean for the clean lust of such as Rem and
herself!
Then they went back to the cave and each other’s
arms; and she wondered how he could make his
naked, muscular shoulder so soft and seemly a
pillow as always he did. And he twisted his fingers
in her short black hair and played with that a long
time, as he liked to do. He would sing her name
in a trill that made a complete song from each
syllable—it was something new in vocal power that
had come into the world since her day and she
would lie and listen to it with a wistful hope she
might follow and comprehend. Sometime she
would learn his language—sometime. She had all
her life to learn it!
She would never forget the sleeping hush of those
mornings when she was the first to start awake, Rem
and his wolf both sound asleep and the early sun
barely topping the strange beech-boughs of the
eastern forest. The shine of the dew on the grass
and the wakening crying of the curlews would greet
her as she danced to the door of the cave and poked
at the fire and piled on it the brush they had
gathered the previous evening. Then she would
uncover the leaves from their provision for break¬
fast and wrinkle a hesitant nose over it, and feel
germ-defyingly hungry as she scraped away the fire
to bury the meat for baking. Rem and his wolf still
162
GAY HUNTER
asleep: she would bathe before they awakened.
That, and coming back glowing and dripping to
find the hunter perhaps vanished away into the
scrubland of the north and returning with handfuls
of cranberries, or wild plums, or great wild apples
—the apples had been tamed so much by men that
they had never reverted to their primal sourness
or smallness. . . . They would sit side by side and
eat, and there would be no plates or napkins or
graces at all, and oh, thank Heaven, no washing-up!
Then the day and its life lay all before them—to
laze, to dream, to hunt, to wander without aim, in
the blessedness of silence and life.
Once, straying far in the west, they came on just
such a great circular space as Gay and Houghton
and Lady Jane had crossed in the early days as
they pressed west from Pewsey. Gay found a stick
and dug here, as she had done in that far place j and,
as once before, exposed the mouldering coppery
surface beneath. The hunter stood and watched her
inscrutably—she would never get deep in his mind
after all, she thought in a moment of panic—shining
and splendid though that mind was. . . . Then
that thought went by, while she squatted, slim
and dark, the mate herself of a hunter, and looked
at the circular plateau from the ruined years.
What purpose had it served?
Then she remembered from the whisperings of
the Voice that there had been mention of ‘vision
THE MOON IN AJALON
plates’ in the countryside, from which observers
in the great hives of the Hierarchies—they had
towered in great pylons miles towards heaven, those
cities—had watched on the passing and acts of the
Sub-Men who had served as shepherds and land-
serfs. This must be one of them. Her mind hesi¬
tated around the explanation, and then found it.
It was a television-plateau.
She looked up and found Rem’s eyes still upon
her. He shook his head.
‘They are part of the Song of the Mad Men long
ago. They cannot harm you now.’
‘Oh, I know that. Poor, dreadful fools they were
—poor beasts. But Rem—what if that madness
should come on the world again? They were men
very like you, those Palaeolithic hunters of the
Mediterranean four thousand years before Christ,
on whom the first madness came—clean and kind
and adorable, bright hunters, who cuddled their
girls just as nicely as you cuddle yours—and
painted great pictures if they didn’t sing great songs.
What if that madness comes back?’
He shook his head again, remote lights in the
amber eyes. ‘There are other Songs.’
And no more than that he would say, and Gay
went on by his side and on in a long dream upon
his words till his hand on her shoulder wakened
her; and they crept through long grass to the edge
of a natural piggery they had discovered, and lay
GAY HUNTER
164
there a long time, watching and giggling over the
antics of the solemn porkers within. Crisp bacon
ready to hand. . . .
Once, straying across the llanos to the south, they
saw high on the crest of the Downs a crumbled
metallic pylon. But it was in no such state of pre¬
servation as that Tower overtopping the great Chil-
terns Dam. They spent a day in the open making
towards it: when night came it was still two or three
miles distant, and they spent the night in the open
grass-land, without fire or covering—the strangest
experience of them all, all those days of crowded
experience, it seemed to Gay. Night and darkness
and the wind upon one, naked and unshielded and
unafraid.... Long after Rem slept she was wakeful,
lying between him and the wolf, watching the
brightening of the altered stars. Then she slept
and woke to the dawn red on the buttresses of the
ruined pylon.
They climbed and adventured all that day amid
its ruins, seeking Gay knew not what, unless it
might be some intimate mark of the lives and loves
and hopes of those men who had once built it and
used it for a purpose long powder and nothing. But
except the great metallic girders, towering to the
ruined roof, and a floor thick with metallic dust,
the place was empty and deserted. Wood and steel
and all other furnishing it ever had had long melted
away. It was obvious to Gay as they came out and
THE MOON IN AJALON 165
looked back at the great structure that its ruin had
not been through the hand of Time only: its west¬
ward side was crumpled and shattered into a pit
that went deep in the earth. They wandered to the
edge of that pit and she stared down at the stagnant
green water.
‘A shell-hole. The place was shelled.’
By whom and when? That she would never
know. She turned soberly by the hunter’s side and
went back with him through a day’s travelling to
the cave that was their home. She questioned his
dreaming silence and heard that he knew of still
one other Tower that survived—only one, apart
from that of the Voice. It was far in the north, and
as ruined as the pylon of the Downs.
‘But there may be others—where the Folk have
never yet wandered?’
‘There may be. But the Voice tells that there is
only one Tower with Voices. When they have died,
there will be no other Voice to sing the Ancient
Madness.’
Gay had a sudden start of fear. ‘But I, Gay
Hunter, am not I also a Voice from the past?’
He shook his head, his arm about her, his eyes
remote. ‘You are the Gay Hunter.’
Something else—some warning she should tell
him—vexed at the edge of its mind, but she put it
away. It was so easy these days to put aside all
warnings and worryings whatsoever!
i66
GAY HUNTER
That night, in the cave again, on the verge of
sleep, she suddenly remembered what it was that
had vexed her memory. She shook Rem’s shoulder.
‘There isn’t only I! Remember—the other two
—Houghton and Lady Jane Easterling. . . . Oh,
damn it, we’d forgotten them. Rem: what if they
have told tales of the Ancient Madness to the Folk? ’
‘But they are mad,’ he said, ‘and the Folk will
not heed.’ But there seemed a doubt in his voice.
‘But once before men heeded this madness—it
brought great gifts to men—ease and security and
varieties in foods and cures for their hurts. What
if your Folk at the Dam should heed again the
madness of civilisation?’
He shook his head. ‘We have other dreams.’
‘What?’
But here they were at something dim and incom¬
municable, and Gay felt a moment, and once again,
sick, alien from this dreaming Singer. What were
the ‘dreams’? What other thing was it that men
of this time were turning to, of which she knew
nothing, of which it might be she could never share?
For it was not merely the hunter’s environment and
training that made him different from herself in a
multitude of ways—so, on his arms, in his sight and
hearing, she knew—it was that he stood far at the
thither side of a world of terror and great experi¬
ence on which her own generation had barely ven¬
tured. Out of that pit they had climbed, Rem and
THE MOON IN AJALON l6y
his kind, with something vanished for ever from
their minds and hearts, and something new and
upgrowing in its place. They were not simply the
hunters of antique time, the Cro-Magnards and the
like, free of the nightmare of civilisation. They
had brought from that thing, dim, no memory, but
a fresh orienting of thought and will. And from
its basis they were building some New Life and way
of life, planning some fresh assault on the stars in
a way as alien to her comprehension as the mind
and mentality of the ant or the octopus.
Yet if that was so, why need she vex at the
memory of Houghton and Lady Jane Easterling,
those two ludicrous strays in the Dam of the Chil-
terns? Why did Rem and the Old Singer wish the
Voices in the Tower to die, if it came to that?
She asked him, and he stumbled amidst the Eng¬
lish words to find an explanation:
‘Because it might be that the Folk would mistake
the gifts—for a little while, till they found them
Bad Singing But it will never bed
And then a dreadful apprehension came on Gay.
‘Rem, we must go back to the Dam to-morrow.
We must?
‘But ’
‘Do you think I want to? That I don’t want
this to go on for ever? But I want it to go on for
others as well as ourselves. . . . Houghton. . . .
Lady Jane—goodness, what silly little filth mayn’t
l68 GAY HUNTER
they have been scattering? You don’t know any¬
thing about such people, my Singer. . . . Oh, they’ve
spoilt my honeymoon for me, and I’m miserable, a
savage in a cave, and lost again, and I want to cry.
. . . Persephone up from Hades—sing for me, Rem,
in case I’ve to go down again!’
BOOK II
gay go down
I. THE BEAM
§i
Towards evening of the fourth day they saw far
over the eastwards forest the upper walls of the
great metallic Tower that guarded the Chilterns
Dam.
They had travelled in a straighter line than the
westwards crazed wanderings of Gay. Even so,
hunting and fruit-gatherings, they had come at no
extraordinary speed. Gay had been uneasy even in
the light-heartedness of those four days, and would
reproach herself for that uneasiness. Nothing could
have happened: most probably she would find
Houghton and Lady Jane engaged in plaiting
themselves fresh grass skirts—or else escaped from
the Folk and on the way to London.
That London they would not believe could die!
Absent-minded, her lips shaped to whistling a tune
as she tramped by Rem’s side:
‘Gay go up and Gay go down:
That is the way to London Town!'
It was then that they saw the hunter. He was
crossing an open glade, recognised them, waved a
GAY HUNTER
172
hunting spear in greeting. Then he came towards
them at a run, and Gay recognised him.
It was the flirtatious hunter, Allalalaka.
In a moment, and running, he was shouting un¬
intelligible things. But Rem appeared to find
them intelligible. He halted in his tracks and
stared. He began asking questions in the quick-
fire agglutinative speech of the Folk. The hunter
nodded, and glanced at Gay, and smiled at her,
but absently. Then he sank down and resumed
his tale.
Gay and Rem sat on the grass and listened, Gay
uncomprehendingly. Allalalaka pointed back to¬
wards the Dam, and beyond that, it seemed to Gay.
He was emphatic, and gestured, and once flung out
his hands in an age-old gesture of dismayed sur¬
render. Gay found incomprehension more than she
could bear.
‘For goodness’ sake tell me what he’s saying. Else
I’ll burst.’
Rem turned and stared at her with remote gaze.
Then, slowly, in his sing-song, hesitant English,
he retold the hunter’s tale.
The mad White Hunter and the Worm-Woman
had been a vexation from the time of their arrival
in the Dam. They had worn grasses on their bodies,
as though wounded 3 and had induced another
hunter—one who was foolish since a fall from a
rock—to do the same. They had taken an over-
THE BEAM
173
bearing part in the play of the Folk, saying they
would teach them new games—forming them in
companies in line, singing, and stabbing with spears.
The Folk had endured this for a little, amused j
then bored. Finally, they had wandered away to
their customary occupations. At that the White
Hunter had been angry, incomprehensibly, and had
attempted to hold Allalalaka by force, and push
him back into the line of those who were carrying
out the foolish play with the spears. Thereon
Allalalaka had taken the mad White Hunter and
thrown him into the water of the Dam-lake, and
that had quietened his foolishness for a time. But
it did not last. He and the Worm-Woman had
begun by gesture, the telling of new Songs to the
Folk—evil Songs—
‘What were the Songs asked Gay, with a sink¬
ing heart.
... They had been Songs of another day and time,
the mad White Hunter had affirmed, of methods
of always finding food, of grasses and ointments
that would cure a wounded man as easily as food
would cure him of hunger, of ways of obtaining
beauty and strength such as no hunter of the Folk
had ever known. The younger men and the old
men and the women were indifferent, and laughed
at him and the Worm-Woman: but the middle-
aged men had listened, and some had believed.
Them—forty of them—the mad Hunter and the
GAY HUNTER
174
Worm-Woman had led out of the Dam secretly, a
week before.
‘Where? ’
Somewhere there (it was south-east). Next
morning the Old Singer had sent a company of the
young men after the party j and they came upon it,
and tried to reason with it. But the Folk who
followed the mad man and woman (some had their
children with them, and their own women) had
themselves become mad through the evil songs
sung to them. They marched in line at the heels
of the White Hunter and the Worm-Woman; and
they had plaited themselves grass-coverings like
their leaders. They had cried to the young men that
they were to bring back great secrets and wonders;
and the young men had been undecided, and
laughed, and yet were troubled, and returned to the
Dam with the tale. Then Old Singer had sent
Allalalaka out on the trail of Rem and Gay.
That was the story told them on the skirts of
the forest. It was enough. It was dreadful, but
now not so dreadful since the worst was known.
Gay said, ‘But what can he do—the mad White
Hunter? He will only mislead the men of the Folk
who have gone with him, and find nothing. All
that ever was of the old days has long vanished into
the ground.’
‘Except the Shining Place.’
‘The Shining Place?’
THE BEAM
175
‘It may be towards there he has led the Folkd
Gay said, in an even voice, to guise her dismay,
‘Tell me of this Shining Placed
§ii
It was London. There could be no doubt of that.
London—a London still undevoured by Time and
the stress of the changing millennia—or at least
some portion of it. The legend of the Folk was very
old and known only to the two Singers, Rem and
the Ancient. Far away to the south-east stood the
Shining Place, towering its airy pinnacles into the
sky, a cloud-land wreathed with the passing mists.
About it the earth was pitted with great holes.
It was forbidden, evil land. So the two Singers
knew, and never mentioned it in their Songs. For
there was no need. The minds of men were turn¬
ing to other things—to those ecstasies of unname-
able arts which Gay could vision only dimly. In
the happy Arcadia they wandered the Folk had
long mislaid curiosity for the few and infrequent
stumps of the past civilisation which still uprose
from the ground. (No other city but the Shining
Place seemed to have survived j only towards the
end of their era, and as disaster overtook them, had
the Plierarchs begun to build in the indestructible
green-brown metal.) They had turned away, by
GAY HUNTER
I76
another route, to their conquest of the stars—they,
and perhaps all the dim tribes of mankind that still
and elsewhere roamed the world.
The men who had gone with the mad White
Hunter and had taken their women and children
on the venture—how account for their lapse? How
otherwise indeed than that even in Arcady there
were those who still dragged ghostly fetters from
the past—though they knew them not as fetters:
probably saw them instead as guiding links to free¬
dom and the full and unpained life. And on those
weak souls the criminals from the past had fixed. ...
Gay moved and sighed, sleepless, in the dark
cavern of the culvert. The night-fires, banked low,
burned with a smell of resin. All about, brown and
naked and healthily tired, splendid of body and
splendid (as she believed) of mind, slept the Folk.
The faint light rayed from the tilted breasts of
adolescence to the full breasts of child-suckling,
the shoulders of some giant hunter—some of them
were nearly seven feet in height—the head and lips
of some dreamless child. They feared nothing and
lived their lives, full and complete and splendid,
without trappings of passion or possession. They
were the children and survivors of the dreadful
debacle of mankind which had nearly wrecked the
planet. . . . And that diseased madness was let loose
in the world again.
She turned, seeking sleep by the side of Rem;
THE BEAM
177
but sleep would not come. Instead, her thoughts
went on and on: Was it always so, would it always
be so? Some seed of desire for safety, security, to
poison the minds of men and set them to climbing
the bitter tracks to civilisation’s bloody plateau, lit
with the whirling storm-shells? That great fire that
still raged in the earth near Wokingham—lit by
giant bombs in the last war of the Hierarchies, or
marking a spot where the Sub-Men had blown great
settlements to the sky, murdering themselves and
their masters—there had been scores of such bomb¬
ings and city assassinations. And plague and disease
had come to complete the work begun in war and
civil war, so that only a few scarce families sur¬
vived and dwindlingly endured while the earth spun
century on century and wiped the mark of that
cosmic shame from its face. And then human life
reached back to ancient ways, to the way of the
Cro-Magnard hunter twenty thousand years before
Christ, and men found happiness and delight again,
and ecstasy, simple and clean. And now 
Was it all going to happen again? She remem¬
bered the line of an English poet, a tortured soul
who lived in the times of her own generation’s
Great War:
‘Look up, and swear by the green of the Spring
That it will not happen again!’
Not happen? But what could she do? So plain
GAY HUNTER
I78
the plan of Houghton and Lady Jane: They would
march the hunters to the Shining Place and poke
and rake in the remnants there, and find perhaps
some tricks of defence or weapon-making not too
complicated for their eager, starved, foolish brains
to grasp. And make a community somewhere, estab¬
lish themselves first priests, first kings, Children of
the Sun again come to earth. And the myths and
legends would rise with their lives and deaths—
they might subdue and enslave all the wandering
tribes of the Folk before they died—and civilisation
would be launched again, with war, religion, blood
sacrifice, all the dreary and terrible mummery of
temple and palace and college. Kingdoms would
rise again on the earth, poets sing battle again, the
war-horses stamp on the face of a child, the women
know rape and the men mutilation ... all because
of an accident and a chance in a night-time’s dream¬
ing at Pewsey!
‘Look up, and swear by the green of the Spring
That it will not happen again!*
She unclosed her eyes again, staring at the fires.
She got to her feet gently, loosening herself from
the sleep-time embrace of the Singer. Then, as three
weeks before, that night when Houghton and Lady
Jane were tied to the pillar, she threaded her way
through the sleepers and found herself at last at
the entrance to the culvert, below the crumbled,
THE BEAM 179
illegible inscription. Outside was the frosty shine
of the stars.
She stood and looked up at them. No help in
them. No help anywhere but what she might find
in herself. It will not happen again—went the mad¬
dening refrain in her mind. But how? How?
She scrambled down the rocky metallic paths
under the starshine-shadow of the great girders 5
and at the foot knelt and drank of the ice-cold water
that bubbled from the side of the Dam. Far away,
beyond the furthest edge of the Dam, a pack of
wolves, in the flight of the hunt, with a quarry
roused, were baying eerily. The sound swept nearer
and then ebbed away. Gay shivered, frightened and
alone and desperate. What could she do—and oh,
what could she do?
Then she turned her eyes westward and saw
there, bulking immensely, the great Tower of the
Voices, brooding over the Dam like an evil god. It
seemed to leer down at her with a foul metallic
face, that creation of man’s madness, outlasting him,
outlasting the crumbling rock of the strata. It was
that she must fight—that and the slaves who went to
build it anew. . . .
The stars were whitening when she came back
again to the mouth of the culvert, small and very
tired, but with her mind made up, and a plan, misty
in detail, but firm in intention, graved on the tablets
of her mind. She paused in the dimness and looked
i8o
GAY HUNTER
up at the illegible inscription, its dim whorling sym¬
bols of some alien shorthand.
cPm weak enough, and so are the hunters. But
you do not come back again. Not though we have
to fill the Dam, year on year, with dust and rocks.
Not though we have to tear down London with our
hands. You are finished and past, and men have the
world again.’
§ iii
All next day she talked to Rem and the Old
Singer, sitting in the shadow of the great plinths
of the Dam, hearing the play of life in the culvert
above them. Once there came on her again that
sense of unreality as she talked with those two—
children unborn in the womb of time. . . . She
covered her face with her hands, in an agony for
that sense of unreality to pass. They sat and
watched her gravely. Then she took her hands from
her face and smiled at them.
‘So that is what we must do, if we are to save
the Folk from the madness of the past.’
How much they understood of her talk she never
knew—how much Rem, her lover, whose body
sometimes so commingled in life with hers that they
interchanged: how much the Old Singer, with that
wrinkled wisdom on his brown, still face. But at
THEBEAM l8l
the end they nodded agreement. Yes, these things
would be done.
It was too late to do them that day. Gay left
those two to talk to the hunters as they came back
from the day’s hunt, and herself sought out Liu,
the girl who had tended her first night in the
culvert. They had not a phrase or a word in com¬
mon, but Gay was suddenly and waywardly des¬
perate for companionship of her own gender.
‘Let’s go berry-picking in the woods.’
The girl understood that readily enough. She
nodded, and they set out together. Climbing up
from the Dam they looked back and saw the culvert
distant, with a play of doll-like figures at its mouth,
and the smoke blown in long banners westward,
towards the Tower. Gay said, £We don’t want men
with us, this once. And we’ve two or three hours
until sunset.’
In the woods it was dim and quiet and peaceful
as they gathered the blackberries in great folded
leaves. In that peace Gay found again her lost self
—lost on the night before, flung aside by that pas¬
sionate purpose that had seized her—that purpose
to prevent the return ever again to the world of the
foul thing that would make of this girl—brown
arm and curving breast and slim, smooth hips and
happy eyes—a doll in the rags of civilisation’s
clothes, a thing for the dreary lust of men, not for
the quick, happy mating of the caves and the forests.
182
GAY HUNTER
It was blessed just to look at her, alien though she
was. . . .
Gay glanced down at herself, seeing her lighter
tint in comparison with that bronzed body, seeing
herself shapely and comely enough, she thought,
but still only one who played at the New Life. . . .
She shook her head and that fancy away. These
were her people, she was one of them!
Liu looked over her shoulder, and Gay followed
her glance. Rem and Allalalaka had come seeking
them. Men were unescapable. ... (Not that you
wanted very bitterly to escape them, Rem standing
in front of you with the gleam of that smile on
bearded lips and deep in amber eyes.) She said,
‘You can carry the berries.J
So they loaded the two men with great leaves
filled with berries, and strolled behind them down
through the forest tracks. Gay and Liu had their
arms around each other, and in the closing evening
the silence was even deeper than when they had
entered the woods. Only the tweet of a bird broke
it, that and the far chirp of some cricket. Rem and
his companion halted on the edge of a jagged fall
of rock into the Dam—a fall of which a footpath
had been made to the dull-gleaming metallic floor
far below, and sat down and rested. The two girls
did the same. Sideways, colourful and tremendous,
the sun was setting in a wash and flare of dyes—
purple and gold and dark-tinted greens, for a great
THE BEAM
183
driftage of nimbus clouds had come from the north¬
east on that wind that blew the smoke. It seemed
as though a great conflagration had broken forth
in the heavens.
Gay lay flat and chewed long stalks of grass,
Rem’s hand on her hip in that caress that still
thrilled because of its very immobility. Liu was
plaiting a chaplet of leaves for the head of the flirta¬
tious hunter. Quiet and still and wonderful, lying
here above the ruined Dam, in a sunset that might
be the Twilight of the Gods itself, the Ragnarok
of old Scandinavian myth. All around, from that
sky-shining, the sky was pale and wan above the
crested heads of the forests, the gleam of water in
the distant north, the bushy wastes of the eastern
hills. It seemed as though Time itself had stopped
to hold that moment.
And then abruptly that peace was broken. The
sky in the east flamed suddenly with fire. A great
red beam of flame smote upward, from far beyond
the bush, and seemed to crackle and break on the
dome of the sky. No sound came with it, but
imagination caught the hiss and bellow of the flame.
Then it vanished, and with it the western sunshine
vanished as well.
‘Hellnblast, what was that?’ Gay asked.
They did not know. They had never seen its like
before. They were curious, a little excited, un¬
frightened. The flirtatious hunter stood up, the
GAY HUNTER
184
better to survey the eastern sky. As he stood the
Beam rose again.
This time it was anger. Burning, it yet rose in no
wild flame, but rather as the beam of a searchlight.
Its power and range seemed immense j it was as
though it drove a great burning hole into the grey
vault of the evening. Twice it rose and quivered,
seeming to search the vault of the sky. Then it
vanished and did not come again.
They went down into the Dam, hastening now
because of the vanishing of the light. A diffused,
violet glow seemed to hang over this lower space.
Allalalaka raised his head and sniffed at the air,
and on Gay also there came the curious illusion of
a smell of burning, as though that beam in the east
had verily fired the sky.
Ragnarok! It was no imagining she had had.
For unless every appearance lied, that Beam in the
east meant that Houghton and the others were
already in London or its neighbourhood, reaching
out greedy, incredulous, unskilled fingers amidst
the terrifying instruments that survived the ruin of
the Hierarchies.
§ iv
Thirty of them, all strong men, had volunteered
for the work of which Rem and the Old Singer
had told them. They were amused or mildly in-
THE BEAM
I85
different over the task. The Old Singer believed
that this should be done, and they would do it to
pleasure him—him and Rem and the gay white
hunter, who had a pleasing smile. So they fol¬
lowed at the heels of Rem and Gay as the latter
climbed in the morning light up from the Dam
and took their way by the little-beaten path towards
the skyey structure of the Tower of Voices.
But before they entered Gay had the hunters load
themselves with great stones, and four of them
bring the bough-lopped trunk of a tree. Inside, it
was dark still in spite of the growing day outside.
In that faint drizzle of light Gay stood for a
moment at gaze on the great machines rearing up
their rods and dials into the bat-haunted platforms
far in the roof. Across the floor, by the track in
the dust, stood the machine of the Voice.
But what of the others? Might not some of them
have secrets of power with which to contend against
that happening in London? Might not they be the
actual salvation of the Folk?
And then she knew that the voice of the devil,
as once it would have been called in the devil-
haunted centuries out of which she had come. Only
by themselves, their own strength, might the Folk
be saved. . . . She led the way through the dust
to the machine of the Voices, and the naked men
with the tree and stones followed behind.
Then, enjoyed as a play and an idle sport, pande-
N
i86
GAY HUNTER
monium broke out in the Tower. The hunters
hurled the great rocks they had brought into the
machines again and again, till even the metal out¬
lasting time was bent and warped. But against the
great organ of the Voices the stones made no im¬
pression. Then a dozen of the hunters manned the
tree-trunk, and ran back with it for a dozen paces
across the dusty floor of the Tower. They spat
on their hands, grinned, and gripped again. Pant¬
ing, Gay and the others drew back and watched.
With a yell the hunters manning the battering-
ram charged.
Twice and thrice they did so, and the great
machine rocked. Strange groanings arose in it.
Then, at a fourth blow that showered all the Tower
with dust, Gay raised her eyes and saw the great
organ pipes toppling forward slowly, ponderously.
She cried in warning.
‘Back!’
The hunters looked and dropped the tree and
ran. All ran, Rem with Gay’s wrist firm in his
fingers. With a roar and a crash the great machine
of the Voices fell to the floor of the Tower, and at
its fall the walls shook and sang and the echo of
that crash thundered across the Dam. Gay waved
the hunters outside desperately.
‘Quick, quick! There’s something else.’
She was just beyond the doorway when the great
Tower blew up.
THE BEAM
IB?
One moment it was standing gigantic upon the
lip of the morning j the next, and with a deafening
explosion it broke apart and showered the sky with
its flying fragments. Great buttresses of metal were
flung far out over the Dam. The very floor of the
Tower was smitten up in fragments like the kicked
fragments of a mosaic. Something seized Gay and
twirled her about and flung her through the air,sick-
eningly, upon her side. As she half staggered erect
another great hand was upon her, hurling her to the
ground, rolling her over and over. She flung up her
hands about her face, and thought ‘That’s the end!’
and stopped with a jar that left her senseless.
§ v
When she recovered consciousness, the girl Liu
had her head in her lap—or rather where her lap
would have been had she lived in more swathed
times. Gay found herself breathing in great gulps j
about her was a crowd of the hunters. She raised
her head from the soft pillow of Liu’s thighs.
‘Was any one else hurt?’
For a little while she could not discover. Then
Rem pressed in through the throng. No one had
been hurt but herself, though all had been flung
to the ground in the force of the explosion. She
herself had been the last to leave the Tower.
The Tower?
i88
GAY HUNTER
It had vanished away. Where once it had stood,
seemingly eternal, was now a great hole in the
ground. The power that had whispered and kept
the records wound and alive in the great machine
had been dying, running low, but it had still had
force enough for such destruction as Gay had not
reckoned on. She put up her hand to her head and
found blood there. And the hand she raised was
also scarred and bleeding. Bruises only, but she felt
very weak and leaned back on Liu.
They carried her down to the shade of the
culvert. The carrying was done by Rem, she was
mistily aware, the Folk, grave-faced and wonder¬
ing, trooping behind him. When he laid her down,
she found it was by the side of the Old Singer.
fThe Voice is ended,’ she heard herself gasp.
He turned bright, lizard-like eyes upon her. Tt
was a mad dream. And a Gay Hunter and a Singer
killed it.’
T suppose so; and very heroic. But I wish to
goodness I hadn’t been such a fool as hang out on
the Tower doorstep so long. I was never cut out
for heroic work. Too fond of listening to songs
myself, not killing them.’ Suddenly, foolishly, she
supposed it was because she was hurt, she found
herself weeping. ‘For oh, Old Singer, even that
mad dream was a Song long ago, and a bit of me
part of it.’
II. EAST
§1
Next morning she awoke with only an overnight
stiffness in her arm, no pain. She was late in waken¬
ing, and found Rem cooking their breakfast by a
nearby fire. Liu came and smiled and sat down
beside her and gestured unintelligibly towards the
mouth of the culvert.
fWhat? My dear, I don’t know a word you’re
saying. But you look good enough to eat. I almost
wish I were a man when I see you. . . . (What
a mess a remark like that would have landed one
in, in my day! Rotten minds and habits we had!)
. . . What? Oh, I’ll have to ask Rem.’
It was raining, that was the trouble.
No ordinary downfall, either. The wind from
the north-east was driving the water in long, storm-
lashed swathes across the floor of the Dam, as Gay
saw from the mouth of the culvert. High in the
air drenched birds were winging into the west. Con¬
dors. She turned to Rem: ‘We can’t set out?’
He shook a doubtful head. ‘The hunters would
not understand.’
189
GAY HUNTER
190
‘Even if they did—we’ll just have to wait.’
But all that day the rain held on. Towards night
it died and the wind rose to a roar, whooming
through the culvert and blowing the smoke of the
fires hither and thither, bringing tears to Gay’s
smarting eyes. She escaped out into the open, des¬
cending the path through the howl and bluster of
the gale to where the rank grass grew in the sedi¬
ment by the banks of the lagoon. The tufts and
tussocks of grass swayed and paled and swayed
again, flattened this way and that by the screaming
squalls that whirled about the great Dam basin.
The water lashed up against her feet. Overhead the
sky was black with the racing of great clouds
through which peeped a watery moon. The ex¬
hilaration of the wild cry and wheel of the storm
caught her, and she cried above it, ringingly, for
the joy and delight of crying, no more. To be free
and naked and fenceless and herself!
But Rem in the culvert had heard the cry, even
above the noise of the wind, and came down seek¬
ing her, thinking her hurt or attacked by some beast
driven into the Dam in the fury of the wind. . . .
So she gathered, leaning against him, they clung to
each other in the bluster and blow and laughed,
feeling the tingle of each other’s bare skins, their
hair tangled all about their heads as they kissed, the
Shining Place and the things that might be there
forgotten. Gay closed her eyes and drew down his
EAST
191
head, and kissed him in a fashion that made him
lift her from the ground in a grip that she feared
would crack every bone in her body. . . . Fun to
die that way. And then, in that moment, far east,
piercing the driving storm-clouds of the sky, a beam
of fire smote upwards through the night.
Rem lowered her and they stood and stared at
it. Now it arced across the sky, slowly, then sud¬
denly spun in dizzying revolution, round and round
in great circles in the heavens—as a searchlight
being tested and retested in the hands of one skilled
but uncertain. The delight of the night vanished
from Gay’s mind and body. She was suddenly
sober.
‘Not forty hunters—we must try to get double
that number to go with us when we march on Lon¬
don to-morrow.’
§ ii
Double that number. . . . Young hunters,
mostly, and here and there a middle-aged and an
aged face, the army that left the cave of the Dam
next day, and held east in straggling march. The
rain had passed and the wind had abated, though it
still blew fresh and strong. Gay looked round the
fires in the culvert, the faces and bodies of women
and children grown half-familiar to her sight j and
192
GAY HUNTER
kissed Liu, and was kissed j and climbed down the
path to the floor of the Dam in pursuit of the depart¬
ing hunters. All the Folk crowded the ruined super¬
structure to watch them go. They watched in
silence, quiet and puzzled and friendly-eyed. Some¬
thing blinded Gay’s eyes a moment as she looked
back.
War—armies—treks at dawn: they had known
nothing of these things, would never have known
of them but for a fantastic accident, a fantastic erup¬
tion into their lives of three strays from a barbarous
time. And, if she and Rem could accomplish it, they
would never know of these things again.
For it might not come to war—(it is damn well
to be hoped it won’t, for what on earth do you know
about war, my girl, except that it scares you stiff,
the very thought of it? Or Rem? Or these others?)
. . . And they were marching out without any plan
at all, except that somehow they must reach London
and bring back the stragglers from the Folk horde,
and stop for all time the clowning mischief of
Houghton and his Worm-Woman.
If they could.
A desperate adventure, Gay thought, and looked
back again. The Folk were lined in brown multi¬
tudes on the ledge of the Dam, no Tower behind
them now. She should have said good-bye to Old
Singer, she thought, she might never see him
again.
EAST
193
Presently the wind died to a quiet blowing and
the sun came full and strong. Summer was long
in this land. Somewhere about eleven o’clock they
climbed up the further end of the Dam, where it
sloped in shallow banks down to the floor, Gay and
Rem by then treading on the heels of the easy¬
going, brown hunter-groups, with their spears and
great dark bows. On this further side the culvert
was a speck in the distance, and eastwards, when
they turned about from that last look, they saw
rise before them a wild jumble of hills, bush-
strewn, with woods that marched darkly down from
the north.
Rem was to be guide henceforth, he who knew
vaguely of the locality of the Shining Place from
the songs and traditions of the Old Singer. Gay
went by his side; as they took the lead it suddenly
came upon her she herself was as utterly unarmed
as in that first morning when she had awakened at
Pewsey. She might at least have brought a spear.
. . . Then she thought of the great Fire-Beam in
the sky at night above London. As well have
brought a toothpick.
She glanced at Rem’s great spear, a six-feet ash-
pole set with a broad blade of sharp, ground stone,
a weapon used in the hunting of lions, he had told
her. What was even it, for this venture, but a
toothpick against a lion?
4You are sad.’
GAY HUNTER
194
fAm I ? I didn’t mean to be. Who would be sad
with you? Still love me as much as ever?’
The ghost-gleam of a smile in his amber eyes.
Gay laughed.
What a thing to talk about—two generals lead¬
ing an army! For that’s what we are, I suppose.
Ought to be grave and earnest and important, with
faces like boiled owls or constipated calves, like the
militarists of old.’
‘Militarists?’
‘Mad people long ago.’
Mad? They had not even the dignity of mad¬
ness, poor things. She remembered soldiers on the
dusty roads of Mexico, with antique rifles and
bloody heels j she remembered solemn processions
of the Guards in Washington, men dressed like
dolls, with shaven, foolish faces and inane trappings.
Militarism! Karl Liebknecht had been right: it was
merely a half-witted ape dressed in an old news¬
paper and a leaf-hat, posturing, red-posterior’d, be¬
fore admiring females. . . .
Rem halted and sniffed the air. They all halted
and smelled the air, Gay ineffectively. It had the
freshness of the rain in it, no more. About them
rose the last curvatures of the hills. Forward, the
forest. A condor wheeled overhead, another fol¬
lowed. What was there to smell?
She asked that of Rem. He had fallen into the
hunter’s lope again. He said: ‘Smoke.’
EAST
195
‘A fire?’
He grunted. Then: ‘You must come behind, Gay-
Hunter—behind us all.’
‘Why?’
‘Because you have no spear.’
That was sense, she supposed. Still—she peered
into the sun-dazzle ahead, the sun shining and
gleaming from the million pellets of water still
crowning the heads of the grass. What was there to
fear?
She stood aside and waited for the hunters to go
by. At the rear she found Allalalaka. He was
pleased to have her, though even he paid but an
absent attention. He had smelled that smoke.
About mid-forenoon the expedition of the Folk
came on the fire.
It was smouldering to extinction. Beside it lay
the hunter who had lit it. Three condors were
perched on a bush at a little distance, watching him.
As the expedition topped the low rise in sight of the
fire, the birds rose with a languid flapping of wings.
Rem went forward at a run.
The hunter had been alive when Rem reached
him. By the time that Gay came up and pushed
through the throng he was dead. She saw the reason
for that plainly enough. All the left side of his
body and face and legs was scorched a deep, angry
brown. Upon this brown uprose great blue pustules.
The hair had withered to whiteness on one side of
GAY HUNTER
196
his face. On that face itself was such stamp of
agony as made Gay turn away her eyes.
The hunters said nothing, staring. Then Rem
lowered the man’s head, and stood up, his eyes very
dark. A lark had broken into singing overhead,
with the passing of the condors. Gay said:
‘What happened to him?’
‘He could not tell me. Something the mad White
Hunter did at the Shining Place. This was one of
those who went with the White Madman. He was
burned.’
‘But why?’
Rem shook his head. He had heard only a few
words. Some of the hunters had refused to stay
longer with the White Hunter and the Worm-
Woman. The White Madman had used a fire
beam 
Gay looked again, shuddering though she looked,
at that dreadful death. So that was how Houghton
was to maintain his empire—it was a thing like that
that they were up against. She glanced round the
circle of the hunters’ faces—puzzled, pleasant,
happy faces, neither frightened nor aware. Against
what was it that she and Rem led them? What
could their spears and bows do against that terror
at the place where London had once been?
Rem motioned the groups forward again, himself
taking the lead. They made no attempt to bury
the hunter. In the open bodies were no longer
EAST 197
buried. Gay looked back and saw the condors re¬
turning in great flapping flight. Ugh!
§ id
At noon they halted and made fires and cooked
the deer killed by a hunter en route. While they
cooked it Gay climbed a tall hill and looked into
the east, where the Forest uprose. But its tremen¬
dous stretch, bough-dazzling, vexed her eyes, and
she could make out nothing beyond. She looked
down at the somnolent hunters about the fire, wait¬
ing the cooking of their meat, and came to a resolve.
They could not be led into that terror unwarned,
unguarded.
She climbed down the hill.
‘Rem!’
He was lying at the far end of the encampment.
Gay went towards him, slowly, hesitating now that
it came to the point, because, she supposed, she was
frightened. Damnably. She heard herself speak
in a queer voice.
‘Pve been thinking of our march—to the Shining
Place. We can’t take the hunters up there openly,
until we know—whatever there is to be known.
Houghton might wipe us out—he’s quite capable
of that, killing us all, I mean—before we ever had
a glimpse of him. So you must bring on the hunters,
GAY HUNTER
198
slowly, while I go on to the Shining Place and find
out whaPs happening there.’
‘But he may kill you.’
Gay thought that likely enough, but lied into
Rem’s amber eyes, because he was Rem, and didn’t
know what lies were, and she was scared, and told
lies well, being frightened.
‘Pm not easy to kill. No, he’ll think I’ve come
to join him. If I do see him—perhaps he’ll have
blown himself to bits by then. I must go, Rem.’
He brooded on the matter, then nodded. It was
her desire—how might he stay her? He would take
the hunters forward slowly for—how long?
Gay had no idea, trying to think of the distance
it might be to London. ‘For three days—to the
near edge of that forest. And then wait for me
there, and I’ll bright back the news.’
He had stood up. ‘And if you do not come back?’
‘Then—oh, my dear, I don’t know. I haven’t
thought of that. You must act as seems best to you.
Don’t bring the hunters near the Shining Place.
Wait on the outskirts—though you have to wait
three hunting seasons. And then kill the Mad
Hunter and the White Worm-Woman if you can.
And the other hunters who went with them as well.
... I don’t think it’ll be safe for any of those
people contaminated ever to escape out into the
world again. . . . But perhaps I’m all wrong. I’ll
come back.’
EAST
199
She sat down. He brought her some of the deer-
flesh and she ate that, a great deal of it, knowing
it might be long before she ate again. The other
hunters had heard by now of her intention, and
Allalalaka wished to go with her. But she shook
her head to that proposal. It would instantly raise
Houghton’s suspicions—if she ever came up with
Houghton. She thought of the wide Teachings of
London in the day when she had known it—the
wildering mazes of brick and mortar, and how im¬
possible it would have been for a single wandering
person to find another in that wilderness. So it
might be even now.
£I must go alone,’ she spoke the incomprehensible
words to the boy, but shook her head in a negative
that brought a shadow in his eyes. ‘Liu would be
sad if I took you and lost you. Besides, you might
prove far too affectionate on our travels. Not that
Rem might mind very much. I mightn’t, myself.
But I’ve years to find out about those relationships
yet, and I don’t want to hurry. ... If I ever come
back.’
At parting she borrowed a spear—one carried by
the youngest hunter of the group, a boy of sixteen
or so. It was light and strong and would serve her
as a staff as well as a weapon. The hunters lay and
watched her. The sun drowsed upon the hills. She
looked round at them, this fantastic army to which
she was bidding farewell.
200
GAY HUNTER
‘Good-bye, all of you. Rem ’
He came with her a little distance through the
bushes towards the lour of that eastwards forest.
He was very silent till she said: ‘Now I must go
on, for sunset will come soon.’ So at that he took
her in his arms, his arms under hers, his hands upon
her shoulder-blades, and they looked at each other
slowly and earnestly, and kissed each other, and
Gay gulped back her tears j and, though she had no
mind for it, nodded at that unspoken request of the
hunter’s. . . . Lying beside him, she pushed back
the hair from his face, and kissed him, as though
he had been a child, and picked up her spear, and
went on.
When she looked back half an hour later camp
and hunters had vanished from sight. Near at hand
rose the forest, waiting and dark and silent.
She was again completely alone.
III. THE FOREST IS ON FIRE
It was dreadful in the forest. Through the veils
of the beech leaves the sun reached down hardly
at all, some thick whorling of lianas interlaced the
branches that met far overhead, and for a long while
she walked in the dimmest twilight though the day
(she knew) was still shining burnished outside. In
that half-gloom her feet pressed on a humus thick
and deep and soft, and once or twice she caught the
gleam of regardant eyes in the dim aisles that led
north and south from that main corridor she fol¬
lowed. It was to be hoped that food had been plenti¬
ful in the forest of late. . . .
Then, far ahead, she saw the sun raying down on
a pool of water, and in a little herself came to that
pool, lost and blue in the midst of the solemn
sentinelling of trees. It was circular and shallow,
like a dew-pond of ancient times, and she knelt and
drank by its mere, seeing herself with hair longer
than it should be, spear in hand, with her brown
self and her blue stare. Her lips set little ripples
out in unceasing eddies as she drank.
201
o
202
GAY HUNTER
Leaving that pool, she took to the main corridor
again, and suddenly found herself questioning it.
How came it that this passage ran arrow-straight
through the trees when thousands of years had
passed since men tended trees and planted and
cared for them?
Something in the soil?
Had she had time she would have stopped, in her
ancient and unquenched passion for excavation, and
have dug through the detritus to examine that soil.
But soon it would be sunset over the forest, and,
if she could, she would be beyond the confines of
the trees when the dark came. She had not heard
that lions roamed as far east as this, but certainly
the other beasts would be abroad with the night’s
coming. At the edge of the forest she could find a
tree and shelter in that.
It grew very dark in the great corridor. And
slowly a vast sigh broke upon the silence. The trees
lifted their heads and listened, frozen, to that
sound. Gay, frozen herself, halted and listened.
Down the length of the corridor in front of her
she saw the quiver of the leaves as they turned
and moved and retook their old shape and stance
again. She gave a little laugh. Only a breath of
wind.
Presently it was more than a breath, the great
gnarled trees were shivering in a stiff blow of wind,
their boughs swaying and moving in a slow rhythm.
THE FOREST IS ON FIRE 203
Through a torn patch of the forest ceiling Gay saw
the sky a moment, with great cirrus clouds going
south at hastening speed. Then the movements of
the tree-boughs stopped, halting, awaiting the rain.
For an hour or so Gay sheltered under a great
beech, watching the steady downpour. Presently
all the air was tingling with the smells it drew from
bark and mould, and up and down Gay quivered
a delightful chill that left her not cold at all,, only
with the feeling of being cleansed. Here, in this
dim place of trees, watching the pelt of the rain and
hearing it whip and tap on the leaves overhead, it
was hard to think there was any world at all beyond
these vistas. Any world at all where hunters lay in
encampments or trailed down through the rains
with spears, where east in the Shining Place a poor,
eager fool out of an accident in time planned to
bring back the filthy bestialities of old—that would
shut women and men out and for ever from the
clean delight of standing naked and unashamed and
unfrightened under a treey canopy in the sting and
glow of clean rain. Had this been England of that
century out of which she came 
No forest, but a bunch of trees, and the yokels
of the village about her. . . . Suddenly it seemed
to her that it was not only the great and towering
and tremendous bestialities of that life that had
been vile, war and classes, oppressions and cruelty,
but the little things that had crippled life and made
204
GAY HUNTER
it a prison: the little, picturesque things that the
poor souls of that time had come to cherish and
love: old cottages and old ale and old couples seated
in front of ivy-wreathed doors and old sweethearts
and old remembrances and old loyalties and old
hopes. Old! What a curse they had been in her
world, the old and all old things that they
cherished!
She picked up her spear, and hefted it, and
padded out into the sting of the rain, taking the
eastwards corridor again.
Nearly an hour later she saw that darkness was
not far from the land. Still there was no sign that
she had come to the confines of the forest, and still
the rain fell, steadily, in a steady seep from a dim
sky, rivuleting warmly from her hair and shoulders.
She must find some shelter against the dark.
So it was she came on the second opening in the
forest.
It might have covered a space of a hundred
square yards, and it gleamed, darkly, like spilt milk
on a buhl table, she thought, out of a childhood
memory. At first, though on the brink of it, she
could make nothing of it. Then she saw it was a
great sheet of metal, lonely and abandoned here
in the forest, though of the same nature as that
which twice before she had come on. It was a
Vision-plate’ such as the Voice in the Tower had
talked of—a television-plateau.
THE FOREST IS ON FIRE 205
How did it come to be cleared of its covering of
forest mould?
She peered round about her, but the light was too
dim to see if the clearing could have been done
recently. The trees grew all about the great circular
plate, abruptly down to its verge. As she looked,
a leaf floated past her shoulder and settled on the
marled metal. She peered at it, then blinked. It
had vanished. She bent down on the edge of the
great disc and put her hand on it. It was cold and
smooth, yet with a kind of faint quiver in it. What
could that be?
The darkness was growing closer. The great
plate glimmered like the surface of a lake. If she
was to press on there was nothing for her but to
cross it.
She was half-way across before she noted the
faint humming sound from underfoot. She stopped.
At that, the humming sound stopped as well. She
shook herself, speaking aloud:
‘Imagining things. You’ll be as bad as Houghton
and his half-witted female in a minuted
At the edge of the plate, as her foot left it and
sought the soft under-press of the forest-corridor
again, she noted that the resumed humming had
again ceased.
But now the tree-army of the English forest was
blinding the last of the day. It was useless to go
on, uncertain as she was of the exact direction. Better
206
GAY HUNTER
to take to a tree until morning.
She found one, a great beech, and climbed
into it. The wind had resumed again, and the tree
drummed and quivered against her bare skin as she
ascended. Presently the wind was in her hair, lift¬
ing it gloriously from her scalp. All around, like
the plash of a dark sea, the boughs of the forest
swished and sang. Tired though she was, Gay felt
like singing herself. Presently, in some angle or
crook (for now it was too dark to see) made by the
boughs and leaves, she found a spot where the wind
failed and it was secure and comfortable. At least,
it felt that, though in the darkness it might well be
that she was going to rest on a rotten branch over
forking abysses. It had just to be risked.
She stretched herself out cautiously in this dry
place to which the rain had not penetrated, and
wedged her slim hips in a crevice of boughs that
felt secure. A stray waft of wind ran down her
spine, tickling it. Very wanton. Goodness, how tired
she was!
She had just closed her eyes, and was settling for
sleep when something quivered red through her
eyelids. She opened her eyes again,, staring in the
sky. What she saw made her sit aloft with a
half-smothered gasp—smothered she did not know
why.
It was the Beam again in the sky—the Beam she
had twice seen before. It sprayed a deep angry red
THE FOREST IS ON FIRE 207
against the darkness, and, as she watched, took to its
twirling revolutions again, spinning like the re¬
leased shutter of a revolving lamp till Gay’s eyes
ached, staring at it. Then 
Then something quite fantastically impossible
happened. The Beam bent slowly downwards—it
bent as though seized and bent in two hands, and
the angry end of it, instead of smiting into the sky,
smote downwards far north. What for? What on
earth was happening?
The Beam had been a red-edged, translucent
pillar while it bent. Now it glowed a fiery red again
and within it, miles away in the sky though it was,
Gay could see the uprush of a great column of
flame: it was exactly like the boiling uprush of an
acid inside a test-tube. At the curve of the Beam
the acid-flare seemed to split and foam. Gay’s hand
clutched her spear.
Far in the north a great screaming roar grew.
She peered through the boughs in that direction,
and as she peered saw all the northwards forest
red-fringed, as though a great fire burned behind it.
The crackling rose in a deafening, whistling screech,
nearing and nearing.
Suddenly a far and solitary tree, silhouetted
against that infernal clamour, burst as in a thunder¬
clap, lighting all the forest in a wan glow.
Then a nearer grove fled into rapid flames,
stabbed by a giant pencil-beam of fire.
208
GAY HUNTER
The sleep-mist vanished from Gay’s eyes and she
understood.
The great bent Fire-Beam was wheeling upon the
forest j and the forest was on fire.
§ii
Of the happenings of the next half-minute she
had never but the dimmest recollection.
Somehow she reached the ground, in a reeling
scramble through boughs and leaves and twigs that
tore at her hair and flesh. Her feet on the forest-
floor, she saw a whirling column of fire nearing and
nearing, and a little hummock lying towards it,
three or four yards away. She ran for the hummock,
and, whistling, the Beam leapt towards her. As it
did so the forest-heads vanished away, great trunks
flew into flame, the detritus spouted and quivered.
Then 
Midway a thunder-clap, lying behind the hum¬
mock, she felt it quiver. Then it showered her with
earth and stones: the stones were almost red-hot.
She cried out and pressed herself deeper in the
mould, and suddenly her left heel went numb. For
a breathless, sizzling second she knew the play of
such fiery heat as no living thing might live and
endure. Then it had switched away. She raised her
head and watched it, wide-eyed.
THE FOREST IS ON FIRE 209
It was sweeping the forest from the face of the
hills. All the countryside was now alight with a
flaring earth-fire. The great trees, their trunks and
boughs, had vanished away: it was the interleaving
bush and grass that now flared as the Beam swung
on, south. For miles the countryside was lighted
in the hellish glare.
Suddenly the Beam deserted the forest—it had
reached the end of the forest—and burst into a
skyey geyser of earth and rocks upon the side of a
hill. At that, abruptly, it vanished.
In the space of two minutes the great forest that
mantled the eastern slopes of the Chilterns had been
swept away, it and all that lived therein—except
herself, by the chance of a miracle.
§ iii
All that night she lay in agony, what of her
scorched heel, unable to move with the charred
country still smouldering around her—in places
bursting into sudden flaming maelstroms of light
and fire. Thirst vexed her throat intolerably: but
there was nothing for it but to tolerate it.
She dozed away at last, behind the scarred
hillock, and was awakened by a roar and crackle
overhead that made her believe that the Beam was
returning. Instead, it was the beginning of the
210
GAY HUNTER
worst storm she had seen in this later-day England.
The sky split and against the broken fragments of
its bowl played a thousand spears of lightning. She
thought, ‘That comes of the Beam, I suppose,
affecting the atmosphere. To be struck by lightning
now ’
Suddenly she heard the moan of approaching
rain.
It rained until nearly dawn. She fell into a doze,
a drenched doze at last, sating therein till the edge
of the morning peeped upon the sky.
The rain was fading to a thin drizzle over a
churned and paddled wilderness. She rose to her
feet, with drenched and aching limbs 5 and, in a sud¬
den fear, looked behind her. Far away, into where
the morning’s soft glimmer extended, the black
desolation extended unbroken.
Had even Rem and the hunters escaped?
She tried to think if any hills intervened between
that camp and the far forest-fringe, whether or not
the ground had sloped down to the forest or risen.
Risen, she thought, but her head was aching in¬
tolerably, and no coherent thinking could be done
in this plight. And oh, hellnblast, however was
she to escape from it?
‘By walking, of course, seeing there’s no aero¬
plane. This damned heel ’
She was more than a little light-headed, start¬
ing j but presently the sheer physical labour of
THE FOREST IS ON FIRE 211
wading and scrambling in the quagmire of black¬
ened stumps and sodden mould cleared away these
vapours of the night. Her chilled and water-sod¬
den self lit and cherished a heartening glow as she
tugged and tripped and ran over gurgling stretches,
and climbed down a great hog-back, still seething,
like a poker in a pail; and trod up the grey,
shrivelled ghosts of canyons where last night trees
towered sentinel. So, after hours of labour she
attained to the edge of what had been the forest.
A hundred yards beyond it, the grass rose wet and
green and tall. She ran for its shelter, and, running,
stumbled over the corpse of a little beast—a hare.
Picking herself up, she would have turned again,
panting, to that tall shelter of the grass, but for the
realisation that she was desperately hungry. She
turned back, retrieved the hare—it flopped soddenly
and sickeningly against her warm skin—and
attained the grasses at last, and fainted very
thoroughly and completely.
IV. A LOST GOD
§1
She must have passed from that to sleep j she
slept well into the afternoon. When she awoke a
corncrake was sounding close at hand—on a long,
staccato, undisturbed note to which she lay and
listened uncomprehendingly a long while. Then
she opened her eyes to a sky set with a slow driftage
of southerning clouds which every now and then
obscured the face of the sun. Around her rose the
tall grass. She sat up on an elbow and pushed aside
its fronds.
It had been no dream. Westwards the country
looked as though a great hand, dipped in pitch, had
been smeared upon it. Here and there still uprose
lazy puffs of smoke, in little pools the water
gleamed under the sunlight, on its nearer fringes
the desolate stretch showed like a slow-moving
ocean of viscid black mud. Condors, innumerable
condors, were planing over the waste. There was
already a sodden, putrescent smell in the air.
She moved and touched something damp and
clammy, and looked down at it and saw the hare she
212
A LOST GOD
213
had rescued. Its presence reminded her of an un¬
abated hunger. It was indeed far more clamant than
ever. She picked up the damp and headless body,
and shuddered, being still squeamish in such mat¬
ters, as she ripped off a section of flesh. It came away
very easily: the hare had not only been killed in the
swinging of the Beam, it had been killed, cooked,
and then drenched in the thunder-burst! . . .
What it took from her heel it gave back with the
hare.
It? What on earth had caused that ghastly bend¬
ing of the Beam?
Now, sitting alone, naked here in the grass, eat¬
ing in a famished and unladylike manner, she
realised how very uncertain she was of what lay in
the east. London?—the Shining Place? And in
there? Dimly and foggily, back in the Dam in the
Chilterns, she had presumed that the Beam was
being operated by Houghton and Lady Jane experi¬
mentally—some weapon or implement they had
stumbled upon in their researches in the Shining
Place. But could it be they?
‘Then who else? There’s no one else alive in
England who could operate it—who would have
the faintest knowledge of the mechanics necessary
to operate it. Last night it must have been they
who twisted it and swung the end down on the
forest. But why did they do it? . . . Lord!’
She paused in her eating, staring at the black
214
GAY HUNTER
desolation. So that had been why. Like using a
hurricane and an eighteen-inch gun to kill a flea—
but what other object was there in the wiping out of
the forest? That television-plateau lying clear in
the midst of the trees—when she had set foot on it
she had thought it quivered in a strange way. Per¬
haps it was still ‘working’} and Houghton in Lon¬
don had been apprised of her coming, had looked
at her in some dim dial far off in the Shining Place,
and had switched on the Beam to kill her. . . .
Fantastic. But these were hours and days of
fantasy. There was no other explanation. A forest
had been wiped from the surface of the earth in an
attempt to kill Gay Hunter.
§ ii
‘And I feel no delight in the fact at all. Scared,
if I only confessed it to myself. And what am I
going to do now? Fire-Beam—when I haven’t even
my spear to use against it.’
The spear was back in the charred forest. Beyond
that forest, for all she knew, the Beam had wiped
out the expedition of the hunters. And east in
London were those idiot adolescents—they’d be
adolescents all their lives—playing their idiot
games with the half-known tools of a brute civilisa¬
tion—
A LOST GOD
215
She sat a long while with her head in her hands,
with a by-thought she dwelt on a moment and then
let go—the thought of how much she had aged in
this last month! Years and years older than that
girl who had driven the Morgan into Pewsey. Well,
she had need to have aged, to be sitting here,
ridiculously, with the history of humanity depend¬
ing upon her. Poor humanity!
She thought, in a sudden glow of pictures, of
Rem, the Singer, the Dreamer, the boy with the
mist on his face, her first lover, who had shown her
the deep wells of beauty and wonder in elemental
human contacts, who somehow in those magic hours
of the past two weeks had grown for her into the
seeming of Man himself—released from the taboos
and travail of civilisation, splendid and strange and
sweet, so that you wanted to laugh at him, and love
him, and admire him, and feel frightened of him
a little as well—like a mother with a child, in fact—
and cry to him, ‘The world’s yours—do have some
fun!’. . . And perhaps he was no more than a
charred skeleton back there in the Chilterns.
She said: ‘If that’s so, somehow, though it takes
me all my life, I’ll keep that life and settle accounts
with Houghton and Lady Jane. Somehow, anyhow.
I can’t think and plan for all the splendid issues, I
know—I’m too angry and ignorant for that. But
Rem—like wiping out a fine picture of a Japanese
deer to put in its place a dirty Leightonish battle-
2l6
GAY HUNTER
daub. . . . Oh, damn it, and now I must cry about
it. A lot that’ll help. . . . Oh, Rem, Rem!’
After a little she said to herself: cIdiot. Rem’s
still alive—I know he is. Hidden and camped with
the hunters beyond the forest, and wondering how
soon you’ll be back. And instead of getting on with
the business you’re snivelling here like a thing in
an Edwardian novel—being Wells-ish and save-
humanitarian and oh-dear-planetish. Move, for
goodness’ sake!’
But rising, she found it impossible to move with
any great speed till she came on a pool where she
drank and then bathed her scorched heel. It had
done no more than move the skin from her heel,
that waft from the hellish Beam. But that had been
bad enough, especially when she must needs walk
barefoot. Nothing for it but to walk and endure.
So, all the rest of that afternoon, she did. In
front the eastwards country wound in shallowing
vales down to a point of mist and glister of which
she could make nothing. London? Perhaps. Why,
in the classes in Mexico City, had she never paid
attention to English geography?—she had thought
it the dullest subject on God’s earth,, she remem¬
bered.
Once she crossed a great patch of grass that was
not grass at all, but clover; the air grew heavy with
the smell as she pressed the heads under her feet.
Late bees were homing laden from that hay-field,
A LOST GOD
217
and Gay picked a head of the clover and chewed it
for the honey in it, as she had not done since she
was a child. A queer feeling came upon her that
she knew this place, but she could not trace the
memory. And, because it was a comforting spot, she
sat there and rested for a while, under the drift¬
ing shadows that the clouds flung down from the
sun, watching the wheel and dance of those shadows,
south into the tenebrous land she had not to tread.
What lay there, she wondered? Somewhere the
Great West Road, long whelmed in earth and stones
and time, with all the little villages that once had
slept uneasily by the side of it, in the sight and
hearing of those endless auto-processionings. She
remembered a Sunday she had driven the Morgan
out on that Great West Road and the seething, end¬
less snake-belt of traffic, the smell, the heat, the
dust, on the great, arrow-straight road. . . . Long
gone and past, with only the curlews crying there,
or further west the roar and pelt of that unceasing
fire by Wokingham which marked where the great
bomb had fallen.
Very silent, a slumbrous hay-making afternoon.
So strange and queer the minds of men! That she
who had wept in a passion of remembrance for Rem
should sit now and drowse, contented, a few hours
later, in the quiet of an English afternoon, knowing
that some foulness was plotted there in the east.
But indeed, that knowledge sharpened one’s eyes
218
GAY HUNTER
and hearing to the homely loveliness of the great
clover-heads, the ping and start of a satiated bee.
Men shall not live by bread alone.
She had a short and sweet sleep among the clover,
and rose refreshed from that, and, being hungry,
held north a little, seeking berries. Instead she
found a great pear orchard—pears such as she had
never believed grew in England, things like
avocado pears, juicy and rich. She ate as many of
them as she could and found grass to bind up a
little bundle of them. So, lightly enough laden, she
came to the end of the shelving valleys and looked
for a spot to spend the night.
In the quietude of the evening she found that
likely spot, a great curved hollow under a little hill
that would hold off the dew while she slept. She
gathered grass and more of the clover and brought
it into the hollow, and sat down, and ate another
pear, and watched the sun upon the rim of the
western country. It was still and deserted. Nothing
moved there, no Beam split up through the even¬
ing. She sat and hugged her knees and dreamt
over it, unafraid, cool and wise and pitiful, seeing
with a strange clarity the wonder and pity and ter¬
ror, not only the horror, of that strange enslavement
of the human mind that had been civilisation, seeing
in the quiet coming of the night not that symbol for
hopelessness and doubt that so many of her kind had
seen on so many stricken fields, shield-bearing in so
A LOST GOD
219
many stricken causes. For gladness, rather. The
day with its heat and fight and fear for the children
of men bedevilled in the endless wars since they
reared the first city, was gone. Now the Night came.
Even that long day had not endured. Nothing
endured.
Heraclitus, wasn’t it, who had said that first, in
some dreamy Ionian city with an evening closing in,
more violet than this, perhaps, but much the same
evening. Thousands and thousands of years ago, at
the very beginning, it seemed now, of mankind’s
terrible adventure. And now she could look back
at that saying and see the truth of it, and try to face
it, as men had been so reluctant to do. Nothing
endured: neither she who sat here, with the blood
circling and sweet in her breasts, her thighs, her
legs, her arms, her hands here about her knees,
neither she nor all she hoped and believed and
trusted in and was passionate for—easy to under¬
stand that neither rocks nor sun endured, but dread¬
ful to think that one’s own tiny self did not!
And yet, was it so dreadful? Death—the thing
you must not face in her generation except with a
flippant bluster, a quick laugh and a quick looking
away. Death, so real, so quick, so inevitable, surely
so unwarranted! You grew from a child to a girl,
to a woman, and in your growing you grew up
within you this strange, delicate instrument of
judging and assessing and creating—an instrument
220
GAY HUNTER
fine and keen and lovely. . . . And presently it
rusted and fell to fragments.
Nothing endures. Not though she and the
hunters—or she alone, if Rem and his people were
dead—were to win in this cloudy conflict down there
in the mists of the east, might that fact be altered.
Not though the Golden Age lived on and grew and
the Folk of Rem reared great Singers and were
lifted on their wings into delights of the senses and
nerves beyond the imaginings of such poor crippled
centuries as she herself had come from. Not though,
from millennium to millennium, that simple life
went on—of delight in mating and begetting and
hunting, running in the cry of the wind, lying in
sleep with a body that sang—thousands of years of
delight, clean lust, clean love for the men and
women of the world. Yet even that would not en¬
dure. Nothing endured. The very planet that was
man’s—somewhere in the deeps of time death
awaited it, death waited on all life that ever was,
the flickering of a little flame in the dark wastes of
space presently to be quenched by God as a hasting
hand a taper.
(Nothing endures, Gay Hunter, still and young,
sport here of tremendous things and happenings j
nothing endures, not even your thoughts and all
the systems on which they are built. Maybe there
was greater wisdom in Swinburne’s vision of Death
himself at last lying dead, than in that sad cos-
A LOST GOD
221
mogony of the twentieth century, which had passed
on, a delusion of dread, to the sciences of the great
Hierarchies. In that twentieth century the physicists
and astronomers had seen in the skies the doom of
men in a varying fantasy of catastrophic universes
—contracting universes, expanding universes, uni¬
verses that frittered away into nothingness, universes
that coiled in upon themselves like—like rattle¬
snakes with colic. Had these imaginings had any
more close approximation to reality than those of
the first Nilotic kings who saw the Sun marching
the paths of the heaven for no other reason than
to ripen the barley crops of the Nile? Nearer to the
unknown Real than the Ptolemaics? Here, in this
evening quiet, you could sit and doubt even the
endurance of change.)
There came the stars—the bright, cold stars, that
had played so ill a game with those far imaginings
of the learned. For not more than a few thousand
years could have passed since that twentieth Chris¬
tian century—twenty thousand years at the most,
the same space of time as had lain between that
century and that of the ancient artists who painted
the belling mammoths in the Spanish caves. And
here was a sky all but alien—a sky that should have
shown little or no alteration through hundreds of
thousands of years! Only the planets familiar and
comely against these strange, monstrous groupings
in the blue-black of the sky.
222
GAY HUNTER
She lay and looked up at them as at old friends—
Venus tremulous above the sunset, the planet of
lovers in the old mythologies j Jupiter, a surly,
comfy glow, low in the north. She moved her gaze
round the sky. The deeper glow of the stars was
changing the dark blue of the early evening to a
velvet black. Something else—that red glow that
had companioned the evenings of her century, that
glow-men in time of war had seen in the skies as
the eternal symbol of War.
Mars. It was nowhere to be seen. Now that she
thought of it, she remembered she had never yet
seen the planet in these alien skies. It was not only
the earth that had changed: the very symbols men
had set in the sky had changed as well, and some
catastrophe had blotted out the planet of War in
the heavens, as another had blotted out the god of
War on the earth.
§ i|i
In the middle of the night she was awakened by
a hideous snarling, and roused, and stared about her.
There was no moon, but a great brilliance of star-
shine: and in that quiet glow she saw one of the
strangest sights—a procession of lions, like hunting
dogs, trotting past her refuge, apparently in reluct¬
ant retreat, following no trail as yet, and disagree-
A LOST GOD
223
ing violently one with other as they went. Two or
three were black, great-maned beasts, like Nubian
lions j whelps ran behind and Gay saw the long,
sleek shapes of padding lionesses. One of these
swung aside her head and growled blood-curdlingly
at Gay. Curdled accordingly, she sat too frozen
even to gasp, and automatically closed her eyes.
When she opened them again, the hunt of lions
had disappeared into the softly-lighted night.
Why hadn’t they attacked her? Lions—surely
lions didn’t hunt like that?
They were trooping west, and far enough off
now. Had she known there were lions in this part
of the country, she would have sought out some
other refuge—a tree or some shelter blocked by a
stone. But it was too late to think of that now. And
apparently the lions had no fancy for her as supper.
Finicky beasts. . . .
She laid her head down and drew the sheaves
of grass over her, and was again composing herself
for sleep when she heard a sound seeming to come
from the breast of the earth itself—thump, thud,
thump, heavy and yet soft. Imagination?
The sound drew nearer and became more rapid.
Gay raised her head again. As she did so she was
aware of a sickening smell of musk in the night-air.
Then, swishing and leaping through the air, she saw
the Horror itself.
It was furred and fanged and small-headed, of
224
GAY HUNTER
the size of a cart-horse but the shape of a kangaroo.
Sometimes it leapt, sometimes scuffled forward on
all fours, its short, claw-clad forepaws tearing the
earth. It was a moving stench, an impossibility, a
monster of starlight and imagination. It paid no
heed to Gay, and, as it went by, she saw another
thing: its nose to the ground, it was hunting on the
trail of the lions.
For a little Gay lay and wished she could be sick.
There could be no doubt of that ghastly shape, and
the filthy smell still lingered to apprise her she
had not dreamt. It had been—it was—
It was a great sewer-rat, lion-hunting, that had
come out of the eastern night—that east into which,
weaponless, she planned next morning to march.
§iv
The flare of the morning sunlight on her face,
coupled with a ravenous hunger, drew her next
from sleep. Pears, even avocado pears, had no stay¬
ing power, she reflected. Then she sat up, grass¬
scattering. The lions, that rat 
The countryside glimmered deserted under the
early morning sun. The glare of the latter made
Gay doubtful. It was too strong to last, and prob¬
ably foretold rain. All the eastwards horizon was
shrouded in a band of fog that moved and foamed,
A LOST GOD 225
colourfully. Swallows were flying south, and far
off, through the long grass, a bittern screamed.
She made towards that sound and its promise of
water, finding a stream that gurgled and ran, hidden
in the grass but for one place where it broadened
into a shallow pool, reed-fringed. Here she knelt
and drank and found the water sweet and icy cold.
After drinking she bathed, shudderingly, and then
ran in the sunlight to dry herself, but too full of
thought to find much of that singing, stinging en¬
joyment that had once been hers in these pastimes.
She was, she decided, far too hungry. . . . And be¬
yond that hunger was the country beyond the morn¬
ing mists.
There were still berries to be plucked, though
here, strangely, the blackberries were meagre and
sour. Nevertheless she quenched her hunger on
them, and found a great root, crooked and shaped
like a shepherd’s staff, which she took to help her
on the journey. Then she looked back over the trail
where last night she had seen a great rat hunting
lions, and turned her face in the direction from
which that hunt had come. Birds were about their
business and the sun shining. Presently out over
the country went a tuneful whistle:
‘Gay go up and Gay go down:
That is the way to London Town!’
It had been as she imagined—the early sunlight
226
GAY HUNTER
too strong to last. Presently rain came skimming
the desolate meadows, and with it—the first she had
seen since that morning at Pewsey—clouds of sea¬
gulls, screaming and crying. Rain-pelted, she held
steadily east, with narrowed eyes against the seep
and swish of the water. So, towards noon, the
rain cleared away, a sharp wind came from the east,
bringing the tang and smell of the sea, and abruptly
the concealing mists rolled away, leaving a sight
Gay was never to forget.
V. THE RUINS
§i
It rose gigantic in the afternoon air, perhaps five
miles away, a great waste of tumbled pylons that
caught the sunlight dazzlingly from cliffs and
precipices of unrusting metal and flung that sheen
high and blindingly into the air. At first the shapes
of the great buildings seemed to move and change
before her eyes, then the last of the mist rolled
down into the place where the sea came, and she
saw the London of the Hierarchs, as they had left
it thousands of years before, when the plagues
came and the Sub-Men rose.
She sat down on the little hill, breathing deeply,
staring with her eyes and all her body. It looked
like a vision of a dreaming Titan realised in metal
and blood and tears—the tears that had gone to its
building! Great escarpments of metal platforms
wound like the corridors of a ziggurat pyramid high
in the air where once (she thought) St. Paul’s had
been; and above that towering structure, dominat¬
ing all the city, a great pointed pillar rose in the
clouds—it rose a full mile into the clouds. Even at
this distance she could see its shape and symbolism.
228
GAY HUNTER
So that was what had replaced the Cross.
The Phallus.
Leftwards rose a building like a Keltic cross^—
square-pillared up to an immensity of gleaming
platforms that shone many-holed, as with dead eyes.
Those had been the windows once, those holes, of
many rooms. But the glass or other substance had
long mouldered to dust. Far down, in the estuary
of the Thames, a thing, squat and immense, dwarf¬
ing the temples of Egypt, but carved in like mould,
bestrode the sky. Below it was a great archway—
suddenly she realised its purpose. Under that arch
the great ships had come sailing in the days of the
Hierarchs, for still there rippled something blue
and grey under the indestructible metals. The
Thames!
So, for a long time, she sat and looked at the
shining Place. It seemed completely deserted. But
somewhere there Houghton and Lady Jane Easter¬
ling were encamped with the party of hunters they
had abducted—somewhere was a building where
they operated the Beam. She glanced at the sun.
And she must find that building before night.
Very soberly she got to her feet and went down
the hill. After a little she came on the beginnings
of one of the ancient ways to the Shining City. It,
like all the other remains that survived, was of
metal. The grass whispered and crept over it here
and there, but it still gleamed, uncovered and
THE RUINS 229
marled, in places. She passed the dung of some
great beast as she went east. Rat’s.
So it was from London the great kangaroo-like
beast had come.
Drawing nearer the confines of the city, she saw
it unfold more clearly, as though on a cinemato¬
graphic roll before her eyes. Between the buildings
that reared their strange structures, sky-piercing,
were vast wastes of trees and jungle bush that
crowned and covered great mounds. Here and there
even the metallic structures tilted drunkenly. Once
masonry must have occupied those spaces now grass-
covered -j and once in some day of dread, foemen of
the Hierarchs had brought their unknown weapons
to bear upon the London of that time. For in the
north the buildings were a long-twisted swathe of
ruined cables and pillars, as though a great gun had
mown them down and yet could not destroy them.
Against that smashed and trodden tangle she saw
a great pine tree growing—she knew it great, but
it looked like a fern in the shelter of a garden-wall.
Now the way was clearer of grass and moss and
she saw the nearer tangle of cruciform buildings rise
at a distance of little over half a mile. All London
seemed to watch her, as she came into it, staff in
hand. Behind the towering structures that once had
been hives of human activity, something winked
blue and high in the air, at the top of a great, spindly
pillar like a wireless mast. Then Gay saw that it
GAY HUNTER
230
was moving—a great disc that spun round slowly,
like the shutters on a lighthouse lamp.
It looked about a mile away. As Gay held to¬
wards it she came on a great dead rat lying in the
middle of the way—a beast that had been killed
only a short time back. Some other beast, one of its
fellows, perhaps, had torn out its throat. Its stench
was abominable. Gay circled round it, her nose in
her fingers, and went on, into a great shadow cast
by the near cruciform Tower. Looking up, she saw
the dizzying heights over her head like the crags of
the mountains that overhung the railway stretches
near Tecpan, Guatemala. Seabirds cried and wheeled
high up there, and the place was thick with their
droppings. Sea-birds: now the salt smell of the sea
was strong in her nostrils; the sea must have come
far up since ancient times.
Still the great blue disc revolved, slowly, cease¬
lessly, and still there was no sign of human activity.
Gay put her fingers to her mouth and whistled.
The echoes rang and spun amidst the great
girders. Hardly had they died away than a great
rat, hiding under the foundations of a nearby build¬
ing, bolted past Gay—so close as almost to sweep
her from her feet. Her involuntary scream cried
and cried upwards to the mile-high circlings of the
sea-gulls. Then she heard a crashing sound in a
nearby grove of giant weeds, and looked in that
direction, and came to a halt.
THE RUINS 231
Four of the Folk—Folk of the Dam, she knew—
were coming towards her.
§ii
l
Tied against a great metal pillar in the darkness
of the Phallic Tower, she moved uneasily, and
stared at the dim roof. Through it, the innumer¬
able interstices which once had been windows and
were now passages for nesting birds, a slow gleam
was breaking. Star-rise. Star-rise out and above the
strange wreck of a strange London. . . .
Here she could hear nothing, see nothing but
dimly. After taking her here at Houghton’s orders
the hunters had left her for a while, and she had
leant against the pillar, resting, thinking wryly that
she endured no more than Houghton and Lady Jane
themselves had endured at the hands of the hunters
back in the Dam. Then Lady Jane had come. . . .
. . . Better not to think of that or the things she
had said. Funny to think how she could have said
them, all the same. Unable to see her face, Gay
had thought of it as even more twisted and pale
than in the great hall where she had met her and
Houghton. She had thought even then that both
of them looked—not mad, but haunted. Haunted
by some unnameable fear.
Into that strange place, a-spew and a-litter
232
GAY HUNTER
with giant machines that huddled twistingly
into darkness, even though the daylight still
lingered, the hunters had taken her; and so she had
come on Houghton and Lady Jane, at the far end
of a great room, with above them something in the
roof that shoomed ceaselessly and cast whirling
shadows. Before she had looked at them she had
lifted her eyes to that strange sight and saw it a
great revolving dial not twenty feet from the floor.
It was made of some glass-like substance and as she
looked at it change and revolve she saw a great
stretch of the country around London change and
revolve inside it. Then she had understood its pur¬
port. It was some kind of periscope.
^ello, Miss Hunter.’
Houghton—in a grass-woven tunic and kilt, and
clumsy sandals. He had half-risen from the log of
wood on which he had been sitting. Gay said:
fWould you mind telling these guards of yours
to take their hands off me?’
fOf course. Damned half-wits. Though they
don’t understand a word I say. . . . Leave her alone,
you fools.’
The hunters had dropped their hands. Gay had
rubbed her wrists. Well, what next? Behind
Houghton had sat Lady Jane, regarding her in an
amused silence. Gay nodded to her, stared at her
grass skirt appraisingly, and looked round at the
new stigmata of human occupancy. A fire burned in
THE RUINS
233
the middle of the great hall, surrounded by the
shapes of enigmatic machines j further up the hall
Gay had caught sight of women’s faces peering
from the shadows—the women of the Folk, she
supposed. Billets of wood had been brought in to
serve as chairs and tables for Houghton and Lady
Jane. The air was a frowsy fug that caught in her
throat. She had found Houghton watching her
narrowly.
‘You and your army seem to be making a horrid
mess of the place, Major. Well, since this is civilisa¬
tion, haven’t you a drink to offer me?’
‘I’ll get you some water ’
‘Good Lord, is that all?’
He moved impatiently. ‘We’ve hardly begun
things yet—we’re just on the fringe of finding out
the meaning and use of the machines in here. Not to
mention those in the other buildings. ... Sit down,
won’t you? I’ll get them to cook you some deer.’
‘Nice of you.’ Gay had sat down. ‘Well, and
what’s to happen when you do find out the secrets
of the machines?’
‘Very obtuse, Miss Hunter. We’re going to put
those dirty people to work, and establish a
colony. . . .’ Lady Jane was surveying her critically.
‘You look horridly scratched.’
Gay had nodded. ‘And you horridly patched.
But we always did engage in unprofitable back-chat
when we encountered, didn’t we?’ She had looked
Q
GAY HUNTER
234
up at Houghton. ‘Why did you try to kill me
with that Beam the night before last?’
There had been a short silence. Looking at them,
Gay had been apprised of the queer, dull look on
their faces in thought or repose—when compared
with that on the face of Rem or the free Folk of
the Dam. (The hunters in here look like scared
savages.) Lady Jane had yawned.
‘Mustn’t credit Ledyard with the attempt. That
was my little effort.’
‘I see. Just why?’
‘I saw you crossing that glass plate in the forest—
the reflection comes on that disc’—she pointed up¬
wards—‘and I knew you were coming to London
on some errand of those savages in the Dam. So I
got the Beam working—Ledyard already had it in
order—and turned a few gauges and got it to
bend ’
‘Yes, damn you, Jane. You needn’t be so proud
about it. . . . Look here, Miss Hunter,, I’m sorry
about that. I wasn’t here at the time, down at the
Sea-House there, searching round for any lumber
left in the rooms. I ran back as fast as I could when
I saw the Beam being used. Jane was out of her
mind.’
‘Quite in my mind. If the two of you’ll excuse
me, I’ll go and see about supper. You might cover
yourself up a little, at least while you’re with us,
Miss Hunter.’
THE RUINS
235
She had risen up and left them. Houghton had
looked after her and passed a hand across his head.
Gay nodded.
‘A bloody woman, as you’d say. Why bother
with her, then?’
‘Eh?’
‘Wasn’t that what you were thinking?’
He had been silent again for a while, his chin in
his hands, and then, as though his voice had been
released by a spring, had begun to tell her his plans.
She had sat and listened, occasionally looking
back through the doorway at the waning light, and
round as the fire in the centre of the hall was piled
higher and the deerflesh roasted. They looked what
they were, Houghton and his men, savages camped
in the ruins of a civilisation. What was that he
said? She brought back her wandering attention:
‘. . . Jane and I have married, of course—we’ve
married without benefit of clergy.’
‘So’ve I,’ Gay had interrupted.
‘Eh?’
‘One of the hunters.’
‘You mean—you actually slept with one of those
savages?’
‘Yes, lots of times. It was very nice.’
‘Those stinking beasts ’
Gay had looked at two of them cooking the meat.
She said: ‘Yes, now you mention it, they are. Filthy.
But—these are not the people you and Lady Jane
GAY HUNTER
236
took away from the Dam in the Chilterns. What
have you done to them?,
‘Done? Nothing, except discipline them a bit.’
‘I see. That’s why they slouch about in that way.
You’ve done more than discipline them—you’ve
civilised them—you poor, idiot boy. Hellnblast,
don't you see what you’re doing?’
‘Shut up, damn you! I’ve no need to stand your
impudence here, anyhow.’
‘No. Savages to command—not to mention Fire-
Beams. And you’re going to found a colony in
London on that for a basis?—when you don’t
understand even the composition of the power
behind the Beam. It’s probably a small reservoir
soon to peter out. It’s you who are the savage—a
savage in a grass kilt playing about in a museum
of the twentieth century. Don’t you see how im¬
possible all this plan of yours is? Civilisation—the
civilisation that built this London—is dead, and
men have survived and are turning to other things
—oh, there are other things, if you’d open your
ears and eyes to them. And instead you come
blundering into this stinking, tattered wreck of metal
buildings and think you can begin half-way again
with civilisation. Fire-Beams! Why didn’t your
mother smack you when you were young?’
‘Miss Hunter, I’ll have no more of that!’
‘Humourless as ever.’ Suddenly Gay had been
serious. ‘Look here, Major Houghton, I’m nothing
THE RUINS
237
and know nothing. But don’t you see what you’re
trying to do—to revive a horrid and beastly thing
and re-enslave men to the kind of horror that the
Hierarchies built?’
‘The Hierarchies?’
‘Of course, you never heard of them. They left
the Voices in the Tower above the Chiltern Dam.’
He had asked what Voices, and Gay had shrugged,
knowing the uselessness of trying to explain. And
then Lady Jane Easterling had come back, and two
of the hunters had brought them some cooked deer-
flesh and water. The hunters were still armed with
flint spears, Gay had seen. Houghton had not been
able to cast from metal yet.
Lady Jane had sat down and glanced from one
to the other of them with her thin, lovely face.
‘Well, Miss Hunter, what is your answer?’
‘Answer to what?’
‘Ledyard—haven’t you told her yet?’
Houghton had moved impatiently. ‘I was telling
her—when she started some damned impudence or
another that distracted me.’
In the light of the fire Gay could see Lady Jane’s
lips come set in a thin, even line of contempt. ‘Dis¬
tract you? You allow her to distract you? A little
of the same treatment as we’ve given those savages
would quieten her, I think.’
‘I won’t have more floggings.’
‘Or burnings?’ Gay suggested. ‘We—I came
GAY HUNTER
238
upon one of your experiments in civilisation who
had escaped from you here. Most of his skin had
been scalded from one side of his body.’
‘Blast you, do you think that was deliberate?
He was the fool who first helped me with the Beam
machine—a shutter fell open and he got a
whiff ’
‘Is it necessary to explain all that?’ Lady Jane
had inquired in her deceptively casual voice. ‘See¬
ing that Miss Hunter escaped my attempt to put
an end to her problem of being alive and disturbing
the savages, we agreed to put her to a better use,
didn’t we?’
‘Yes.’ Houghton had stood up and began to walk
about. Far over, beyond the glow from the fires,
bats were haunting the dim shadows. There was a
subdued murmur of life from further up the great
building, where the stray Folk and their families
were presumably encamped. What exactly had
Houghton and Lady Jane done to bedevil them?
They looked subdued and dirtily cruel at the same
time. What was he saying?
‘. . . the savages. Apparently they trust you and
allow you a considerable freedom ’
‘They allow me any freedom I want. They are
the freest and finest people I have ever met.’
‘Then you can help. This is what Lady Jane and
I want you to do—to go back to them and persuade
the entire tribe to come down to us here in London
THE RUINS
239
and help in founding a colony. You can make it
attractive enough to them, the prospect—Good God,
isn’t it attractive to be dug out of the filthy life of
a hunting beast and set on the road to a civilised
life?—and you yourself, of course, will have special
privileges in the colony. Yes, she will, Jane. . . .
After all, we’ll be the only three white people, and
if we stick together we can carry on the whole show
as long as we live. A Council of Three. After us
our children. You say you’ve found a—admirer
among these—people, Miss Hunter. If you
married, of course your children would have the
same privileges as ours.’
‘Admirer?’ This had been Lady Jane. ‘How in¬
teresting! And no doubt you’ll soon mother him a
little savage half-caste?’
For a minute Gay had bitten at her lip. Then
she had said, ‘I see. So that’s to be the future
aristocracy to rule England. Pity I’m an American
with a natural hatred of aristocracies. And after we
start this agricultural life, and make metals and set
up houses, and get these machines in order, and
ferret out their secrets, and our children control
them—what then?’
‘Eh? Well, they’ll spread out and make a little
kingdom in time, I suppose. All the old adven¬
tures. Then there’s the sea. We might even get
across to France in our own lifetime.’
‘Better still, you could first depopulate it with
240
GAY HUNTER
the Fire-Beam. . . . No, let me speak now. You
and Lady Jane aren’t so certain as you once were
that we’d stumbled into only a little accident after
that night at Pewsey—you now know this is a dif¬
ferent age and a different time and that we are
probably the only civilised beings left alive?’
Houghton had sat down again. He nodded.
‘And you are to raise civilisation again—with the
aid of the Folk in the Chiltern Dam? Two
obstacles.’
‘What?’
‘The first is that you’re making a bad mistake if
you think the whole Folk are like those forty that
you and Lady Jane managed to lead away as a body¬
guard. Also, they’re startled and on the defensive
now. You could no more get them to trek down
here en masse and start a strange life than you would
get the Fire-Beam to grow corn. They wouldn’t
come.’
‘That’s to be proved. You could persuade them.
They were fond enough of you.’
‘Quite. Which brings the second obstacle—that
I won’t persuade them, or rather, as soon as I do
get back to them I’m going to raise an army of
spearmen and bring them here and put an end to the
whole plot. Plain? Do you think I’m going to let
dirty little morons of your calibre start diseasing
the world again?’
(Idiot to lose your temper. . . .) Houghton had
THE RUINS
241
started to his feet, in one of his usual rages. But
Lady Jane had restrained him. ‘Supposing we give
her the night to think it over—down in the Pillar
Tower alone?’
‘No. I won’t have that.’
‘You prefer her to get away and raise the savages
against us?’
They had wrangled for a little. Gay had stood
up and yawned, too tired to be frightened.
‘Pd rather have the Tower any day than sit
listening to your civilised domestic felicities. Where
is it?’
‘Then by God you can have it,’ Houghton had
retorted. ‘Hey, you ’ and he had called up a
couple of hunters. They had seized Gay’s elbows
and led her out of the building on the heels of
Houghton himself, into the whispering mystery of
London’s night. They had stumbled down grass-
grown roads a while with the aid of a spluttering
pitch-pine torch, till they came under the cliff of
another great building. Raising her eyes as Hough¬
ton fumbled at a small side door, Gay had seen an
immense pillar towering into the quietness of the
evening sky. Suddenly she had realised what that
pillar was—this was the Phallic Tower. . . . Then
Houghton and his hunters, having led her across
an immense desert waste under the arching of a
cathedral-like roof, had tied her to a pillar, and
departed.
242 GAY HUNTER
‘You’ll probably have changed your mind in the
morning,’ Houghton had called back. ‘One of the
savages was recalcitrant and we tied him where you
are for the night. He was meek enough in the
morning.’
To that Gay had answered nothing, sick and sorry
already for the flippancies which had landed her
here. Hellnblast, what a fool of a schoolgirl she
had been to twit them like that! What a damn fool!
. . . The door had banged echoingly, leaving her
to her disturbed thoughts.
But not for long. In less than an hour, so she
had calculated, she had heard that door open, and
seen a slim figure in the opening. Lady Jane . . .
Gay shuddered and moved at her pillar, tugging
at the bonds of dried deerskin. But they were
bound tightly and skilfully enough. Lady Jane had
tested them before she had gone.
‘I think they’ll hold while the Rats are coming.
After that neither you nor we need worry.’
Gay had licked her lips. ‘You won’t—you can’t
leave the door open?’
‘Won’t I? Just watch.’
She had gone, and Gay had watched. Watching,
she had seen the doorway blind a moment and then
clear again. Out of the darkness she had heard
Lady Jane’s last laugh—a laugh which made her
shudder.
It was the laughter of a madwoman.
VI. THE RATS
§1
The Great Rats, the terror of the London dark—
Lady Jane had said they haunted this building at
star-rise. And now the stars had risen. Looking
up again, Gay was conscious of a pressing multitude
of sounds, the creak of the great metal stays of the
buildings, the whisp of bats’ wings j but as yet no
thudding noise of the coming of the beasts. A few
minutes yet 
She licked her lips, staring in front of her in the
darkness. To be torn in pieces by a Rat. Best to
face that squarely, now it was so imminent. Prob¬
ably the pain would not last long—the beast would
leap at her jugular, she thought. Or she would faint
in its approach, before the tearing and slashing of
those giant claws and teeth began. . . .
She was dreadfully sick a moment, and hung
weakly in the bonds. Even so, her mind took up a
train of thought, coolly enough. So that explained
a great deal—Lady Jane was half-mad, Houghton
also probably. This echoing city with its deserted
buildings towering in the clouds—was that what
243
244
GAY HUNTER
had done it or the feeling of hopeless lostness which
she herself had known—known even in the comfort
and good fellowship of the Folk? Mad . . . and
the Rats were coming.
She heard the patter—not inside the building,
she thought, but outside, on one of the great
deserted ways. It flickered and flumped about the
Tower, and she strained to look towards the little
doorway. Abruptly that darkened.
Gay held her breath.
The stench of musk grew, while the doorway still
remained black. How long, God, how long? Better
scream and finish it.
No!
Abruptly, she saw that the pale night-light
streamed through the opening again. The Rat had
gone.
For how long—or how long until others came?
This scene was very old, she thought, dazedly. Who
was that woman in the Greek stories who had hung
in chains, waiting the coming of a beast to devour
her? Andromeda.
Flumpy thudy flump. She closed her eyes. This
time, surely. Then outside sounded the noise of a
wild scuffle. A scream of pain rent the air, and
echoed far up among the cliffs of masonry. Then a
renewed thudding and thumping, dying away. Some
fight over spoil. . . .
Noises inside the building, coming nearer. Gay
THE RATS
245
braced herself back against the pillar, suddenly so
pitiful for herself and the fears of her own shudder¬
ing flesh that she felt strangely serene.
Now 
§
‘Miss Hunter! ’
She opened her eyes. Something was breathing
deeply close at hand—someone. She breathed fear¬
fully herself.
‘Miss Hunter! Are you all right?’
‘Is that you, Major? Did I hear you have a meet¬
ing outside?’
‘Bloody Rat. Was it coming in?’
‘I don’t know. Shame to put it off its supper,
anyhow.’ Her laugh, echoing up into the great
metallic spaces of the roof, sounded ghastly to her
own ears. In the darkness Houghton’s hand came
over her mouth.
‘Sh! Don’t make that noise.’ His hands were
urgent upon her. ‘Where are the ropes tied? Never
mind, I’ve a knife. Stand still.’
Something cold slipped down between her bare
skin and the thongs. A moment later she staggered
away from the pillar and sank down in the inches-
deep dust of the floor, rubbing at her cramped legs
and arms. Houghton’s whisper was as urgent as
his hands had been.
GAY HUNTER
246
‘You’re all right—you can walk?’
‘I think so. Where?’
‘Anywhere. Get out—get out of London before
morning—as far away as you can get before morn¬
ing. You can have this spear and you’ll just have
to take your chances of the Rats. Hold along the
main way, they hardly ever come out on it. And
don’t make a sound, for God’s sake.’
Gay sat still in the dust, staring towards that voice
in the darkness. Then she said:
‘You’re going to let me go free? Don’t you know
Lady Jane came in here and told me it was your
plan to have the Rats eat me?’
There was a short silence, then he said: ‘Lady
Jane’s—not well. She’s been upset. Anyhow, don’t
argue it now.’
She understood. He was freeing her without let¬
ting the woman know—the Worm-Woman, as the
Folk called her. She stood up and stretched out her
hand and in the darkness encountered Houghton’s.
‘Look here, come away with me.’ She felt his
fingers flinch and the ghost of a laugh came on her
lips. ‘Oh, I don’t mean as my lover. Come back
with me to the Folk. There’s fun and a good life
among them, if you’d only let yourself see it. Come
back with me, before it’s too late.’
‘Can’t. There’s Lady Jane and those chaps—
the savages I brought here.’
‘You could bring the lot.’
THE RATS 247
‘Don’t damn well dictate to me. Are you going
or are you not?’
Gay squeezed his hand. His fingers held hers as
he guided her across to the door. In that star-rayed
darkness the London of the Hierarchs looked like
an infernal city limned by Dore. It was filled with
the rustle and murmur of multitudinous voices—
the pines under the great walls of the cruciform
buildings, the whishing of the colonies of bats about
their nocturnal business, the sigh of a sea-wind, salt¬
laden, that came up from the east. Houghton thrust
the spear in her hand.
‘Right straight along here, and you’ll make it.
I must get back, or Jane will miss me. If you meet
a Rat, thrust under his left paw. You’ve got guts
enough.’
‘I know the way. Look, I must tell you: if I
get back to the Folk I’ll still do as I said I would
earlier this evening—raise them and bring an army
down here against you.’
‘Raise what you like and be damned. God, I’m
sick of this nightmare! Go on, go on! ... Eh?’
She had kissed him, suddenly, on an impulse,
lest she should weep. ‘Only that. Good-bye, Major
Houghton.’
He called something after her, unintelligible in
the dark. She half-turned round, but saw no sign
of him—only the titanic shadow of the great phallic
symbol and the white, marled glimmer of the way.
GAY HUNTER
248
She turned her face towards the darkness of the
west, where Jupiter burned above the Chiltern
Hills.
§ iii
Twice she hid from rats, and once lost her direc¬
tion on the grass-grown way, straying into a be¬
wildering metallic cul-de-sac and on to the verge
of a giant hole in the earth. Looking down that
hole in the faint glow of the starshine she remem¬
bered the great underground railway system of
antique London and the multitudinous passages and
echoing caverns once crammed with a busy life. Did
any of those old subterranean voyageurs ever vision
a time when giant rats like kangaroos would make
of the underground tunnels their runways, and
squatter up slopes, set in eternal darkness, where
once the creaking escalators worked? Funny how
rats were in some measure always horrifying, big or
little. . . .
Long before dawn she was beyond the outskirts
of the great complex of buildings. Once she walked
in darkness and a downfall of stinging, salt rain.
Then the wind had risen, howling eerily while she
trod westwards over the deserts of crumbled
masonry where once Hammersmith and Chiswick
had been. There was no sign of the Thames—it had
THE RATS
249
long vanished to an underground bed, she sup¬
posed, like the river in Kubla Khan. Once an owl
screamed piercingly as she passed a lurching edge
of falling metal, and that brought her heart in her
throat far more than the near encounter with the
two rats. Then the rain ceased and she had seen, a
faint ghostly limning of the eastern sky, that the
morning would not be long delayed.
So she had taken to running—fleeing westwards
through that dawn from the dreadful city of night
that had once been London—presently fleeing in a
panic terror from the thing, she knew not why.
Jupiter vanished in the darkness of the west, and
a great star she did not know burned brightly a
minute where Jupiter had been, and then also
vanished. Morning was close.
Her feet trod in long, wet grass, dimness-
shrouded, as she still pressed west. Presently the
ground began to rise, gently, and she knew she
must be nearing that hillock from which she had
looked on London the previous day. Only the
previous day!
She sank down at last in the wet grass, in a little
hollow of the quiet hills, with the light of the dawn
now full upon the earth. Lying there, she gave way
at last, weeping with terror in remembrance of the
dreadfulness of the night—the madness in the
laugh of Lady Jane Easterling, the hopeless despair
in Houghton’s voice, the scuffle and whimper of the
R
GAY HUNTER
250
great Rats in the dark corridors and alleyways of
the tenebrous city. Sickening and vile and pitiful—
most pitiful of all those lost hunters who had com¬
panioned the two strays on their insane adventure
into London. Even if they ever came back to the
Folk of the Chiltern Dam, could in some way be
reclaimed, would they not come as beings diseased,
to act as a fester in the body politic of the simple
people who were kin to them? Sun and wind and
the sight of the dawn over grasslands—pressed from
that into a narrow life of filth and fear in the
shadows of an insane nightmare in metal. Hough¬
ton and Lady Jane had much to pay for.
Yet—were even they to blame? They were no
more than victims of their one-time environment
and education and social caste j and the aberrant
culture that companioned that caste in the days of
its economic straits. Poor, silly, trapped beasts,
trapped themselves like the hunters they had
trapped. . . . And neither they nor their hunters
could ever again be allowed out of London.
That grew plain to her as presently she rose from
the grass and held west, with Houghton’s spear
trailing half-forgotten in her hand. She must do
as she had threatened to Houghton she would do—
either find the force that Rem had captained or raise
another and lead it down on London. And then—
Massacre. There was nothing else could wipe clean
that sore. The Folk must kill Houghton and Lady
THE RATS
251
Jane and all of the hunters, men, women and chil¬
dren, who had gone with them, smash in whatever
of the great buildings and machines were smashable,
and march out of London, setting on it a taboo for
anyone ever to go near the place again.
‘My God, what a programme for a pacifist! ’
Presently, when she looked back, the hazes of
Thames-mouth had brought down their mists again
to veil the great London of the Hierarchs from her
eyes.
§iv
She was very hungry before that day ended. She
had thought at first it would be easy to decide again
the route that led back to the blackened desert where
once the forest had stood; but she saw in front of
her, now westwards-making, a land that seemed as
unfamiliar as though looked on for the first time.
A jumble of grassy nullahs climbed into low hills
that smoothed down to dried-up river-beds. Crickets
chirped maddeningly, endlessly. The lap-lap-lap of
peewits’ wings she found exasperating, standing at
this or that twist and bend of the landscape, seek¬
ing a recognisable feature. West she could make,
even north-west. But somewhere between those
points was the forest, and holding a degree or so
north or south she might miss it in this wildered
GAY HUNTER
252
jumble, and take days to range back. It came on
her with full force how easily she might miss Rem
and his expedition—providing that expedition was
no more than a heap of calcined ashes on the fringe
of the ruined forest.
And, because this day of all days she could find
no food in a country suddenly grown berry-less,
appleless, she met towards afternoon straying packs
of dogs as hungry as herself. The first pack lay
under a hillside, halted on its haunches, tongues
lolling forth from slavering jaws, evidently resting
disappointed from some unsuccessful pursuit. At
sight of Gay the great, wolf-like brutes rose bristling
to their feet, not looking at her directly, but at one
another, as if vaguely consultative. Then one made
a step towards her, snarling, and at that Gay lost
her indecision:
^coot!’
They scattered and fled before her rush—a flight
of sheer surprise, not fear, for they gathered at a
little distance, with brushes and ears cocked, watch¬
ing her. A little breathless, she turned her back on
them and resumed her way, the spear shaft slippery
with involuntary sweat from her palms. Glancing
back after a little, she saw that the brutes were fol¬
lowing her, albeit cautiously.
That they did for a good hour or more, till a
lone calf—a stray from one of the great wandering
herds—uprose from a bush on the verge of a wide,
THE RATS
253
green meadow. Thereat the pack wheeled from the
trail of Gay and whirled across the meadow with a
whirlwind unanimity blood-chilling in its silence
and speed. Gay halted to stare a moment, saw the
calf brought down, saw its throat ripped out, and
covered her face with her hands and ran. Horrible,
horrible. Yet 
She came on a narrow grove of great trees she
did not know—poplars mated with some unknown
tree, she thought, lonely and splendid against the
copper tintings of the western sky. The great leaf¬
age and boughs of the trees towered high, and she
climbed one of those trees to rest in safety, her
nerve more than a little shaken at sight of that
happening in the pasture. Yet 
Yet it had nothing of the horror of London and
Houghton’s experiments in the resurrecting of
civilisation. A quick and dreadful and bloody death,
and the dogs lying sated in the sun, sated with
flesh that a few minutes before had made the body
of a thing that lived and breathed and butted at its
fellows, and grunted sleepily of nights, and mooed
a foolish joy in running and sporting in the bovine
way. Horrible—but rational and clean enough also,
uncruel as well. Not like the Tower of the Phallus
where a girl had hung waiting for the giant rat
to come and devour her. . . .
‘Though I feel so hungry now Pd be more liable
to eat a Rat than it me. Get up, my girl, you can’t
254 GAY HUNTER
take roost here all the afternoon.,
Wearily, she forced herself down to the ground
and through the grove of silent pseudo-poplars.
Looking back, she saw them marching splendid and
sentinel for long miles afterwards, lovely and un¬
forgettable and vividly green.
In that they were contrast to other tree-clumps
here and there in the long valleys up which she
passed. Now she saw that everywhere the hand of
autumn was on the land, and great driftings of
leaves wheeled down in the little puffs of afternoon
wind. She had noticed nothing of this in her east¬
wards travelling only a day or so before, but now it
struck vividly home to her. Autumn—and coming
at a speed surely greater than in the old days. (She
called them cthe old days’ to herself, she noted with
an absent twinge of amusement. To refer to them
as the days of twenty thousand years ago was im¬
possible.)
Presently dogs came hunting her again, and again
she managed to take to a tree. The beasts sat
around and waited a while and yawned and
scratched and looked at her with bright, pupil-less
eyes, and gnawed for a while at the handle of her
spear, dropped on the ground as she leapt for the
tree. Gay shook the hair from her face, and con¬
sidered the dogs unlovingly, if dispassionately.
How long would they keep her treed here?
They gave up after a while, and trotted off, in
THE RATS
255
close pack-formation, into the south. Gay descended
and almost immediately thereafter came on a wide
patch of clover—a great stretch of clover which she
recognised instantly. It was here, three days before,
where she had lain and slept with the bees about
her, honey-gathering. It was here where that feel¬
ing of another-time familiarity had haunted her a
moment 
Now she saw no beesj and that the heads of the
clover bent, withered. Autumn. A little chill caught
at her heart as she looked out and beyond the patch.
Autumn, and soon the winter, and what would have
happened by then?
‘Nothing, except what you’ve planned. You’ll
collect Rem and go down and do that scavenging
in London, and go back with him and the Folk into
the North ’
Then she remembered the orchard of avocado
pears, and abandoned speculation, seeking it out,
and finding it at last. Eating pears under the great
flecked leaves, the shadows waving gently upon her
face, she remembered that it was close to here that
she had seen the giant rat go by in the night. She
must push on west, beyond their hunting grounds,
weary though she was.
She finished with the pears, and found a pool with
clear water, and drank there, and tramped into the
polychrome splendour of the sunset. A piling of
skyey towers had gathered about that place of the
GAY HUNTER
256
sun’s going down, and in the chill wind (that even
up here seemed to smell in ghostly fashion of the
sea) they piled themselves slowly in great struc¬
tures, those towers, till it seemed a New London
gathered in the skies—pylons and towers and
ranging temples illumined for a moment blood-red.
Then the colour faded from them, it was only the
faded English landscape at twilight, and she a lost
American seeking a lost band of savages on the
verge of a lost forest.
Not London. Perhaps instead it had been what
Blake once saw—what was once a vision and a possi¬
bility in the days when he sang it, before man lost
his vision completely:
<I shall not cease from mental strife,
Nor shall the sword sleep in my hand,
Till we have built Jerusalem
In England's green and pleasant land.'
Suddenly, far in the west, under the sunset’s
edge, she saw the strange star lit.
§ v
Presently a thin, sickle moon came up and rode
the sky, shedding a faint radiance, a light like—
like diffused buttermilk, she thought, stumbling
sleepily. In that pale illumination the near stars
THE RATS 257
burned and went out—all but the forward star low
in the sky. It was the same she had seen that morn¬
ing from London.
But astronomical curiosities could keep her awake
no longer. In front of her, dim in the moonlight,
came presently a long, wide scarring of the earth.
It was the verge of the ruined forest, attained at
last, but impassable at night. She sank down thank¬
fully in the grass.
‘Can’t go further though it’s to save the side¬
real system—and it looks pretty askew as it is. Wish
there was more light to make a nest of some kind.’
She plucked grass with rebellious fingers that
seemed almost on the point of fainting from her
hands in weariness, gathered that grass about her,
and tucked a heap under her head for a pillow.
She was acquiring the habit of nest-making. She
chuckled, drowsily, remembering the name hung
above the door of a foolish little bungalow she had
seen on the way to Wiltshire in the Morgan. It had
made her writhe then. Now it was merely funny
and pitiful.
It had been ‘Wee Nestied
A leg uncovered, she bent forward to heap that
with the crinkling dry grass, and so doing raised
her head into the soft blow of the ground-wind of
night-time But more than that. The strange star
was nearer, burning with a fiery radiance just beyond
the forest, it seemed—or beyond the dark waste
258 GAY HUNTER
where the forest had been. Some celestial catas¬
trophe?
Too weary to think it out, she laid her head down
and fell instantly into a dreamless sleep, sleeping
undisturbed throughout the night but waking with
the first of the sunlight on her face. Waking, she
sneezed violently, what of the hayseed and dust in
her nostrils, and sat erect to sneeze yet again. So
doing, she saw something inexplicable.
The strange western star had not gone out with
the coming of the day. Instead, it was fountaining
a slow pillar of smoke far away, into the sky.
Sleep vanished from her eyes as that realisation
came upon her. She jumped up and sought for
Houghton’s spear, and heard herself singing—
scraps and odds and ends of anything, though her
whole body still ached with tiredness, and that skin¬
less heel had been rubbed red anew in the marchings
of the previous day.
Star? It was the glow and smoke of a distant
camp-fire.
VII. SPEARS
§1
The long flint-spears glistered in the rain as the
army of the Folk marched down on London.
Sights and sounds innumerable imprinting their
memories on her mind, thought Gay, but never one
deeper than this—the glister of spears in the spear-
drive of the rain. Perhaps it came, the thrill of
it, out of the past she denied, memory and thought
of the multitudes of men who had marched on
strange forays with shining spears. . . . She looked
up at a sky from which summer had fled—at the
whirlwind sweep of great dank clouds before a
hurrying north-easter. Remote in the east great
banks of fog bellied and spread under the drive
of the rain.
They had crossed through the quagmires of the
burned forest, scrambling and splashing amidst the
pools of black mud and mud-made ash, slipping
and stumbling down long corridors of calcined ash
in the trail of Gay and Rem. Now they were march¬
ing south-east through the ruined pasture where she
had seen the clover hangj and all about them the
259
26o
GAY HUNTER
grass rustled and shivered under the steady pelt
of the rain. Gay brushed her hair back from her
forehead and turned to look at Rem, and saw his
smile as he caught her gaze, and remembered that
other look on his face when he saw her come
stumbling from the edge of the ruined forest to the
camp-fire of the hunters twelve hours before. . . .
She had said, in his arms, ‘I’ve come back and
you—oh, you’re still real. I thought that damned
Beam—Oh, Rem!’
The other hunters had crowded about, patting
her, laughing at her, questioning her in pantomime
and incomprehensible words, Allalalaka with an
arm round as much of her as Rem himself left
unshielded (and that had not been much). She had
looked round at their friendly faces, and suddenly
gone limp, happy and tired, willing and content for
Rem to carry her to the camp-fire and bring her
food and stare at her with the amber clouds light¬
ing and lighting in the smoky depths of his eyes.
Then she had remembered.
fRem, I’ve been to the Shining Place. I know
the way into it now, and we must take the hunters
there—immediately.’
Tt is the madness of the Voices?’
fThat—and worse. When can the hunters set
out?’
4When you are fed.’
She had crammed the last handful of dried deer-
SPEARS
26l
flesh into her mouth. Saving savagery from civilisa¬
tion was certainly bad for table-manners. ‘I’m fed
now. Come on.’
So they had come, dismantling their camp-fire
by the simple procedure of kicking apart its embers.
Then they had followed Gay through the black
swamp-land which the Beam had made of the great
forest-stretch. At one time, slipping and falling, she
had glanced down and seen that they were crossing
the littered surface of the television-plateau. For a
second a flash of doubt and fear had smitten her
and then passed, her mind and feet busied with
searching out a possible path ahead. She had found
Rem’s hand a help.
‘Did you see the Beam that night I left you—
the Fire-Beam that fired the trees?’
He told her how the thing had whistled above
their encampment—they had been encamped in the
lee of a hill—and swept away a copse on a distant
hill, and burned into a feather of flame there awhile.
He had known it was part of the madness at the
Shining Place. . . . No, he had not feared for her.
He had prevailed on the hunters to wait for five
days. On the sixth they were to march down on the
Shining Place and end the madness themselves. . . .
Gay nodded, mud-splashed. ‘As we should have
done at first, I suppose. But no, not all of us would
have escaped the Beam in the Forest. We must
hurry now, for they’ll guess we are coming.’
262
GAY HUNTER
Spears in the rain. She glanced back at their
shine and something rose singing in her heart at
sight of the hunters’ faces, grim and kind and
enduring, the tramp of naked feet and lovely bodies,
east, into the fogs that shrouded London. Dead
tired though she was, she knew she could march in
this fashion all night if they so willed it.
But they did not will it. The rain seeped off into
a thin drizzle before sunset. They came to a
drenched copse of laurel-bushes and beyond that
firs towered on a little eminence. Here, by the
copse, the hunters camped, cutting off branches from
the distant firs and erecting them as breakwinds.
Then they dried great bunches of grass in front of
the fires they made and spread these as beds, spread¬
ing a single bed for Rem and the Gay Hunter.
Squatting under a breakwind, Gay watched the drift
of the rain and toasted her toes, very near the fire,
and ate the tough pemmican of the hunters. Allala-
laka brought her water in a leaf, and it was while
he stood over her and she raised her head from
drinking, that down in the east, where the darkness
was waiting, there rose again into the sky, flaring
and lighting all the eastwards horizon, the Beam
of Fire.
Gay dropped the leaf and leapt to her feet. The
Beam was piercing upwards, fire-filled and whirling,
in a long straight line through the raining drive
of the nimbus clouds. But even as she looked she
SPEARS
263
saw it bend and branch 
She was screaming and crying to the hunters as
they stood and stared. Rem had gone away a little
distance, but now he too had seen the Beam and
came running. Gay seized his arm.
‘They are turning it on usd
He nodded, and gestured at the countryside
around. The fir-tree knoll Gay could see through
the raining evening haze a quarter of a mile away.
Impossible to make that. From their encampment
the land sloped steeply down to that series of shal¬
low vales that debouched on London itself. There
was no cover.
She raised her eyes again to that terror in the
sky.
In the sky no longer. The Beam was whirling
down through the rain. Northwards there sounded
a sizzling crackle, and through the rain they looked
and beheld the firs on the top of the distant knoll
burst suddenly into flame. Then, with a hiss as of
snow on a fire, the long grasses caught and flamed
and shuddered and went out as the Beam swept
south. ... Its glare lighted up all the countryside.
Gay turned to Rem.
‘Thanks for a lovely time. The Folk will kill
that Beam yet. My dear ’
She buried her face against him. Abruptly he
shook her with iron fingers. She looked and saw a
sight that suggested the sky gone mad.
GAY HUNTER
264
The Beam had lifted from the earth, and, crooked
and ragged, was whirling about the dome of the
heavens in an insane dance. As it wavered and spun
it changed from red and yellow to blue, to a deep
violet Gay had never seen before, a violet that was
somehow green. Then abruptly a great puff of
darkness rushed up the Beam and devoured it,
leaving nothing in the eastern sky but the cloudy
onset of the night.
Through the steady drive of the rain came the
chorus of the lost peewits.
§ii
Twice in the night Gay awakened under the
breakwind beside her sleeping hunter, seeing the
soft lowe of the fires, hearing their hiss and spatter
as some gust of the wind drove on them the spears
of the rain. In that night there seemed no real dark¬
ness, it was as though a thick veil had been drawn
over the countryside j and beyond the fire-glow the
great rain-wasted meadows lifted up to peer in the
camp with grassy faces. . . . She curled down
again, and dozed for a little, and awoke, exasper-
atedly. Now> what kept her awake?
London. What would happen when they reached
London?
Eighty spearmen, with bows and arrows, besides
SPEARS
265
their spears. To bring these against Houghton
operating the Fire Beam. She visioned a belch and
glow down the long ways littered with moss and the
droppings of the giant Rats—a flare and a puff of
smoke as a charging line of hunters shrivelled to
nothing—Rem’s body here flaming in a second’s
agony and vanishing into ash. Hopeless attempt!
She put her arm around the sleeper, in a desperate
gesture of protection, and he turned round and held
her, and that was comforting. She saw his sleep¬
ing face dimly, and put up a hand to wipe back
the blown hair from his forehead. She felt towards
him an odd tenderness again—not of the lover, but
for one immeasurably dear and immeasurably
younger than herself. Her hand brushing through
his hair sent it crackling with a faint fire. Even
his hair was alive and vibrant. ... So for a little
she lay in an idle tenderness, and then again that
sickening depression touched her, so that she drew
away from the warm contact of his legs and chest,
and crouched by herself a moment in the shelter
of the breakwind. The near fire was dying and she
heaped it afresh with the rubbish from the firs—
cones that spat and spluttered and kindled smokily,
handfuls of twigs from the boughs they had used
in making the breakwinds. Leaning out to the fire
the wind blew on her hand and puffed wetly up
her arm. She stood up and looked around and the
rain fell softly in her face.
266
GAY HUNTER
All the countryside slept, wan and dim, and
silent, but for that unending wail of peewits. The
fire kindled by the Beam in the north had long been
extinguished. Westwards, through the drive of the
clouds, an occasional star showed and then closed
from sight as a fresh whisper of the rain came mur¬
muring across the sodden grass. Around, behind
their breakwinds grouped in a shallow half-moon
in front of the fires, the hunters slept soundlessly,
unguarded, uncold, unfrightened. All but herself.
And once again that feeling of unreality des¬
cended upon her—stiflingly, for an instant, so that
she gasped with wrenched lungs and panting lips,
so that before her eyes the scene flickered and faded
and she felt herself hurtling down an abyss of dark
terrors. Rem!
The thought of him steadied her. What on earth
caused that odd faintness? Unreal?—these, the
realest and lealest and truest folk she had ever
known? Real and splendid, all of humankind that
had survived the filthy night of long ago. . . .
The human drift! She remembered a book with
that title she had once read, a book that foretold
strange worlds and lives in the future, and forgot
(as all those books had forgotten) that not even in
the sunshine does humankind drift. Always and
eternally (she thought, the rain in her face, her eyes
half-closed as she looked at the sleepers) we march.
Even these Folk in this second Golden Age—they
SPEARS
267
were out on an Expedition terrible and strange, into
the wastes of time and space, on that conquest of the
universe Men may not deny.
The sleeping expedition! She thought if she
could make songs and sing them, she would surely
do so now, in this storming autumnal night while
the army of the hunters lay around her, and an
unguessable morning was hastening up from that
darkened east. Sing: sing the glory of the human
spirit and the human body, unconquered and
tremendous and lovely, lovely in its passion and
pity, sing—
(We mix from many landsy
We march from very fary
In hearts and lips and hands.
Our staffs and weapons are
The light we walk in darkens
Sun and moon and star?
The rain ceased to blow on her face, lifted by
the wind and hurled sleeting over the dark Middle¬
sex lands.
'Out under moon and stars
And shafts of the urgent sun
Whose face on prison-bars
And mountain-tops is one,
Our march is never ending
Till Time>s march be done.*
268
GAY HUNTER
After all, what though they died in London?
They would not die alone. Houghton and Lady
Jane would go with them—though the last of them
had to crawl a half-cindered corpse to shove a spear
into the pitiful fools. And there were other Ex¬
peditions. Always. Man did not die. Even civilisa¬
tion had failed to kill him. Men died, but Man
lived, a child as yet, but immortal and terrible in
the eyes and hands he lifted to the skies. The fevers
of religion and science and civilisation had passed
away, and out again, in the wastes of Time, spear
in hand, he stumbled on a quest undying, with rain
in his face and the wail of peewits to companion
that endless trek. . . .
She sank down again beside Rem, with wet face
and hair and a drowsy content in her heart.
The rain whispered eastwards in the night.
§ iii
The wolf woke her, licking her face. It was
barely daylight, and only a few of the hunters,
yawning, were as yet on their feet, their brown
bodies glistening. All about was fog as fine and
thick as carded wool—it was impossible to see more
than a few yards beyond the encampment. The
rain had ceased, and overhead the sky was breaking
a powdered pearl. Gay coughed in the fog, and
SPEARS
269
pushed aside the wolf, and shook Rem awake.
‘Time we marched again. Sleepy? ’
He had come instantly awake, as always. And,
also as always, he made no reply to a question which
did not need it. He stood up and found his spear
and went and scattered the near fire. Gay sought for
her own spear, yawning.
They filed away into the westwards mist, Gay and
Allalalaka in the lead. It clung about their faces
and shoulders like cobwebs,, soft and slimy, and
under that soft blanket no whisper of a sound came
to their ears. But all the eastwards world was afloat
with a pale dun colour, and under that colour lay
London. Gay knew that a direct march of an hour
would bring them within a few miles of the Shining
Place, and suddenly she realised the benison of this
fog. They would creep into London unobserved in
the great periscope.
At that thought she sent back word for Rem to
come up, and whispered her plan to him. The fog
seemed to call for whispering. He nodded and said
something to Allalalaka, and then fell back, calling
to the other hunters. Presently their pace had in¬
creased to a long, loping trot. Steadily the radiance
in the east grew deeper in colour, changing from
faint yellow to a dun red. The fog was thinning.
Worse than that, Gay, running, now felt on her
skin the soft stir of the wind. Slowly the mist-veils
about their progress thinned. The hunters’ lope
GAY HUNTER
270
slowed down as they came to the crest of a hill, and
a sudden premonition of disaster awaiting them
touched Gay.
cRem! We can’t go further. The mist’ll have
cleared in a minute and we’ll be seen.’
The expedition came to a halt and spread out and
squatted on the dripping grass. Rem and Gay stood
erect, staring into the lightening East. Now it was
possible to see far down the hill into the moving
shroud that covered the ruined city. Gay whispered
again:
‘We must make the hunters hide here all through
the day and then creep down on the Shining Place
at night.’
He nodded, and went calling softly among his
fellows. When he had finished with that, he came
back and sat down. Gay still stood. He put up
his hand on her leg in the old, remembered caress,
and she drew her eyes from that peering into the
east, to look down at him. . . . And again that
sickening feeling of unreality caught her.
She sat down, shaking. The grass was damp and
soggy. She leant against him, albeit her eyes would
not leave the east.
‘Yes, please. This is an invitation for you to
cuddle me. Tight as that.’ In the security of his
touch she lay for a little against him, silent. His
young, bearded face looked down on hers. She said:
‘Your heart has a nice, even thump . . . I’m all
SPEARS 271
nerves. Don’t bother to understand. Hadn’t the
Folk better lie flat in the grass?’
‘When the mist has cleared.’
It was unveiling as though Middlesex were lift¬
ing ensaflfroned fingers to undrape her face. A sweet
and lovely and desolate face, Gay thought. A bird
cheeped damply somewhere in the grass. The wind
shook the wet hay on the hill-brow, gently, so that
through the silence of the morning one heard the
fall of the spilled drops of water from the grass-
heads. Suddenly the wind veered and Gay’s small
nostrils quivered in the smell of the sea. And there,
five miles or so away, the giant pillars and pylons
of London came marching tremendous out of the
haze.
A low cry and murmur came from the hunters.
None of them had ever seen it before. Bestriding
the sunrise rode the giant Sea-House with the water
lapping below it,, its thousand storeys gaping win¬
dowless westwards. Nearer rose the Tower of the
Phallus, the great symbol of shame and sterility
pointing its rounded end high in the sky—it towered
a mile into the clouds of the hasting autumn morn¬
ing. Pylons and towers, a gleaming city as the mist
unrolled its banners from dizzying ledges a half-
mile above the ground and wreathed down from
terrible crags to the sweep and long flight of giant
buttresses thundering into the dawn. Gay’s heart
came into her mouth.
272 GAY HUNTER
Lovely, fantastic and terrible London! Twenty
thousand years since she had looked back on it from
that hired Morgan, in the cottage by Pinner.
Pinner! Suddenly it came on her why that hay-
field with the clover had seemed so familiar. Oh
God, it couldn’t be, and yet—that was the hayfield
behind Nurse Geddes’ cottage!
Twenty thousand years—and it had survived un¬
changed by chance or time. Nurse Geddes and her
sharp, bright face and voice and—oh, those biscuits
she had made and fed to a girl long ago—a girl
called Gay Hunter, not the Gay Hunter, a girl who
had had a pleasant wit and a flippant manner and
multitudes of dreams. . . . She opened her eyes
and blinked something from the eyelashes. The
mist-webs, damn them.
Suddenly she sneezed, violently, tremendously,
so that even Rem started. And it was in the moment
of her sneezing that above the distant cruciform
building there awoke a strange glow.
It was as though a pale-blue fire had been kindled
within it, and poured out its unburning flame from
every crack and cranny of the giant structure. The
whisperings and murmurs among the hunters died
away. All had seen it, suddenly springing to being.
The blue altered and became a glaring, still slash
of colour in the heart of London. It tore at the
eyes. Gay put up her hands to shield her face. The
air was deathly still.
SPEARS
273
And then the earth shook, like a frightened horse,
and then went mad. It bucked and clawed and
heaved. Gay’s hands fell from her eyes to clutch
at the ground and in that instant, as once with the
Cities of the Plain, God smote on the Shining Place.
§iv
By noon that day Rem and Gay had succeeded in
gathering together the surviving hunters, fifty-three
in all. The rest lay mangled to pulp under the
raining fire and brimstone boulders which spewed
from the earth, in the place where London had been,
and bombarded the countryside around as with an
enormous fall of meteors. And in that place where
the Shining Place had risen a great waste volcanic
stretch flamed and spat in spume as the boiling
waters of the sea poured in.
VIII.
SING FOR ME
§1
With the coming of the morning a kind of faint
milkiness formed in the tops of the trees—not light,
but neither was it the lower darkness that shrouded
the sleeping earth. Turning in sleep, Gay saw that
light and felt the morning chill that came with it,
and relapsed into sleep again. When next she turned
and sought a more restful position it was with the
blaze of the sunshine on her face.
Rain and cloud had cleared away. The hunters
were yawning and stretching cramped legs and
peering around them in a day that might have been
the beginning of a summer. Rem was missing and
Gay set out in search of him, drawn by the sound
of splashings beyond the copse where they had slept.
She came on him standing upright in the midst of a
miniature stream laving himself with water so that
he rippled and shone as though his flesh were made
of brown quicksilver. Flinging back his hair from
his face, he saw her and waved. Shivering Gay tip¬
toed into the water beside him.
splash me as welld
274
SING FOR ME
275
He did so, generously, while she wriggled and
protested and then was moved, what with the cold¬
ness, to a frenzied retaliation. They were cascading
the water upon each other when the other hunters
came trooping down to join in the fun. There
seemed a unanimous agreement that Gay ought to
be splashed. She ran from them at last, and climbed
the hillside to sit there and dry in the sun and wind,
looking down at the horse-play in the stream.
Dripping and grinning, some of the hunters went
back to the camp for their bows and vanished across
the pastures in search of breakfast. Rem came
striding up to sit beside Gay. She made room for
him on a thick tussock of grass, and went on with
the task of wringing out her hair and then combing
it with her fingers into the drying maw of the sun.
Remote and far off in some morning-touched tangle
of jungle, a cock began to crow.
In the east, against the sunrise, the sky was tipped
with smoky torches.
‘Rem—we’ve finished with all that! Can you
realise it? I can’t yet—quite. Finished with that
horror that darkened our lives from the Shining
Place—we need never lose each other for a day
again! . . . Need we?’
He also was looking at that far torch-glow that
had been London. ‘Not until we go hunting again.’
‘We’ll do it together in future ’ Suddenly,
in the morning of clarity, she saw life unfolding
GAY HUNTER
276
page on page of pictures for her delight—far and
far into the future, into old age. She saw herself
with the hunters marching back to the Dam in the
Chilterns, to the welcome of the Folk, the kiss of
Liu, to days of play and laughter and good fellow¬
ship as the autumn stretched to winter. Then into
the North with the migrating Folk, on the heels of
the great herds, into days and suns innumerable,
Rem beside her, Rem to teach her his songs, to help
her grope a way up that dim stair of understanding
and new knowledge the Folk were mounting.
Winter in a cave, the roar of a fire within, the roar
of storms without, no clothes or furnishings to be¬
devil life or hide the stark, fierce face of things.
Life like a song, terrible and true, stark as them¬
selves. Children—children like brown naked flames,
singers and hunters. . . . She turned to Rem and
saw him a misty outline beside her. Her heart came
in her mouth as she groped for his hand.
c. . . . these idiotic fits! Faint for food, I sup¬
pose. Pull me up, like a dear.’
The hunters brought back pears and pig-flesh, and
they cooked the latter, and drowsed through break¬
fast, and then put out the fires and set out on an
unhasting trek back to the Chiltern Dam.
All that day the expedition straggled miles to
right and left of the central march of Gay and Rem,
hunting berries, hunting deer, odd hunters lying
down for short naps in the sun, hunters wandering
SING FOR ME
277
in singing groups, hunters merging in and out of the
brown gold of the autumnal landscape as though
part of the play of sun and shadow themselves.
(And out of the earth and sky.) Knowledge of that
kinship entered your heart and you walked the ways
of the wind and the ways of the sun of no volition
of your own at all, but the volition of all life that
was, that moved to being in grass and tree and the
flicker of a bright bird’s wing. A kind of Indian
Summer had touched all the countryside j the bees
had come back. Never-seen, the la'p-la'p-lap of the
peewits sounded over distant meadows. And again,
this time as they sat and ate dinner under the shade
of poplars by a deep, brown pool, Gay heard the
far crowing of the jungle-cocks. . . . The sound
vexed her to a moment’s unreasonable, foolish fear.
So, sun-tired, late in the afternoon, they breasted
a crest and Gay cried out in recognition of the place
—the hayfield where long ago she had lain in sleep
and rest that time she pushed down to the Shining
Place as a spy; where, long before that, dimly now
she remembered, she had sat at tea with Nurse
Geddes’ comfortable bulk beside her. She called to
Rem, ‘Can we camp here for the night?’
‘If the others will.’
They stood and hallooed the others, and these
straggled in in hazy groups. Here was as good a
place as any. In a little there rose the reek of wood
smoke in the air and the equal reek of torn flesh
GAY HUNTER
278
being hacked for cooking. Gay lay on her back and
smelt them both, and hated neither, beyond hate or
love, as the little German poet-man had said—
though he said it of other things, she remembered:
horrific humans he had dreamt, poor, whiskered
soul in a waistcoat and thick Teutonic pants! What
dreams men had dreamt of past and future in the
flicker of the brief dreams that were their own lives!
The hunters dreamt seldom or ever. They were
without inhibitions or complexes or all the rest of
the sad, futile fantasies civilisation and Sigmund
Freud had once foisted on men. They did not dream
of life—they lived it and sang it instead.
She called to Rem and he came and sat beside her,
with that absent caress, with the lights coming lit in
the amber depths of his eyes. (Sometimes those
eyes frightened you a bit, like a fool—seeing they
could light for you so! But remote—so chillingly
remote on heights of thought your feet had never
found.)
And suddenly, though she had said nothing, he
seemed, for the first time, to understand. She was
to remember that when all else had grown dim, that
sudden speech and look—as though mankind had
looked back a compassionate moment before it
turned from the shadows to the daylight:
‘There are many Songs—this we live, and that
which you lived. And all are part—’ he hesitated
in his soft sing-song, and sought for words in that
SING FOR ME
279
alien tongue of the Voices—‘of a greater singing.
Even though it may not be with us, you have still
your own Song.’
‘Not with you? Rem—what do you mean?’
He shook his head, hair and beard blown softly
in the wind. It was near twilight again. All along
the verge of the western sky England slept ruined,
and desolate, and free. A stag was belling, tremend¬
ously, far in the north. A murmur of laughter
came from a group of hunters about a fire. For a
moment a frozen fear took Gay. She said, deso¬
lately, ‘Oh, Rem, all this has just been an adven¬
ture and a play until now! But—there are other
things. . . . All lives and times Songs in the mind
of a Great Singer, none real, none unreal, none but
is somewhere sung. . . . Sing for me, Remd
§ii
She saw a distant hunter, against the sunset,
sitting in almost the position she herself sat in, hands
clasped around his knees. Sitting and lying, the
hunters listened: in the sweep and fall of the
shadows Gay saw herself in her listening com¬
panioned by a multitude. The fires flickered and
blew and sent their long writings of smoke up into
a sky that drowsed from dull azure slowly into a
velvet black.
28o
GAY HUNTER
And Rem stood singing.
At first, in the first slow chords of his singing,
Gay had sat and listened with that feeling of lost¬
ness, of an alien, still upon her. Then the warmth
of his voice warmed her, drew her up beside him
where he stood and sang. He sang not now of sleep
and love and lust and the mating of bird and beast
as once before, long before, he had sung in the Vale
of the White Horse. He sang now of birth, she
thought, and the coming of the birds in Spring, and
winds in the boughs of the apple-trees and the stars
at night in the apple-blossom. He sang of the
Spring of a World that had forgotten winter, yet
where winters came and passed unceasingly, unend¬
ingly, amidst the lives of men. He sang of the
vigour and the madness of youth, the deep days of
silence that companioned manhood, the coming at
last of old age and rest: these, the mere background
for the essence of his Song. For he sang of Life as
a fine bright fire, tremulous, tremendous, against
the dead wastes—Life and its splendour in the
touch of hands, in the touch of lips and bodies and
words, in its pain, in its pleasure, its tiredness, its
madness. Living himself, he sang the Psean of all
life, a naked savage in a ruined pasture beyond the
wreck of man’s greatest dreams. . . .
And Gay saw the sunset wheel down over them
and over that ruined England that knew not its ruin,
over dreams mislaid as a sleeper at morning mis-
SING FOR ME
28l
lays the fantasies of night. The dusk came striding
up the waving grasses in bands of a flickering blue
that changed to black, black raiders against the grey-
green monotone of daylight. Under the throbbing
chords of the Song rose no other sounds, no twitter
of birds, as the Singer faced the Night. . . .
Then again over Gay there swept a great desolate
fear. She tried to cry out to Rem, and could not,
and covered her eyes. And in that moment, far away
on the verge of darkness, as the strange world in
the pits of Time faded from her sight, she heard a
drowsy crowing of cocks.
T
IX. THE RETURN
§i
‘There now, I knew there was nothing much
wrong with you, bless you, though you’ve been
sobbing and shivering all night that way. Such
carryings-on!’
Sheets. A window. A window-curtain flapping
against a grey light. And—oh, most impossible
of all—the face of Nurse Geddes. Gay gave a
moan.
‘Nurse! What’s happened? How did I come to
be here?’
‘Carried you in myself, of course. How you got
out there in the meadow I can't imagine. All this
nudist nonsense—Gay, I’d ’a’ thought you’d ’a’ had
more sense. Browned like one of them horrid little
Mexicans—scratched and worse. Don’t know why,
either, I surely smacked you well enough in the old
days.’
Gay sat up, dizzily. ‘Listen, Nurse, where did
you find me?’
‘Why, Gracious Goodness, haven’t I been telling
you? Out in the paddock there, among the clover,
about ten last night when I went on a stroll before
282
THE RETURN
283
going to bed. There you were, lying stiff and stark
—nearly lost my supper looking at you. Then I
says, “Well, it’s Miss Gay—damn if it isn’t, and
them folk at the Pewsey hotel writing about her
leaving her luggage and her clothes in her room
and her bill not paid. H’m—left her clothes all
right—” So I picked you up and brought you in
here.’
‘For God’s sake, open that window!’
‘But, lovey, it’s raining. There, there, you’re
still light-headed. Pll make you some gruel and
you can tell me where you’ve been this last six
weeks ’
‘Six weeks?’ Gay lay down again and closed her
eyes. ‘Six weeks. . . . Oh, Nurse, Nurse!’
Nurse Geddes was cuddling her, fiercely, protec¬
tively. ‘There, there, don’t tell me if you can’t!
Don’t worry your dear head about it, Miss Gay.
You can go and do what you like, though I do wish
you’d at least wear them hikers’ shorts.’
‘What, twenty thousand years away? . . . I’ve
been twenty thousand years away in the future,
Nurse, and I was sitting in a meadow the last of it,
the Folk round about, and Rem was singing ’
‘Well, well, the carryings-on they do go in for.
I never did hold with them funny trips. You lie
still now, lovey, and I’ll bring you some ’
‘Nurse!’ Gay sat up, still dazed, but slowly
awakening, in the lovely unaccustomed luxury of
GAY HUNTER
284
sheets. ‘I’m not mad, and Pm not ill, but Pve been
twenty thousand years away. And I haven’t come
back for gruel. Tell me: Is there still some coffee
left in the world?’
§ii
There was coffee. There was a cigarette. There
was the blessedness of clean sheets. There was the
beatitude of stepping out of bed and placing one’s
feet on a soft and furry rug, and standing and star¬
ing at oneself, unforeshortened, un-caricatured, in
a full-length mirror. Staring in wonder at some one
inches taller than that night at Pewsey, taller, with
thinner cheeks and hips, and blue eyes not Gay
Hunter’s 
Where were the hunters now? Now? This was
the now! The folk—Rem—Wolf—the Chiltern
Dam—the Forest of Dreadful Night, the London
of the Hierarchs—they were fading like a dream
though she dropped her cigarette and dropped on
her knees in a passion of desolation and reached
after them, sobbing. . . . and all around, impossible
as them, a twentieth-century morning was breaking.
Real—this or they? And then she remembered
Rem’s words: that there were many Songs—Songs
thick as leaves on an autumn gale, all of them real,
all unreal.
THE RETURN 285
‘Oh, Singer, Singer, but I never thought you’d
be missing from any one I sang!’
Outside she heard the drowsy cheep of wakening
birds. She crept to the window and stared out at
that strange day coming on an England that was
the living England of her own life-time. A motor-
lorry purred up a distant road. Very far off, its
voice muted in distance, a train hooted under some
tunnel. The sky was barred with red. Down in the
kitchen, breakfast-making, she heard Nurse Geddes.
Back—she was back again and her own world
wakening again. . . .
Houghton and Lady Jane—somewhere, some¬
how, had they come back as well?
And then, far down in the east, across the roofs
and pastures of Middlesex, she saw the glow of
London under the eastern sky. London—London
there yet, alive, with its teeming streets where no
great Rats hunted the black lions or ruins towered
roofless to heaven—where still men lived and hoped
and dreamed—might yet, as in all the world, build
them a life that would never know the nightmare of
the Hierarchs. London: and beyond it the Atlantic,
its ships, New York, all the days that would yet be
hers who had dreamed a dream to give her a
guerdon for life. Frightened? Afraid? Hopeless?
When there were still pity and kindliness in her
world, humour and love and irony?
Nurse Geddes heard her whistling as she sought
286
GAY HUNTER
unaccustomed clothes. Like a starling.
That was better.
She loaded a tray and puffed genially upstairs.
There are many Songs.
THE END
By the same Author.
THREE GO BACK*
Compton Mackenzie {Daily Mail). “Mr. Mitchell is as
plausible in his own way as Mr. H. G. Wells or Jules
Verne, and it will be an obstinate reader who cannot
muster up enough ‘make-believe’ to enjoy from the first
page to the last this admirably well-told romance. . . .
This young man has written a strange and exciting story,
and readers will guess from the length of my notice that
it provides, if Mr. Mitchell will allow me so trite an
expression, much food for thought.”
Christopher Morley {Saturday Review of Literature).
“I hope your reviewer doesn’t seem too breathless about
this glorious book. Here’s an adventure story for intelli¬
gent people, written by a man of science and a man of
feeling. . . . Romance and science and a genius of good
story-telling are here wound up together in perfect effi¬
ciency. This is what the Literature of Escape was
intended to be, the sheer magic of the impossible. In
the candour of its ticklish situations Three Go Back is
charmingly of to-day; in its poetic vision it is as old as
Homer or the oldest fairy-tale. I should like to imagine
100,000 people laying aside the woes and colics of our
flea-bitten life to revel in this cosmic adventure.”
* A premier recommendation of the American
Book of Month Club.
* Published in England, February, 1932.
* Published in America, May, 1932.
* Translated into Danish, June, 1932.
* Translated into Swedish, August, 1932.
* Translated into German, January, 1933.
A
