Yfcr (5^ { 'l'z'
National Library of Scotland
Kllllllllll
*8000393391*
THREE GO BACK
MR. LESLIE MITCHELL is also author of
Hanno, or the Future of Exploration, an essay in
prophecy;
Ancient America, a series of five archaological papers ;
And four novels:
Stained Radiance: A Fictionist’s Prelude
The Thirteenth Disciple: Being Portrait and Saga o
Malcom Maudslay TT _ TKr „ ,
The Calends of Cairo {Introduced by H. G. Wells and
'Leonard Huxley)
The Lost Trumpet : Swansong of Colonel Saloney
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
THREE GO BACK
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34 Paternoster Row E.C.4
7
MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
AT GAINSBOROUGH PRESS, ST. ALBANS,
BY FISHER, KNIGHT AND CO., LTD.
To
R. L. MEGROZ
Aly dear Megro^,
I wrote this novel as a holiday from more serious things and
in dedicating it to such distinguished critic as yourself might be
guilty of some temerity were it not for the fact that convention
will forbid you reviewing me. But though this may be my loss I
hope it will not be your gain l
You've impressed on me that a novel should need neither foot¬
note nor forenote. I agree—and happily escape the reproach of
either by embodying their contents in the dedication.
First, the continent where Clair and Sinclair and Sir John
adventure : Many respectworthy people in all ages have professed
to find the ocean shores littered with proofs of its one-time existence.
, The litter leaves me unconvinced.
Secondly, the character and characteristics here and elsewhere
ascribed to the “grey beasts" : There is not a scrap of proof that
the “grey beasts" were ferocious and gorilla-like ; for that matter,
and to employ a very just Irishism, there is not a shred of evidence
that the gorilla in his native haunts behaves in the least like a
L, gorilla.
But though these two apparent fictions, continental and tem¬
peramental, are employed for dramatic effect, they have no direct
bearing on the main theme and contention of the story, which seem
to me quite unassailable.
And with these cautions I pass you the book in company with
my gratitude and good wishes. Alay you like the reading of it as
much as I enjoyed the writing !
Yours,
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
London, 1932
CONTENTS
Book I: WHERE ? WHEN ?
CHAPTER PAGE
I. The Wreck of Magellan's Cloud . . 15
II. The Survivors . . . . .36
III. In an Unknown Land . . -50
IV. The Lair ...... 67
V. And I’ll Take the Low Road . . 84
VI. The Hunters . .. . . .100
VII. A Slip in the Time-Spirals . . 114
VIII. A Lover for the Dark Days . . 131
IX. Sir John a Prophet: His Prophecy . 150
X. Exodus ...... 164
Book II: WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
I. Clair Lost . . . . . .181
II. A Light in the South . . -197
III. All Our Yesterdays . . . .212
IV. Now Sleeps the Crimson Petal . . 227
THE LAST. I Shall Rise Again . . . 244
IX
BOOK I
WHERE ? WHEN ?
‘'And if jou conquer the air, and if you
compass the earth.
It will not sweeten your death, and it will
not better your birth.
And though you out-distance the swallow,
with a song of pride in your mouth.
What if you barter your soul for speed—
and forget the way to the South} *
—OLAF BAKER
,d.
THREE GO BACK
Chapter I: THE WRECK OF MAGELLAN’S CLOUD
Subchapter i
SKYEY monster, cobalt and azure-blue, it sailed
xjl out of the heat-haze that all morning had been
drifting westwards from the Bay of Biscay. It startled
the crew of the Rio tramp and there was a momentary
scurry of grimy off-watches reaching the deck, and a
great upward gape of astounded eyes and mouths. Then
the second engineer, a knowledgeable man and discreet
in friendship with the wireless operator, voiced explan¬
ations.
“It’ll be the airship Magellan’s Cloud on her return
voyage.”
The Third spat, not disparagingly, but because the
fumes of the engine-room were still in his throat.
“Where to ?”
“Man, you’re unco ignorant. Noo York. She’s
been lying off for weather at Paris nearly a week.
Sparks says. Twenty o’ a crew and twenty passengers
they 11 be payin’ through the nose. I’ll warrant.
. . . There’s Sparks gabblin’ at her.”
A subdued buzz and crackle. A tapping that presently
ceased. High up against a cloudless sky, the airship
quivered remoter in the Atlantic sunshine. The Third
spat again, forgetfully.
“Pretty thing,” he said.
The Rio tramp chugged north-eastwards. One or
15
i6
THREE GO BACK
two of the crew still stood on deck, watching the
aerial voyageur blend with the August sunhaze and
the bubble walls of seascape till it disappeared.
And that was the last their world ever saw of the
airship Magellan's Cloud.
Subchapter it
Clair Stranlay could not forget her lover who had
died on the wire outside Mametz.
A series of chance encounters and casual conver¬
sations overheard had filled out in tenebrous vignettes
each letter of the cryptic notice. Killed in Action. He
had died very slowly and reluctantly, being a boy
and anxious to live, and unaware that civilization has
its prices. . . . And at intervals, up into the coming
of the morning, they had heard him calling in delirium :
“Clair I Oh, Clair !”
Fourteen years ago. And still a look, a book, a
word could set in motion the little discs of memory
in her mind, and his voice, in its own timbre and
depth and accent, would come ringing to her across
the years in that cry of agony. . . . She thought,
stirring from the verge of sleep in her chair of the
Magellan's deserted passenger lounge : ‘What on earth
made me think of that now ?’
“. . . no, madam, quite definitely I’ve nothing to
say about my deportation from Germany.”
“Oh, please, Dr. Sinclair, do give your side of the case.
Just a par. I’m Miss Kemp of the C.U.P., you know,
and it would be rather a scoop for me. Shame to miss
it.”
“I’ve nothing to say. And I’ll be obliged i%ou’ll
stop pestering me.”
WHERE? WHEN?
17
“Oh, very well.”
An angry staccato of heel-taps broke out and
approached. Clair, deep in her basket-chair, saw the
doorway to the swinging gallery blind for a moment
its glimpse of ultramarine skyscape. Miss Kemp,
short, sandy, stocky, stood with flushed face, biting
her lips inelegantly. Then, catching sight of Clair, she
came across the cabin in her religiously-acquired svelte-
glide. Clair thought, with an inward groan : ‘Oh,
my good God, now I am in for it.’
She closed her eyes, as if dozing. Unavailingly.
The near basket-chair creaked under the ample, svelte-
moulded padding of Miss Kemp.
“Hear me try the beast ? You’re not asleep, are you ?
I saw your eyes open. . . . Hear me tackle him ? Hope
I’m not disturbing you. . . . Beast. Hear his answers ?
But I’ll give him a write-up that’ll make him and his
precious league squirm, though. Dirty deportee.”
“Dirty what ?” Clair opened reluctant eyes.
“Deportee. Haven’t you heard of him ?”
“Quite likely. Who is he ?”
“Why, Keith Sinclair, the agitator who’s been travel¬
ling about Europe organizing the League of Militant
Pacifists. Says that another war’s inevitable with the
present drift of things and that it’s up to the common
people to organize and shoot down or assassinate their
militarists and politicians at the first hint of it.”
“Sounds logical.” Clair thought: ‘And I hope I sound
bored enough. ... No result ? Oh, well.’ Aloud :
“And what happened ?”
“Haven’t you heard ? He was kicked out of Italy
a month ago and deported from Germany last week.”
“What fun. And where’s he going now ?”
‘Beast. To gaol, I hope. Returning to America in a
hurry to attend some demonstration in Boston.” Miss
B
18 THREE GO BACK
Kemp’s chair creaked its relief as she rose. “Hear
that Sir John Mullaghan’s on board ?”
“I'm awfully weak on the auricular verb. . . .
Never heard of him at all.”
“Oh, you must have. Awfully important. Conser¬
vative M.P. Head of the armaments people. I’m off
to get his opinion of the trip. Rather amusing, you
know; he and Sinclair have met before.”
“Have they ?”
“Didn’t you hear ? Awful shindy. Sir John was
making a speech at some place in Berlin. Said there
would always be wars and that honest men prepared
for them. Sinclair stood up in the audience and inter¬
rupted and started a speech on his own. Told them
things he’d seen on the Western Front when he served
there as a doctor with the Canadians. Sickening things ;
he’s a beast. Women began screaming and some were
carried out fainting. . . . Ended up by saying that the
obvious duty of the British public was to cut Sir John
Mullaghan’s throat, and the Germans to hamstring
Frau Krupp. . . . Police had to interfere, and that
led to his deportation. Sinclair’s, I mean. Wonder if
Sir John knows he’s on board the Magellan ?”
“I haven’t heard.”
“Will be a scoop if they say anything when they
meet. Did you hear—oh, there’s Sir John crossing to
the steering cabin. I’ll get him now.”
Clair cautiously raised the eyelids below her pencilled
brows. Like talking to the bound files of the Nervs-
Chronicle.
The lounge was empty, the passengers in their cabins
or on the galleries. Miss Kemp’s high-heeled footfalls
receded. . . . Blessed relief. Please God, why did you
make Miss Kemps ?
Clair closed her eyes again, and remembered with a
WHERE ? WHEN ?
J9
drowsy twinge of amusement various gossip para¬
graphs in the less sanitary weeklies. Inspired by Miss
Kemp. No doubt as to the inspirer. . . . What had
they been ?
WE’D LOVE TO KNOW—
it’s true a certain lady novelist acquires a new “lover for
me with every fresh novel she writes ?
she s made this clair to the seventh successor in the role ?
And if London isn’t rather tired of both her literary and per¬
sonal promiscuities ? r
Poor Miss Kemp ! That had been the case of Gilbert
Trolden she’d heard of and exploited at half-a-crown
a par. And poor Gilbert with his desperately respectable
sins—how the pars had shocked him ! Almost burst
his bootlaces. Didn’t realize Miss Kemp must live,
or that he himself suffered from quite as many pitiful
spites and repressions as the journalist. . . . That
article in Literary Portraits had been sheer claw, how¬
ever.
BEST-SELLER FROM THE SLUMS
Miss Clair Stranlay, whose real name is Elsie Moggs
born in a tenement house in Battersea . . . best-seller in England
?nc|, Amenca- • • • Mr Justice Melhuish, delivering judgment
in the case of her banned novel, “Night on Sihor”, said : “It is
obscene and unclean ...”
Most of it true enough, of course. Except for the
Elsie Moggs bit. A bad mix-up that on Miss Kemp’s
part when searching out antecedents in Thrush Road.
She d missed the story of how fond Stranlay mere had
been of novelettes—even to the extent of christening
her daughter out of one of them . . .
Romance ! Romance that had beckoned so far away
beyond the kindly poverty of Thrush Road !
My dear girl, you came this voyage for rest, not
reminiscence. Now’s your time.’
But not even the Magellan’s soothing motion could
20
THREE GO BACK
recapture that drowsiness from which the sound of
Miss Kemp’s attempted interviewing has evicted her.
She thought, with a laggard curiosity : ‘Wonder if
the Sinclair man is the one with the beard and false
front who ate so hard at lunch ? Throat-cutting is
probably hungry work. Let’s look.’
And, as idly as that, she was afterwards to reflect,
she stood up and strolled out of the Magellan's lounge
and out of the twentieth century.
Subchapter in
Below her, trellis-work of wood and aluminium, and,
in the interstices, the spaces of the sun-flooded ocean.
The beat of the engines astern sounded remote and
muffled. There was not a cloud.
Then, raising her eyes, she saw Keith Sinclair for the
first time. Pie turned with blown hair at the moment,
glanced at her uninterestedly, looked away, looked
back again. He scowled at her with the sun in his
eyes.
He saw a woman who might have been anything
from twenty-five to thirty years of age, and who, as a
matter of data, was thirty-three. She was taller than
most men liked, with that short-cut, straight brown
hair which has strands and islets of red in it. And, indeed,
that red spread to her eyelashes, which were very long,
though Sinclair did not discover this until afterwards,
and to her eyes, which had once been blue before the
gold-red came into them. Nose and chin, said Sinclair’s
mind methodically, very good, both of them. She
can breathe, which is something. Half the women alive
suffer from tonsilitis. But that mouth . . . And he
definitely disapproved of the pursed, long-lipped mouth
WHERE ? WHEN ?
21
in the lovely face—the mouth stained scarlet with
cochineal.
“Weather keeping up,” said Clair, helpfully.
He said : “Yes.” She thought: cMy dear man, I
don’t want to interview you. Only to collect you as
a comic character. Sorry you haven’t that beard.’
Nearly six feet three inches in height, too long in
the leg and too short in the body. All his life, indeed,
there had been something of the impatient colt in his
appearance. He had a square head and grey eyes set
very squarely in it; high cheek-bones, black hair, and
the bleached white hands of his craft. Those hands lay
on the gallery railing now.
“Wish I could go and smoke somewhere,” said Clair.
“So do I.”
“A little ambiguous.” He stared rudely. Clair said,
suddenly : “Goodness !”
Startled, they both raised their heads.
The metal stays below their feet had swung upwards
and downwards, with a soggy swish of imprisoned
lubricant. The whole airship had shuddered and for a
moment had seemed to pause, so to speak, in its stride.
Sinclair leant over the gallery railing.
“Hell, look at the sea.”
Clair looked. The Atlantic was boiling. Innumerable
maelstroms were rising from the depths, turning even
in that distance below them from blue-green to white,
creamed white, and then, in widening ripples, to dark
chocolate. . . . Clair felt a kindly prick of interest in
the performance.
“What’s causing it ?”
The American was silent for a moment, regarding
the Atlantic with a scowl of surprise. He said:
“Impossible.”
“What is ?”
22
THREE GO BACK
“I said impossible.” He brushed past her towards
the doorway of the lounge. Paused. “See the dark
chocolate ?”
Clair nodded, regarding him with a faint amusement.
“Well, don’t you see it must have come from the
bottom ?”
“So it must.” She peered down again. “And it’s
deep here, isn’t it ?”
“Perhaps a couple of miles.” He disappeared.
News of the submarine earthquake spread quickly
enough. Passengers crowded the galleries. Miss Kemp
coming to the side of Clair in some excitement.
Another passenger, the inescapable portrait-hound,
appeared with a camera of unbelievable price and
intricacy, and snapshotted the Atlantic closely and
severely. From the flashing of lens in the gallery of
the engine-house it was obvious that a member of the
crew was similarly engaged.
“The chocolate’s dying away,” said Clair Stranlay.
So it was. The Atlantic had reassumed its natural
hue. The maelstroms had vanished, or the airship had
passed beyond the locality where they still uprose.
For, after that first shudder, the Magellan's Cloud had
held on her way unfalteringly. The snapshotter beside
Clair wrinkled a puzzled brow.
“Very strange. I could have sworn there was a ship
down there to the south only a minute or so ago. It’s
disappeared. . . . Quick going.”
The airship beat forward into the waiting evening.
Sky and sea were as before. But presently there
gathered in the west such polychrome splendour of
sunset as the Magellan's commander, who had crossed
the Atlantic many times by ship, had never before
observed.
And suddenly, inexplicably, it grew amazingly cold.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
23
Subchapter iv
The airship’s wireless operator fumed over dials and
board, abandoned the instrument, went out into the
miniature crow’s nest that overhung his cabin, glanced
about him, and beat his hands together in the waft of
icy air that chilled them.
“Damn funny,” he commented.
He went back to his cabin and rang up the Magellan's
commander. The latter had donned the only overcoat
he had brought on board and was discussing the weather
with the navigator when the wireless operator’s voice
spoke in his ear.
“Is that you, sir ?”
“Yes.”
“I’m sorry, but it seems impossible to send that
message.”
“Eh ?”
“I thought there was some fault in the set. I’ve
been sitting here for the last two and a half hours
trying to tap in on France or a ship. There’s no message
come through. I’ve sent out yours, but there’s been no
reply.”
The commander was puzzled. “That’s strange, Gray.
Sure your instrument is functioning all right ?”
* Certain, sir. I’ve broadcast to the receiving appar¬
atus in the passengers’ lounge and they heard perfectly.”
Damn funny. Get it right as soon as you can, will
you ?”
“But . . . right, sir.”
The commander put down the telephone and turned
to give the news to the navigator. They were in the
steering cage and it was just after eight o’clock. But
the navigator, instead of standing by with his usual
24
THREE GO BACK
stolid expressionlessness, was at the far end of the cage,
staring upwards fascinatedly.
“Gray says the infernal wireless has gone out of
order. Bright look-out if we go into fog over the
banks. . . . Hello, anything wrong ?”
“Come here, Commodore.”
The commander crossed to the navigator’s side. The
latter pointed up to a darkling sky which, ever since the
sudden fall of temperature, had been adrift with a multi¬
tude of cloudlets like the debris of a feather-bed. The
commander peered upwards ineffectually.
“Well, what is it ?”
“Look. Up there.”
“Only the moon. Well ?”
“Well, it’s only the 22nd of the month. The new
moon, in its first quarter, isn’t due till the 27th. And
that one’s gibbous.”
“Good Christopher !”
They both stared at the sky through the lattice of
airship wire, amazed, half-convinced that some trick
was being played upon them. From behind the clouds
the moon was indeed emerging, round and wind-
flushed and full. It sailed the sky serenely, five days
ahead of time, taking stock of this other occupant of its
firmament. The Magellan's commander brought his
glasses to bear on it. It appeared to be the same
moon.
“But it’s impossible. The calendar must be wrong.”
“The only thing possibly wrong is the date. And
it’s not—as of course we know. Look, here’s to-day’s
Matin."
He showed it. It was dated the 22nd.
The airship Magellan's Cloud beat forward into the
growing radiance of moonlight which had mysteriously
obliterated the last traces of the day.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
*5
Subchapter v
Looking out from his cabin window as he prepared
to undress and go to bed, the American, Keith
Sinclair, was startled. He was aware that it had grown
intensely cold, as indeed was every soul on board the
Magellan's Cloud, whether on duty or in bed. But now
his gaze revealed to him the fact that the airship’s hull
was silvered with frost in the moonlight. Frost at this
altitude in August ?
For a moment he accepted the moonlight. And then,
standing in the soft hush-hush of the flexible airship
walls, realization of the impossibility of that moon
came on him, as it had done on the navigator.
‘Now how the devil did you come to be there ?’
The moon, sailing a sky that was now quite clear,
cloudless and starless, made no answer. The notorious
deportee whistled a little, remembering a Basque story
heard from his mother—of how the sun one morning had
risen in the semblance of the moon. . . . But that
didn’t help. It wasn’t nearly morning yet. And it was
an indubitable moon.
Still whistling, he felt his pulse, and, as an after¬
thought, took his temperature. Both were normal.
Meanwhile, the cold increased. Sinclair pulled open
his cabin door.
‘Look up the navigator again. He had precious
little explanation of that submarine earthquake, but the
moon’s beyond ignoring.’
But, crossing the lounge, glimpse of the dark sea¬
scape beyond the open door drew him out on the
passengers’ gallery. There it was even colder, though
there was no gale. The ship was travelling at a low
altitude. Below, smooth, vast, and unhurrying the
THREE GO BACK
26
rollers of the Atlantic passed out of the near sheen of
moonlight into the dimness astern. . . . Abruptly
Sinclair became aware that the gallery had another
occupant.
Clair Stranlay; in pyjamas, slippers, and wrap.
Intent on the night and the sea. But, imagining for a
moment that she had air-sickness, the American groped
along the handrail towards her.
“Feel ill ?”
She started. “What ? Dr. Sinclair, isn’t it ? I’m quite
well.”
“You’ll be down with pneumonia if you stay
here.”
She thought: ‘You must be a blood relation of the
Irish policeman—“You’ll have to be moving on if you’re
going to be standing here.” But I’d better not say so.
Thrush Road imperence, Miss Kemp would diagnose it.’
Aloud :
“Don’t think so. I do winter bathing and icy baths.
What’s happened ?”
“The cold ?”
“Yes.”
“Early bergs down from the north, I suppose.”
“But it’s not nearly the season yet.”
He had seen something in the moonlight below them.
He caught her arm. Clair brushed the short, red-tipped
hair from her face with one hand, clung to the handrail
with the other, and looked down.
Out of the deserted Atlantic was emerging what
appeared to be an immense berg—a sailing of cragged,
shapeless greyness upon the water. The moonlight
struck wavering bands of radiance from it, and for a
moment, in some trick of refraction, it glowed a pearled
blue as though lighted from within. It passed under¬
foot, and as it passed a beam of light shot down from
WHERE ? WHEN ?
27
the navigating cabin, played upon it, passed, returned,
hesitated, hovered, was abruptly extinguished.
But not so quickly that the two occupants of the
passengers’ gallery failed to see an accretion such as
no iceberg ever bore. For beyond the berg had showed
up a long, sandy beach, and beyond that the vague
suggestion, a mere limning in the moon-dusk, of a
flat and comber-washed island.
Sinclair swore, unimpassioned. “I’m going to find
out about this. Are we making for the Pole ?”
Clair, to her own amusement, found herself
shaking with excitement. “But what could it have
been ? There are no islands on the France-New York
track.”
“We’ve just seen one. I’m going to find out what
the navigating cabin knows about it. Unless we’re
Pole-bound—and that’s nonsense—the submarine earth¬
quake may have thrown it up.”
“It must have done other things as well, then.”
Clair began to stamp her feet to warmth. The rest of
her felt only the glow of well-being that falling tem¬
peratures nowadays gifted her unfailingly as guerdon
for much braving of wintry dips. “Haven’t you noticed
something entirely missing from the sea—even though
this is the crowded season ?”
“What ?” He sounded impatient.
“Ship-lights. Not one has shown up since sun¬
set.”
“Who said so ?”
“One of the riggers I spoke to just now.”
She saw, dimly, his puzzled scowl, and thought,
with the unfailing Cockney imp for prompter : ‘Dis¬
approving of the Atlantic again !’ He said :
“The submarine ’quake we saw couldn’t have
affected shipping. It was quite localized. If it had
28
THREE GO BACK
caused great damage the wireless bulletins they post in
the lounge would have told us.”
“Don’t they ?”
The same thought occurred to them simultaneously.
Clinging to the handrail, she followed Sinclair into the
cabin. The case with wireless transcriptions was hung
against the further wall. They crossed to it, looked at
it, and then looked at each other. Clair’s face close to
his, a flushed and lovely and easily-controlled face, he
found for a moment irritatingly disconcerting.
No notices had been posted since five o’clock in the
afternoon.
“Look here, Miss ”
“Stranlay.”
“Stranlay, I’m going to find out about things. Some¬
thing extraordinary seems to have happened. But if
any of the other passengers come out, don’t alarm
them.”
Clair shook her head, regarding him with upraised
brows. “Much too.”
“Eh ?”
“Dictatorial. . . . And I alarm people only in my
books.”
“Oh. Do you write ?”
“Novels.”
“Oh. I’d go to bed if I were you. I’ll tap on your
cabin door and let you know what I hear.”
Fortunate she hadn’t seen anything peculiar in the
moonlight itself . . .
Passing through the hull, he stopped at a window
and himself noted another happening.
The moonlight was pouring lengthwise into the
long hull of Magellan's Cloud, not striking due in front,
as a moment before.
The airship had turned southwards.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
29
Subchapter vi
Clair Stranlay arrived in her cabin meditating the
deportee from Germany. And, looking out at the far,
moon-misted horizon of the Atlantic, she thought:
‘He’d never heard of me ! Publicity, where are thy
charms ? . . . Any more than I of him. But how
desperately important folk we are to ourselves !’ She
yawned. ‘Must insert that reflection in my next serial.
It can’t have been used in more than a million novels
already.’
And, because that Cockney insouciance of Battersea
days seldom deserted her, and she had long ceased to
feel even mildly vexed that there lived a world which
devoured not best-sellers, she forgot the matter. She
slipped out of wrap and pyjamas, rubbed her white and
comely self until she felt warm and pringling and the
possessor of an altogether enjoyable body. A spear-
beam of moonlight splashed on her shoulder and she
raised her head, with the red lights in her hair, and
looked at it. She put up her hand.
‘The blessed thing feels almost cold.’
Something quite extraordinary had happened to
the Magellan's Cloud. But what ? Delay it much reaching
New York ?
‘Oh, my good God !’ sighed Clair, getting into bed.
For, escaping England and boredom to go and
lecture in America, the awfulness of the ennui, hitherto
concealed, that lay awaiting her appalled her. The
shore. Miles and miles of ferro-concrete, macadam,
pelting rush and automobilist slither. Packing of clothes
—scanty though they were. Mooring mast. Elevator.
Customs shed. Forms. Beefy officials. Forms. “Are
you an atheist or anarchist ?” Solemn no, instead of
30 THREE GO BACK
writing, as the spirit always moved her, “Yes, both,
and then some.” Auto. Becky Meadow’s house.
Literary gathering. Stylists. (Accent on the sty.)
Prudent pornographers. Platform. Brisk skittishness
with tiredness commingled—correct best-seller atti¬
tude. Husky American voices stilling. “The New
Schools in England.” Woof, woof, woof. Woolf,
Huxley. Blah, blah, blah. And rows and rows of eyes
set in faces more like those of paralytic codfish than
human beings—faces of women combed and powdered
and bathed to excess, living hungrily on the mean
grubbing and sweating of mean and shrivelled hes.
Shes ! Oh, my good God, the shes of the world !
And, thinking of them, Clair’s mind-mask of insouci¬
ance, brittle and bright, quivered and almost showered
her soul with its flakes. Sometimes, indeed, it cracked
and fell about her entirely, and she’d hear that boy on
the wire outside Mametz, and her desperate distaste
for her work, her lovers, her life and her century
crescendo’ed in her heart into the cry of a prisoned,
tortured thing. . . .
‘Oh, forget it. The mess of our lives ! Civilization !
Ragged automata or lopsided slitherers. Our filthy
concealments and our filthy cacklings when the drapings
slip aside ! Our hates, our loves—oh, my good God,
your own loves, my dear ! Better to have kept to the
memory of the boy always, perhaps—and turned to a
shrivelled virginal spite like the Kemp. Your lovers.
. . . Poor simulacra ! Remember them ? Sneak and
strategy. Devotion. Starryeyedness. Thrill and mascu¬
linity. . . . Instead of 
‘What else ? What else is there ? Physical love or
life—could there ever be anything very much better ?
For we’re not human beings, of course. There was
never such a thing as a human being. We’re only apes
WHERE ? WHEN ?
31
repressing our blood-lusts and sex-lusts and God alone
knows what unhygienic lusts—in the interests of feeding
better ! And the repressions’ll grow and grow as we
eliminate the beast entirely. Exit Tarzan. . . . And
when that’s happened there won’t be a codfish in a
N’York audience but’ll be an intelligent codfish, dis¬
cussing hormones with its intimate hes. Utopia. . . .
See old Moore ’
But here Clair Stranlay found the blessedness of
sleep now close upon her. Her body had lost its surface
cold. She curled up her toes a little under the quilt—
they were even, uncramped, and shapely toes—and
sighed a little, and wished she could smoke a cigarette,
and fell fast asleep—and was shot out of sleep five
minutes later by a knock at the door of her cabin.
Subchapter vii
Yes, come in,’ she called, good-tempered even
then; good temper had dogged her through life. Was
it morning already and had they sighted New York ?
But there was no daylight, only moonlight, entering
the cabin window. She reached up to the switch and in
the pallor of electric light looked at the American.
Keith Sinclair, shutting the door, thought: ‘Pretty
thing a thought in the circumstances that was a
considerable feat of detachment.
“About what’s happened, Miss Stranlay— Can I sit
down ?”
“Can you ?” said Clair, blinking her eyes and looking
round the small cabin. Then, entirely awake, she solved
the difficulty by drawing herself into the smallest space
possible. “Yes, do, here on the side of the bed. If
anyone comes in you can be taking my temperature.”
THREE GO BACK
52
She put her hands behind her head and leant back
comfortably.
The American grunted. “It’ll probably want taking
when I’ve told you the news.” He brooded, his high
cheek-boned face dourly thoughtful. “We’re in this
together, in a fashion, I suppose, seeing we were the
first to see the submarine ’quake. Well—the com¬
mander refuses to talk sense. Scared I alarm the others,
I suppose. But he has to admit that no wireless mes¬
sages have been received since the time of the submarine
disturbance, though the apparatus of the Magellan
appears to be perfectly in order. Also, he’s turned the
airship south.”
“South ?” Clair’s hands dropped from her neck at
that. “Then we’re not making New York ?”
“We’re not”—grimly. “We’ll be lucky if we fetch
up in Brazil at this rate.”
“Thank God,” said Clair.
“Eh ?”
“Nothing. Not particularly anxious to reach New
York. The codfish can wait. . . . Sorry, I’m still half-
asleep. Nice of you to come and tell me the news.
Why has the Magellan turned south, then, and what
does the captain say about that island with the berg we
saw from the gallery ?”
“Turned south because he’s scared about the effect
of the continued cold on the airship’s envelope. I
don’t wonder, either. I met your garrulous rigger
just now and he says we’re carrying tons of ice. As for
the island—the navigator says we’re mistaken.”
“Astigmatism or booze ?”
He grinned—a softening relaxation. (‘Possibility
that some day he’ll laugh,’ recorded Clair’s imp.) He
said : “Neither in his case and both in ours, he seems
to think. Truth of the matter is that the crew is as
WHERE ? WHEN ?
33
puzzled as we are, but they think if the passengers knew
they’d blame them for all these extraordinary phen¬
omena.” He considered his pyjama-jacketed listener
for a moment. “There’s another thing, Miss Stranlay,
which you didn’t notice. The most serious of the lot,
though the commander refuses to have anything said
about it. It’s the moon.”
“What has it done ?”
“Arrived five days ahead of time. There shouldn’t
be a full moon for another fortnight; there shouldn’t
be a moon at all just now.”
Even Clair felt startled at that. “But—that is the
moon.”
He looked through the cabin window at it. “It is.”
He rubbed his chin impatiently. “And it isn’t. . . .
Eh ?”
“I said : Clear as mud.”
“Oh. It’s a thing not easy to explain.” He stood
up. “But I’ve a telescope with me—probably the
most powerful magnifier on the Magellan—and I’ve
had a peek at the moon through it. Just a minute.”
He was back in less. He opened the cabin window
and poised the telescope on the ledge. Clair sat forward
and looked through it.
“Keep both eyes open,” advised the American.
So she did, and for a moment was blinded in conse¬
quence. The moon was sinking. Stars were appearing,
pallidly. Clair gazed across space. Then :
“Nothing very different, is it ? I’ve looked at it
through the big glass at Mount Wilson. Why—the
nose 1”
The Man in the Moon lacked a nose. Clair turned
her face to Sinclair’s moon-illumined one. He nodded.
“Exactly. That mountain-range on the moon is
missing. Something is happening up there.”
c
34
THREE GO BACK
She thought for a moment, caught a glimpse of a
possible explanation. “Then—the tides are caused by
the moon. Mayn’t that submarine earthquake have been
caused by the change in the moon ?”
“Perhaps. I’m not an astronomer. But something
abnormal has happened to the moon—both to her
surface and her rate of revolution. The submarine
earthquake we witnessed may have been the result.
Probably it’s had other effects in the far north—God
knows what. Bringing down bergs and so forth.”
“And the wireless interruptions due to the same
cause ?” Clair lowered the telescope from her cabin-
window in the Magellan. “Most interesting thing I’ve
seen for years. Pity we’ve explained it all so nicely.”
But, as they were later to learn, they were very far
indeed from having explained it.
Subchapter viii
And presently, while Clair slept again and Sinclair
tried to sleep (for his mind was vexing itself with notes
for his Boston speech to the League of Militant Paci¬
fists), and the commander sat peering at an almanac,
and the navigator peered into the west—a pale shimmer
of daylight arose in the east, lightening the surface of
that strange Atlantic, flowing liquid almost as the
Atlantic itself till it touched the southwards-hasting,
high-slung cars of the Magellan's Cloud. A moment it
lingered (as if puzzled) on that floating monster of the
wastes, and then, abruptly, like a candle lighted for a
hasty glimpse of the world by some uncertain arch¬
angel, was snuffed out. . . . And the navigator from
his gallery was shouting urgent directions into the
engine-room telephone.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
35
It is doubtful if they ever reached the engineers.
For at that moment the nose of the Magellan, driving
south at the rate of eighty miles an hour, rustled and
crumpled up with a thin crack of metallic sheathing.
The whole airship sang in every strut and girder, and,
quivering like a stunned bird, still hung poised against
the mountain-range that had arisen out of the darkness.
The drumming roar roused to frantic life everyone on
board, asleep or awake. Most of the passengers probably
succeeded in leaving their beds, if not their cabins.
On the lurching floors of these they may have glanced
upwards and caught horrified glimpses of the next
moment’s happening.
The airship’s hull spurted into bright flames, green-
glowing, long-streaming in the darkness that had suc¬
ceeded the false twilight. Then the whole structure
broke apart, yet held together by the tendrils of
the galleries and cabins, and, an agonized, mutilated
thing, drew back from the mountainside and fell and
flamed and fell again, unendingly, in two long circles,
the while the morning came again, hasting across the
sea, and the noise of that sea rose up and up and reached
the ears of some on the Magellan . . .
And then suddenly the Atlantic yawned and hissed,
while the dawn passed overhead and lighted the moun¬
tains and hastened into the west.
Chapter II : THE SURVIVORS
Subchapter i
NOW, what happened to Clair Stranlay in that
dawn-wrecking of the Magellan's Cloud was this :
The preliminary shock, when the nose of the airship
drove into the mountain which had mysteriously
arisen out of the spaces of the Atlantic, did not awaken
her, though she twitched in dreams, and, indeed, may
in dream have had a momentary startlement. She
stirred uneasily, though still asleep, freeing her pretty
arms from the quilt during the period that the Magellan
hung, death-quivering, against her murderer. Then,
abruptly, sight, hearing, and a variety of other sensa¬
tions, were vouchsafed to her fortissimo, crescendo.
She heard the first explosion which shattered the
hull of the airship, and leapt up in bed to see through
the cabin window, phantasmagoric against a grey
morning sky, the flare and belch of the flames. She sat
stunned, uncomprehending, the while the floor of her
cabin tilted and tilted and the metal-work creaked and
warped. Then the cabin-door, a groaning, flare-illu¬
mined panel, was torn open, a figure shot in, crossed
to Clair’s bed and caught her with rough hands. It was
the American deportee, Sinclair.
cOh, my good God, he’s been reading one of my novels,’
thought Clair, as his hands touched her. It was the kind
of thing the overwrought hero always did when he
couldn’t abide the fact of the heroine sleeping alone
any longer. . . . She struggled, thinking: ‘Shall I
36
WHERE ? WHEN ?
37
blacken his eye ?’ then ceased from that as, fully awake,
she heard him shout:
“Come on, damn you ! The ship’s a flaming wreck.
. . . Clothes—some clothes !”
He swept a pile into his arms from the locker. Clair
jumped from bed, plucked something—she could not
see what it was—from the floor, and groped across the
cabin after Sinclair. He tugged at the door. It had
jammed. Now, out of the corridor, above the babel
of sounds, one sound sharp-edged and clear came to
them ; a moan like that of trapped cattle. For a moment
it rang in Clair’s ears in all its horror, and then—the
floor of the cabin vanished from beneath the feet of
Sinclair and herself.
Below, the Atlantic.
And Clair thought ‘Oh, God’, and fell and fell,
with a flaming comet in wavering pursuit. Till some¬
thing that seemed like a red-hot dagger was thrust to
the hilt into her body.
Subchapter ii
Breakers, and breakers again—the cry of them and
the splash of them, and their salt taste stale in her
mouth. In and in, and out with a slobbering surge.
Water in pounding hill-slopes, green and white-crested.
Pounding tons of water whelming over into those
breakers. . . . Clair Stranlay cried out and
awoke.
“Better ? I thought you’d gone. ... My God, look
at the Magellan !”
Her body seemed wrapped in a sheet of fire that
was a sheet of ice. She could not open her eyes. She
THREE GO BACK
38
tried again. They seemed fast-gummed. Then,
abruptly, they opened. She moaned at the prick of the
salt-grime.
She and Keith Sinclair were lying in a wide sweep
of mountain-surrounded bay, on a beach of pebbles.
Beyond and below them the sea was thundering. And
out in the bay, a splendour like a fallen star, the
Magellan's Cloud was flaming against a dark-grey, rainy
sky momentarily growing lighter, as if the Magellan
were serving as tinder to its conflagration.
This was not what Clair saw immediately. It was
what she realized as she looked around her. Sinclair
lay at right-angles to her, propped on his arm, vomiting
sea-water in horrid recurring spasms of sickness.
Clair stared at him, sought for her voice, found it
after an interval, manipulated it with stiff and painful
lips.
“How did we get here ?”
“Swam.” The American swayed to his knees. His
high cheek-boned face looked as though the blood had
been drained from it through a pipette. “We hit the
water before the Magellan did, and sank together. Came
up clear of the wreck and I pulled you ashore. . . .
Oh, damn it!”
He was very sick indeed. There was an inshore¬
blowing wind, bitterly cold. With a shock Clair dis¬
covered she was dressed in her pyjamas only. Through
those garments the rain-laden wind drove piercingly.
It was laden now with other things than rain—adrift
with red-glowing fragments of fluff, portions of the
Magellan’s fabric. The Magellan ?
In that moment the airship blew up. A second Clair
saw its great girders, like the skeleton of a great cow,
then they vanished.
The eastwards sky was blinded to darkness in the
WHERE ? WHEN ?
39
flash, Clair and Sinclair momentarily stunned with the
noise of the explosion. Then a great wave poured shore¬
ward out of the stirred water of the bay, leapt up the
beach, snarled, spat, soaked and splashed them anew,
tore at them, retreated. Gasping, Clair saw Sinclair’s
hand extended towards her. She caught it. Unspeaking,
now crawling, now gaining their feet and proceeding
at a shambling run, they attained the upper beach.
Fifty yards away, across the shingle, there towered in
the dimness of the morning great cliffs of black basalt.
Against their black walls Sinclair thought he discerned
a fault and overhang. He pointed towards it and they
stumbled together across sharp stones that lacerated
their feet. Anything to get out of the wind and spray.
Clair almost fell inside the crack in the rock face.
Sinclair crumpled to the ground beside her. Clair heard
someone sobbing and realized it was herself.
“What’s wrong ?”
She looked up at him, her teeth chattering, thinking:
T suppose we’ll both be dead in a minute.’ She said :
“I’m all right.”
Prone, he began to laugh crackedly at that.
Clair stuffed her fingers in her ears and looked out
to sea.
It was deserted. The Magellan's Cloud had disappeared
without leaving other trace than themselves. Green,
tremendous, with tresses upraised and flying through the
malachite comb of the wind, the Atlantic surged over
the spot where the wreck had flamed. An urgent fear
came upon Clair. She shook the American’s shoulder.
“Where are the others ?”
“Dead.”
He had stopped laughing. He lay face downwards,
unmoving. Clair shook him again.
“You mustn’t! You must keep awake . .
40
THREE GO BACK
But she knew it was useless. Her own head nodded
in exhaustion. She laid her face in the curve of her arm
and presently was as silent as he was.
Subchapter Hi
The morning wind died away and with its passing
the sky began to clear. One after another, like great
trailing curtains drawn aside from an auditorium,
sheets of rain passed over the sea. But they passed
north-eastwards, not touching the little bay. Lying
exhausted and asleep in their inadequate shelter under
the lee of the cliffs the two survivors of the airship’s
wreck stirred at the coming of the sunlight. Sinclair
awoke, sat up, looked round, remembered. He whistled
with cracked lips.
“Great Spartacus !”
Wrecked. The Magellan's Cloud blown up. And
cold—the infernal cold . . .
He was in pyjamas—green-striped silk poplin. The
suit clung to his skin in damp and shuddersome patches.
He stood up. His feet were cut and bruised, black with
congealed blood. The salt bit into them as he moved.
Alternate waves of warmth and coldness flowed up
and down his body. He pulled off the pyjama-jacket,
stripped himself of the trousers, and spread the soggy
things to dry in front of the shelter. Setting his teeth
against giving way to the pull of the urgent pain in his
feet, he began to knead and pound his throat and chest
and abdomen and thighs, then took to massaging them,
plucking out and releasing muscles like a violin-maker
testing the strings of a bow. Suddenly something
screamed at him, menacingly.
He glanced up, startled. It was a solitary gull. He
WHERE ? WHEN ?
41
thought: ‘And a peculiar one, too.’ It swooped and
hovered, its bright eyes on the occupants of the shelter.
Man and bird looked at each other unfriendlily. Then
the gull, with slow beating wings, flapped out of sight.
Sinclair resumed operations on his now tingling body.
Behind him, Clair Stranlay began to moan.
He had thought her dead. He wheeled round. Lying
with her face and throat in the sun, she was moaning,
again unable to open her eyes. Her hair was a damp
mop. The American frowned at her, lightedly, con¬
sidered a moment, reached out for his pyjamas, found
them almost dry, donned them.
Then he knelt down by his fellow-survivor, straight¬
ened out the crumplement in which she lay, loosened
at waist and throat her ornate sleeping suit of blue
and gold, and began with great vigour to massage her
body into such warmth as he had induced in his own.
The muscles of her stomach, usually a very flat and
comely stomach, were bunched in cold. He smoothed
that out, gently enough. She quivered under his hands.
Her eyes opened at last.
She sat up, remembering at once, as he himself had
done.
“Any of the others turned up ?”
He shook his head, searching her body the while
with skilful, nervous fingers. She became aware of
that, surprisedly.
“Thanks. What about yourself?”
“I attended to myself before tackling you. The
sunlight woke me.”
“I’m horribly thirsty.”
“So am I. I’ll go and look for water in a minute.”
“Where do you think we are ?”
“Somewhere in the Bay of Biscay. Coast of Portugal,
perhaps.”
42
THREE GO BACK
Clair’s undrowned imp raised a damp head. “Hope
it’s the sherry district. People inland must have seen the
wreck of the Magellan. They’re bound to come down
to the shore, aren’t they ?”
“Bound to, I should think. Feel certain enough to
rise now ?”
She stood up with his arm supporting her. Instantly,
in the full sunlight, she began to shiver. He
nodded.
“Strip and do exercises. Know how ? Right. I’ll
go and look for water and see if any people are coming
down the cliffs. Don’t overdo things. Shout for me if
you feel faintness coming on.”
He went, limping bloody-heeled. Clair stared after
him till his black poll vanished round a projection of
rock, and then emerged slowly from her dejected sleep¬
ing-suit. She thought, hazily: ‘ “Exercises. . . .”
Honest to God Amurrican ones. This can’t be happen¬
ing to me. It’s a scene out of a novel.’
Her feet, like Sinclair, she discovered bloody, though
not so badly cut. Excepting its craving for water, her
body in the next few strenuous minutes acquired com¬
fort and familiarity again. The pyjamas steamed in the
sunlight; ceased to steam. In ten minutes they
were dry. She was putting them on when Sinclair
returned.
“There’s water round to the left—a cascade over
the rocks. Can you walk ?”
She essayed the adventure, gingerly. “Easily.”
Out in the full sunlight she stopped to look round
the bay. Desolate. The navigator, the commander,
Miss Kemp—a fit of shuddering came on again. She
covered her face with her hands.
But the horror lingered for a moment only, and
then was gone. She turned to the American, a pace
WHERE? WHEN?
43
behind her, waiting for her, a grotesque figure in his
shrunken pyjamas, his blue-black hair untidily matted.
He stood arms akimbo, scowling at the sea. A gull—
there seemed but one gull in the bay—swooped over
their heads. Clair thought, after that one swift under¬
glance : ‘We must look like a bridal couple in a Coward
play. But I’d better not say so.’
She became aware that the silence around them was
illusory. It was a thing girdled by unending sound, as
the earth is girdled with ether. The tide was no longer
in full flow, but the serene thunder of the breakers was
unceasing. Clair’s voice sounded queer to herself as
she spoke, as though voices were scarce and alien things
in this land.
“Funny no Portuguese have come down to look for
the wreck.”
“Damn funny.” The scowl went from his face. He
looked at her expressionlessly. He glanced up at the
surrounding walls of basalt. “They’ll come. You’d
better have some water.”
The pebbles underfoot were slimily warm. From the
sea a breath of fog was rising, like a thin cigarette-smoke.
Not a ship or a boat was in sight, nothing upon or
above the spaces of the Atlantic but a solitary cirrus
low down in the north-eastern sky. Clair’s heels smarted.
The American limped. They turned a corner in the
winding wall of cliff and were in sight of the waterfall.
In distance it seemed to hang bright, lucent, unmoving,
a silver pillar in a dark phallic temple. Clair loved it
for its beauty ; she had the power in any circumstances
to love beauty unexpected and unwarranted. She bent
and scooped from it a double handful of water. She
gasped.
It was icily cold. Some drops splashed through her
jacket. They stung like leaden pellets. She shivered
THREE GO BACK
44
and, squatting, rinsed her mouth and laved her face.
Sinclair looked down at her; knelt down beside her.
They scoured their faces in solemn unison. Standing
up, Sinclair looked round about him, involuntarily, for
a towel. Clair wiped her face with the jacket of her
pyjamas. Sinclair followed suit. Wiping, he suddenly
stayed operations.
“Here’s someone at last.”
He pointed towards the leftward tip of the bay. A
black-clad figure was descending the inky, sun-laced
escarpment, apparently less steep at that spot than
elsewhere. It was descending in haste. It had descended.
It stood hesitant, glancing upwards, not towards them.
Clair put her fingers to her mouth and startled the bay,
Sinclair and the stranger with a piercing, moaning
whistle which the rocks caught and echoed and
re-echoed.
“Stop that!” said Sinclair, angrily.
He was to see often enough in succeeding days that
look of innocent, amused surprise on the lovely face
turned towards him. The black-garmented figure had
started violently, seen them, stood doubtful a moment,
but now, with gesticulating arm, was coming towards
them.
“I can’t speak a word of Portuguese,” said Clair.
“Can you ?”
There was a pause. Then :
“It won’t be necessary. I don’t suppose he knows
Portuguese himself.”
“No ?” Puz2led, Clair examined the nearing
stranger. He was finding the going punishing. He
stumbled. His features changed from a blur to dis¬
cernible outline. “Who is he ?”
“A fellow-passenger on the Magellan. Sir John
Mullaghan.”
WHERE ? WHEN ?
45
Subchapter iv
“I was washed ashore at the far peak of the bay when
the Magellan's Cloud struck the water. I imagined I
was the only survivor.”
The grey-haired man with the gentle, sensitive face
was addressing Clair. She held out her hand to him.
‘T’m Clair Stranlay. Dr. Sinclair rescued me.” She
glanced from one to the other, thinking: ‘Don’t
bite. . . .’ “You know each other ?”
The American smiled thinly, but otherwise took no
notice of the question. Sir John Mullaghan began to
unbutton. Clair said, wide-eyed : “What’s wrong ?”
“You must wear my coat. Miss Stranlay.”
“No thanks. I’m quite comfy. However do you
come to be wearing your clothes ?”
“I found it too cold to go to bed, and was sitting up
studying some documents when the wreck occurred.”
His small, neat form was clad in the shrunken caricature
of a dress suit. Collar and tie were missing, the breast
of the shirt very limp and muddied. Sinclair glanced
sideways at his feet and scowled again. Shod in thin
pumps that were at least some slight protection. . . .
Clair said: “Let’s sit down. What did you see at the
top of the cliff?”
They sat down, Clair and Sir John. Sinclair remained
standing. Clair folded one shapely knee over the other,
and twisted a little on the boulder, thinking : ‘Oh,
my good God, how I would like some coffee and a soft
chair to sit in !’ She repeated her question to the new
arrival.
“—and what made you come down so quickly ?”
The armaments manufacturer was sitting with his
grey head in his hands. He looked up.
THREE GO BACK
46
“A lion, Miss Stranlay.”
“A—what ?”
“A lion. One of the largest brutes I have ever seen.
It stalked me close to the cliff-head.,, He trembled
involuntarily.
Clair glanced at Sinclair, glanced back at Sir John,
looked up at the cliffs. The Atlantic said : “Shoom.
Surf. Shoom.” The cirrus cloud trailed its laces across
the face of the sun, and for a little the faces of the three
derelicts on the beach were in patterned shadow. “A
lion ? But I thought we were in Portugal ?
“I don’t know where we are. But this is not the
coast of Portugal. At the top of the cliff there is a
further terrace-wall to be climbed. It is fringed with
bushes and trees. I expected to get some view of the
country from there and went up about half an hour
ago.”
“What happened ?”
“I pushed through the fringe of bushes until I came
to a fairly open space. I was certain that I would see
some village near at hand, or at least houses and some
marks of cultivation.” He paused. The Atlantic lis¬
tened. “There are no houses and the country is quite
wild. It is natural open park-land, dotted with clumps
of trees, stretching as far away as one can see. And on
the horizon, about five or six miles distant from here,
are two volcanoes.”
“‘yfQlcjjQoes ?” The American was startled into
speech. “You must have been mistaken.
“I have quite good eyesight, Miss Stranlay.”
The American bit his lip. Clair said : Where do
you think we are, then ?
“Somewhere on the coast of Africa.
“But it’s much too cold. And I never heard of
volcanoes on the coast of Africa.
WHERE? WHEN?
47
“There are no volcanoes on the coast of Africa.
Most likely the lion was some beast escaped from a
menagerie.”
This was Sinclair. Sir John Mullaghan flushed.
Clair, wondering bemusedly if there were ever an arma¬
ments manufacturer who looked less the part, won¬
dered also if the beast of which he spoke had had any
existence outside the reaches of a disaster-strained
imagination. She looked again at the cliff-top, shining
in the cool sunlight. “We’ll have to go up there and
look for food, anyhow. I’m horribly hungry.”
All three of them were. It was nearing noon. They
licked hungry lips. Both men, if for different reasons,
had been too preoccupied to realize the emptiness
within them. Sinclair, peering up at the cliffs in the
breaker-hung silence, thought: ‘Hungry ? As hell.
But if this patriot warrior didn’t dream, there’s a lion
up there. Still—without food we’ll never last another
night.’
Clair thought: ‘Now, if this were a good novel of
wrecked mariners, we’d toss up for it to see which was
to eat t’other.’ And she began to giggle, being very
hungry and somewhat dizzy.
“Miss Stranlay !”
She regarded the American placidly. “It’s all right.
I was thinking of a funny story.”
“Oh.”
“Yes.” She stood up, suddenly decided. “Wrecked
people sometimes eat each other if they can’t get other
food—at least, they always do in my profession. De
rigueur. Let’s climb the cliff and see if the lion’s gone.”
“Come on, then,” said Sinclair, shortly, striding over
the shingle. They followed him, Sir John Mullaghan
dubiously, Clair satisfiedly, and once surreptitiously
trying to rub some feeling into her oddly-numbed
4g THREE GO BACK
stomach. Sinclair was making for the point ascended
and descended by the armaments manufacturer. His
survey of the cliffs had told him that no other spot was
climbable.
They went on along the deserted beach. The tide was
going out. Sinclair glanced back, casually, halted in
his stride, stared, abandoned the other two, strode past
them.
“Wait.”
They looked after him. Ten yards away he bent over
something at the wet verge of shingle. He picked it
up. It glittered, wetly. He shook it vigorously. Clair
called : “What is it ?”
“An eiderdown quilt.”
So it was. Brought nearer in Sinclair’s arms, Clair
recognized it.
“It’s off my cabin-bed in the Magellan ! I d know those
whorls anywhere. . . . That was the thing I must have
picked up when you came to get me.”
“Lucky that you did.”
“Why ?” She regarded it without enthusiasm. “It’s
very wet, isn’t it ?”
“It’ll dry. And the nights are likely to be cold.
“But—” Clair looked out to sea, looked round the
deserted bay again. The possibility that this was not,
after all, a few hours’ lark struck upon her. “We’ll be
rescued before then.”
Neither of the men spoke. Sir John passed a grey
hand over his grey hair. Sinclair s comment was the
usual impatient frown. . . . They resumed their
progress cliffwards, the barefooted refugees slipping on
the moist pebbles. Sir John in slightly better case. The
thin, sun-flecked wind bit casually through pyjama-
fabric. At the foot of the cliff-ascent, hearing a swish
of wings, Clair looked back.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
49
The bay’s solitary seagull was following them.
Clair held out her hand to it. At that, as if frightened
by the gesture, it turned in the air in a wide loop, and
planed away steeply down towards the retreating tide.
The American was speaking to Sir John.
“You’ve got shoes. Will you lead ?”
The armaments manufacturer hesitated only a moment,
nodded curtly, and began the ascent. The silence but
for his scrapings over the rock was more intense than
ever.
Sinclair and Clair followed, the American in a little
beginning to swear violently underbreath because of
his cut feet. Clair said : “Say something for me as
well.”
He glanced at her—almost a puzzled glance—from
below his fair, unhappy brows. Then he went on.
Clair, panting, poised to rest. She was more than a
little frightened, though she refused to think of the
fact. . . . Where were they ? And what on earth was
going to happen ? And how long would her pyjamas
last ?
Sinclair’s toiling back, quilt-laden, reproached her
sloth. Sir John Mullaghan had almost disappeared.
From the shore the circling gull saw the three strange
animals—it had never seen such animals, nor had any
gull on the shore of that strange Atlantic ever seen their
like—dwindle to spider-splayed shadows against the
face of the cliffs, dwindle yet further to hesitant, fore¬
shortened dots on the cliff-brow, and then vanish
for ever from its ken.
»
Chapter III : IN AN UNKNOWN LAND
Subchapter i
THREE days later, and the coming of nightfall.
Almost it came in countable strides. All the
afternoon the line of volcanoes beyond the leftward
swamps had smoked like hazy beacons, like the whin-
burnings on a summer day in Scotland. They had
drowsed in the clear, sharp sunshine that picked out
so pitilessly the hilly, wooded contours of the deserted
land. Swamp and plain and rolling grassland, straggling
rightwards forest fringe, swamp and plain and hill
again. Unendingly. But with the westering of the
sun these things had softened in outline, blurred in
distance, and now, on the hesitating edge of darkness,
the great chain of volcanoes lighted and lighted till
they were a beckoning candelabrum, casting long shadows
and gleams of light over leagues of the bleak savannah.
The coming nightfall hesitated a little on the stilled
tree-tops of the great western forest, and then, with
uncertain feet, walked westwards, delicately, like Agag,
to meet the challenge of those night-beacons kindled
far down in the earth’s interior. So, walking, it paused
a little, as if astounded, by a spot in the tree-sprayed
foothills that led to the volcanoes’ range.
Pqj- in. all that chilled and hushed and waiting
expectancy, were three things that did not wait, that
bore human heads and bodies and cast them anxious
glances at the astounded and brooding nightfall. For
three sunsets now the nightfall had come on those three
hasting figures. Each time they were further south,
5°
WHERE? WHEN?
51
each time they greeted the astounded diurnal traveller
with the uplift of thin, ridiculous pipings in that waste
land overshadowed by the volcanoes. They did so,
now.
“ ’Fraid it’ll beat us,” said the middle figure, a short,
bunched shapelessness.
The leading figure, tall and hasting, grunted. The
last figure, breathing heavily, said : “I also think it’s
useless. We had much better try the forest.”
“What do you think, Dr. Sinclair ?” asked the midway
shapelessness. The leader grunted again.
“Damn nonsense. We’ll climb towards the volcanoes,
where we’ve a chance of getting warm. Another night
in the open may finish us. And the forest’s not safe.”
Underfoot, the heavy-fibred grass rustled harsh and
wet to the touch of naked feet. Overhead, the dark
traveller still hesitated. The heavy-breathing rearward
figure said :
“There is probably no danger in the forest. You
saw things while you were half-awake. In daylight
we’ve seen no animal larger than a small deer.”
The leading figure swore, turned a shadowed face,
halted and confronted the rearguard, and disregarded a
restraining motion made by the shapelessness. “Damn
you and your impertinences. Did you imagine that
lion you originally saw, then ? I tell you I saw a brute
twice as big as any lion hovering round the tree-clump
we slept in this morning. And you make me out a liar,
you—you damned straying patriot freak !”
And the middle shapelessness which, under the
endrapement of the eiderdown quilt salvaged from the
wreck of Magellan's Cloud, contained Clair Stranlay,
thought: ‘Goodness, they’re both nearly all in. And
I don’t wonder. What on earth am I to do if they
start scrapping now?’
52 THREE GO BACK
That question had vexed her almost continually for
some seventy hours. The American and Sir John
Mullaghan had seemed to her designed from the begin¬
ning of the world to detest each other. For seventy
hours they had lived on edge. And now 
Clair thought: cOh, my good God, I could knock
your silly heads together. And I’m cold and miserable
and hungry. And if ever we get out of this awful
country I’ll write an account and lampoon you both ”
Subchapter ii
There would be plenty of copy for that account.
. . . The wreck. The rescue. Sir John Mullaghan
arriving on the scene, complete with tale of discourteous
lion. Climbing the cliffs. No lion. Wide view of the
sea. No ships. No food. And before them an unrecog¬
nizable landscape about which Sinclair and Sir John
had at once begun to disagree. Labrador or North
Canada, said Sinclair—abruptly deserting Portugal.
There were supposed to be lost volcanoes in the wilds
of Canada. Sir John had asked if there were also lions,
and how the Magellan, turning south just prior to being
wrecked, could have reached Canada ? No reply to that.
Scowls. All three growing hungry. Finally, exploration
in search of food.
It had led them further and further inland, that
exploration. No animals. Not a solitary bird. Strange
land without the sound of birds, without the chirp of
grasshoppers in those silent forest clumps ! Clair had
shivered at that voicelessness, though, far off beyond the
cliffs, they could still hear the moan of the lost Atlantic.
They had strayed remoter and remoter from that moan,
out into thinner aspects of the park-land, till the land-
WHERE ? WHEN ?
53
scape they saw was this : Distant against the eastern
horizon a long mountain sierra, ivory-toothed with
snow, cold and pale and gleaming in the cool sunshine,
except at points lighted with the lazy smoking of
volcanoes. To the right a jumble of hills that must
lead back to the Atlantic eventually, and those hills
matted and clogged with forest. But not jungle. Pines
and conifers and firs.
“Likely-looking country for lion,” the American
deportee had remarked acidly, and then hushed them
both with a sharp gesture. Something stirred in a
clump of bushes only a yard or so away. They’d stared
at it, making out at last the head and shoulders and
attentive antlers of a small deer. Sinclair had acted
admirably then, Clair had thought—albeit a little
ridiculously. He’d motioned them to silence, unwound
the damp eiderdown from about his shoulders, crept
forward, suddenly leapt, landed on top of the deer and
proceeded to smother the little animal in the quilt’s
gaudy folds. Squeals and scuffling. Deer on top, deer
underfoot. Sinclair in all directions, but hanging on
grimly and cursing so that Clair, running to his aid,
had thought regretfully how she’d no notebook with her
on this jaunt. . . . She had halted and gasped.
For at her forward rush all the bushes round about,
probably held paralysed by fear until then, had sud¬
denly vomited deer ; a good two score of deer. A
hoofs-clicking like the rattle of an insane orchestra of
castanets, the bushes were deserted, and the deer in
headlong flight. Clair had stared after them, fascinated,
been cursed for her pains, then had knelt down and,
rather white-faced, assisted Sinclair to strangle his
captive . . .
Sir John Mullaghan, who had tripped and fallen in
his forward rush, had arrived then.
54 THREE GO BACK
They had kindled a fire and fed on that deer. The
making of the fire had been a problem until it was
discovered that the armaments manufacturer had a
petrol-lighter in his pocket. Ornate, gold-mounted
thing. No petrol. But the flint had still functioned
and there had been lots of dry grass available. Fire in
a minute. How to cook the deer ? No knives. Sinclair
had said: “ Miss Stranlay, go away for a minute.
You, Mullaghan, I want your help.” Clair had turned
away, reluctantly, had heard an unfriendly confabula¬
tion, had heard the sound of scuffling, smelt the reek
of blood and manure, had wheeled round with a cry.
\ . . . The men had torn a leg and haunch from the body
of the deer. Clair had been quietly sick.
The meal had been good, though singey and tough.
Sinclair had burned his fingers in tearing off a half-
cooked portion and handing it to her. Sir John, his
dress-suit spattered with drops of blood, had helped at
the cooking efficiently enough. But there had been no
co-operation between him and Sinclair. They had sat,
replete, and disagreed with each other, never once
addressing each other, but talking through the medium
of Clair. It had then been late afternoon.
“It’s obvious we must hold inland and south¬
ward,” said Sinclair. “There’s no sign of human
beings or habitations hereabouts. And if this, as
I suspect, is Northern Canada in a warm spell, it
is only southward we are ever likely to meet with any¬
one.”
“I doubt if there’s anything in that, Miss Stranlay.”
The grey head had been shaken at her ; the gentle eyes
held determination. “Probably you, like myself, wish
to get back to civilization as soon as possible ? Then,
I think, it’s obvious we ought to return to the cliff-head
before sunset and light a fire there and wait through
WHERE ? WHEN ?
55
the night. Some ship is bound to see the signal, for there
are plenty of ships on the African coast.”
Clair had wiped her greasy, slim fingers on the coarse
grass, and thought about it, sitting cross-legged and
massaging her sweetly pedicured toes. “I don’t know.
Canada ? I don’t think we can be there. Dr. Sinclair.
It’s too far away from the eastern Atlantic, as Sir John
Mullaghan says. But this is not a bit like Africa.” She
had glanced round the unhappy landscape. “Not a
bit like anything I ever heard of.” She had thought of
adding : ‘Like hell it isn’t!’ because that would have
been funny, and was always appreciated in her novels.
But she had restrained herself, being judicious, and
looked at the three-quarters of deer left to them, the
while the two men looked at her, Sinclair with apparent
indifference, Sir John with courteous attention. “On
the other hand, there doesn’t seem to be any food in
this place. All those little deer ran away south. They
may have been strays from the south. I think we ought
to follow them. After all, we’re bound to meet people
some time.”
The American had stood up at that, handed Clair
the quilt, seized the deer, gutted it—a sickening task—
with his hands, and then slung it across the shoulder of
his pyjama-jacket. “You’ve the casting vote. Come
on, then.”
And they had gone on. They’d camped that night
a few miles inland, under the lee of a ragged and woe¬
begone pine on the edge of the great, silent forest
itself. They had made another fire with the aid of Sir
John Mullaghan’s lighter, and broiled more deer and
eaten it, all three of them by then weary and footsore
from the few miles they’d covered, but Clair in no
worse plight than the others, except that she wasn’t
of their sex. When she strolled into the bushes Sir
THREE GO BACK
56
John had called out warnings about the lion. Clair
had called back: “No lion would be so unlionly”,
and then wished she hadn’t, and thought: ‘Oh, Batter¬
sea !’ and sighed, being tired.
When she came back they had apparently settled
down for the night. Sir John lay to the left of her
entrance. He had taken off his pumps and wrapped his
feet with grass. He had also removed his coat and
draped it round his thin shoulders. He lay close enough
to the fire. It had grown cold, though there was no
wind. Neither was there a star in the sky. Sinclair lay
near the fire also, but more directly under the lee of the
pine. He was swathed about by bundles of grass, and
Clair had thought, appalled : ‘Oh, my good God, I’ll
have to do some hay-making.’ But that had proved
unnecessary. Between the spaces occupied by the two
men, and directly opposite the bole of the pine, the
quilt had been outspread to dry and had dried. This,
Clair understood, was her sleeping position. She had
sunk into the eiderdown gratefully.
“Good night, you two,” she had called, muffling
the soft folds round about her. Sinclair had merely
grunted. Sir John had said, uncovering his face:
“Good night. Miss Stranlay. Call me if you want
anything.”
“Tea in the morning, please.”
He had laughed, with pleasant courtesy, and there
had been silence.
Such silence ! All her life she would remember it,
though the second night had made it commonplace.
The night was a stark and naked woman, asleep. But
sometimes you could hear her breathe. Terrible. And
against the lightless sky, unlighted though it was, you
saw her hair rise floating now and then. The pine-
foliage . . ,
WHERE ? WHEN ?
57
Miles and miles of it, this cold, queer country. Where
was it ? What would happen to them ?
Clair had stirred in the light of the fire, and turned
on her left side, staring at the dead wood and hearing
the soft hiss of burning cones. She lay half-in, half-out,
the spraying circle of radiance. Beyond that: the
darkness. Fantastic position to be in ! She had thought,
‘To-night ? I should have been in N’York. Betsy
would have been coddling me. Bedtime cocktail.
Slippers and—oh, my good God, a clean pair of
pyjamas. Lighted bedroom. Bed. Blankets. Sheets.
A soft bed. . . .’ She had drowsed then and wakened
to find the fire dying down and her shoulder cold where
the eiderdown had slipped aside. Also, her hip-bone
had been aching unbearably. She had turned over
and lain on her back, thinking : Ts it really
me ?’
Three or four yards to her right she had seen the
outline of the sleeping form of Sir John Mullaghan.
He was snoring. Catarrh. That was what had awak¬
ened her. She lay and stared at him, thinking : *1 do
wish he’d realize he’s a lost and desperate refugee and
wouldn’t saw at his backbone like that.’ But Sir John
had sawed on. She had turned her eyes towards
Sinclair’s place.
No more than herself was he asleep—or sleeping
only fitfully. His grass wrappings had fallen off, and
she saw the gleam of the dying firelight on his skin
where the pyjama-jacket had failed of its purpose. At
that sight she had called to him, softly, but he had made
no answer. Reluctantly, she had disencased herself
from the eiderdown and stood up, finding the night a
pringling coldness and underfoot something that rustled
like salt. Hoar-frost. She’d danced to the fire, seized
the ready collected pile of cones and branches, and fed
THREE GO BACK
58
the heap of red cinders till it kindled to a glow, eating
hungrily into the resinous cones, more slowly engaging
in mastication of the branches. She’d stood and shivered
until it was well under way, and then bent over the
American.
“Are you sleeping. Dr. Sinclair ?”
“No. Why?”
“Come under the eiderdown with me.”
“Nonsense. Go back to it. You’ll freeze there.”
“And you’ll freeze here with nothing but pyjamas.
Do come.”
“No thanks. Ask Sir John Mullaghan.”
She’d felt herself flush a little at that, in spite of the
cold. She’d turned round and gone back to her place,
picked up the quilt, wheeled round and returned to
Sinclair’s side.
“I’m not asking you to become my lover,” she had
explained. “Only not to be a silly ass.”
He’d stared up at her, the firelight in his eyes. He
had looked rather ashamed. He’d stood up. “All right.
Miss Stranlay. Sorry. Stand back and I’ll arrange the
grass. We’ll lie on it. . . . Now.”
Even so, he had been diffident. Clair had said :
“Please just forget it. We’re both very sleepy. . . .
So. Comfortable ?”
He’d said “Yes.” And added, as an afterthought:
“Thank you.”
He’d been asleep before she was, and she’d lain
listening to his quiet breathing and thinking : This
is a fine scene for a novel. But there ought to have been
all kinds of drama. Instead of which the hero s so tired
he’d have bitten the Queen of Sheba if she’d suggested
being naughty. . . . Has a nice, strong chest. Hope
to goodness he doesn’t snore. . . .’ And then, though
she didn’t know it, she had snored a little herself, gently,
WHERE ? WHEN ?
59
adding her soft pipe to the deep bass notes that smote
the night from the nose of Sir John Mullaghan.
Next day they had held south again, with little con¬
versation except that Sir John, some sternness in his
gentle eyes, had drawn Clair aside after breakfast and
asked her if the American—last night 
“Oh, no, I went and forced myself into his bed,”
Clair had said, looking at him wide-eyed.
He’d coloured a little, looking at her undecidedly.
“Remember, Miss Stranlay, I can always protect you.”
“From lions, you mean ?”
Catty, that, she had thought remorsefully as he turned
away. He’d addressed few remarks to her from that
time onwards until the evening. Neither had the
American. Willy-nilly, he had taken the lead. There
was no compulsory obedience, but the other two had
followed. Water in ponds and in streamlets was plenti¬
ful enough, but the character of the country did not
change. As one volcano receded to the right, another
took its place. Clump on clump of forest, dark-green,
erupted from the face of the tundra. The great forest
itself marched on their left, watching them. Again and
again Clair had the feeling that they were being watched
from that half-mile distant forest. She had told the two
men of the feeling. Sinclair had shrugged his shoulders.
“We may be. But it doesn’t look like it.” He waved
his hand around. “Look, it’s completely desolate.”
There was no sign of other living thing than them¬
selves until late afternoon, when they again started a
small herd of the small deer. Perhaps it was the same
herd. It disappeared from view within two minutes of
their rousing it. Sinclair had sworn. “We could have
done with more venison.”
There had been only a quarter of the deer left by
then. Camping at sunset, this time in the midst of a
6o
THREE GO BACK
cluster of bushes, itself in the midst of a tree-clump
out in the tundra, Clair had taken stock of herself
and her companions. First, herself: Her pyjama-trousers
were ripped and scratched from the knee downwards ;
otherwise intact. The jacket was still serviceable, though
one of the loops had been torn away. Her feet ached,
as indeed did all her body, especially knee and thigh
joints. But otherwise she was quite well.
Sinclair—it did not do to look very directly at
Sinclair. In matters sartorial he had suffered the worst
of the three, though he did not seem very conscious of
the fact. . . . All right if he didn’t feel cold.
‘And anyhow,’ Clair had consoled herself the while
she gathered brushwood for the fire, ‘we’ve still got a
dress suit in the expedition. Even though the pumps
have given way.’
They had, abruptly abandoning their allegiance to
the armaments manufacturer in a swampy place. Prior
to that they had abandoned their soles. Now Sir John
tramped barefooted, like his companions, displaying
small, handsome and well-cared for feet. ‘Fortunate
he hasn’t got bunions,’ Clair had meditated, and had
gone on to think that it was fortunate indeed that all
three of them were comparatively healthy people. Her
own penchant for winter bathing had inured her to
almost any extreme of temperature that almost any
climate could provide. Sinclair, she had discovered,
was a trained athlete, combining with militant pacifism
some gospel of the unpadded life which had taken him
on tramping expeditions through half the Western
States. Sir John was the least well equipped, yet
compared with the average passenger on the
Magellan ! What would Miss Kemp have done ? Miss
Kemp !
Sinclair had divided up the last leg and haunch for
WHERE ? WHEN ?
61
the evening meal. “We don’t know when we’ll get
any other food.” The others had assented, Clair silently
regretful, for she found herself very hungry in those
hours of marching through the clear, cold sunshine.
Suddenly she had thought, and said aloud with a rush
of longing : “Oh, my good God, I do wish I had a
cigarette 1”
Sir John Mullaghan had come to her aid unex¬
pectedly. “I have two,” he had said, and had drawn a
small silver case from his pocket the while Clair stared
at him unbelievingly. Opened, the case disclosed two
veritable Egyptians. Clair had reached for one, star-
vingly, lighted it from a twig, drawn the acrid, sweet
smoke down into grateful lungs. Sir John, similarly
employed, had sat at the other side of the fire. Sinclair,
looking tired, looked into the fire. She had suddenly
disliked Mullaghan with great intensity.
“Share with me, Dr. Sinclair ?”
“No, thanks. I don’t smoke.”
“Now, isn’t that a blessed relief ?” Clair had said,
but she had not said it aloud. Instead, she had leant
back on the long, coarse grass and smoked slowly, care¬
fully, lingeringly, finishing long after Sir John, and
indeed, had she known it, finishing the last cigarette
ever smoked in that unknown land.
Nightfall. Bed with Sinclair under the eiderdown
quilt, Sir John, grey-headed, watching them across the
fire. The American, settling down, had resented the
stare.
“What the devil are you glowering about ?”
“To see you take no advantage of Miss Stranlay’s
kindness.”
Clair had felt Sinclair’s arm muscles tauten beside
her. She had interposed, sleepily. “It’s quite all right.
Sir John. We sleep together for warmth, not love.”
62 THREE GO BACK
Then she had laid her head against Sinclair’s unyielding
shoulder and gone to sleep again. So presently had Sir
John. But Sinclair had slept in fits and starts, turning
uneasily and twice awakening Clair. Finally she had
whispered : “Whatever ails the man ?”
He had answered in a whisper. “There’s something
prowling round the fire.”
Clair had sat up beside him, peering forward. Nothing.
Nothing but the crackle of a consuming twig. Not even
a breath of wind. Nothing to see, except far off, remote
across the tundra, the nearest volcano, crowned with
quiet flame, burning watchfully. Perhaps five miles
away. Utter darkness and silence. Sir John Mullaghan,
dim-seen, sleeping quietly now. Or was he also awake ?
Not a sound. Or was there ?
It was a deep, steady, full-lunged breathing a little
distance away from them. “There’s some beast there,
whispered Sinclair, unnecessarily, staring across the
fire. He had slipped out of the eiderdown. Clair had
caught his wrist. “Stir up the fire.”
“I’m going to.”
He had, and then, suddenly snatching up a branch
which was crackling into flame, had emitted a blood¬
curdling yell and rushed round to the other side of the
fire, waving his torch. He had crashed through the
bushes, spark-spreading, and to Clair, ^ thinking
unalarmedly : ‘Goodness, his poor pyjamas 1 it had
seemed he was preceded by an even more distant crash.
Sir John awoke, startledly.
“What is it ? Miss Stranlay—are you all right ?”
“Quite. Dr. Sinclair thought he heard a wild animal
prowling round and went after it with a torch. Here
he comes.”
Sinclair returned, piled the fire with all the wood
they had collected, and sank down by Clair. Crouching
WHERE ? WHEN ? 63
on his elbow, the armaments manufacturer had looked
across at them.
“What was it ?” Clair had asked.
“Sorry I’m so damn chill. ... Eh ? Some kind of
bear, I think.”
“A big one ?”
“Brute like a cart-horse.”
“Did it run away ?”
“Near the equator by now, I should think.”
Clair had gurgled drowsily and laid her shapely head
on the grass pillow. It was the first spark of humour
she had heard struck from the American’s angry, flinty
personality. Soon she and Sinclair slept. But until
dawn Sir John had watched the moving shadows of the
bushes beyond the radiance of the camp-fire.
Next morning—the third morning—they had eaten
the last of the deer and tramped southwards again,
across country still unchanged and unchanging in
promise. But this morning had greeted them with rain,
so that they had been forced to shelter under a great
fir, watching the sheets of water warping westwards
over the long llanos. It looked almost like grey English
countryside, grossly exaggerated in every feature.
Clair had early felt very tired, and standing under the
fir had become aware of the cause. Of course, the damn
thing would happen now. She had questioned
Sinclair, who had looked curiously into her white
face.
“Do you know what the date is ?”
“It should be the Z5th.”
“The 25th ? But it can’t be. Why—” She had
stopped, calculating, very puzzled as well as otherwise
distressed. Sinclair she had discovered to have singu-
larly gentle eyes. Sir John Mullaghan was a little apart.
“Why can’t it be ?”
64 THREE GO BACK
She had remembered his profession, with relief,
and had explained. He had stood thoughtful, draped
in his ragged pyjama-suit, pulling at his rather long
upper lip. Then :
“If it’s only twenty days since the last occur¬
rence, Miss Stranlay, you can put it down to shock, I
suppose. Hardship. Different life. Though I never
heard of such a case.”
“The moon 1”
“Eh ?”
“Don’t you remember ?” she said. “The moon we
saw from the Magellan. You said it was five or six days
too early.”
He had stared away from her. “So I did. And it
was. Been too cloudy since we landed to see the moon
again. . . . But the connection’s a myth ”
Clair had smiled at him ruefully, lovely even then.
“It’s a fact.”
He had nodded, impersonally. “Right. Now
When Sir John Mullaghan turned to them again,
with the clearing of the rain, he had stared in some
surprise at Sinclair’s legs. He was clad now in knee-
length shorts. Clair, considerably more comfortable,
moved forward by his side.
But the day had held little of comfort in it, what
with the rain. Somewhere in the early afternoon
Sinclair had stopped near a stream which meandered
out of the forest and filed away into the beginnings of a
tract of long-grassed, mush-eared swamp. “I’m going
to hunt around and see if there’s any food to be had.
Miss Stranlay.”
“I think I’ll also look round, Miss Stranlay.”
“There’s a fire required,” the American had flung
over his shoulder. “And Miss Stranlay s tired.
Sir John Mullaghan had searched around for dry
WHERE ? WHEN ?
65
grass and twigs, scarce enough commodities, both of
them, the while Clair lay under a thing that looked like
a whortleberry bush, but wasn’t, and wished she was
dead. The quilt was damp, and presently kindled to a
slimy warmth from the heat of her body. She had fallen
asleep in a self-induced Turkish bath, with the slow
patter of the rain on the leaves overhead and a view of
Sir John Mullaghan, in a considerably battered dress-
suit, squatting on bruised and dirty heels, doing
futile things with his petrol lighter against a dour
loom of treey, desolate landscape. Sinclair had not
yet returned.
They had no method of measuring time, with the
sun’s face draped in trailing rain-curtains, but it must
have been at least another two hours before he did
come back, coming from the direction of the forest,
and walking wearily, a soaked and tattered figure.
“You’ll catch pneumonia,” Clair had called, and
tried to stir the fire to warmth-giving. But both she and
Sir John had looked at the doctor with sinking hearts.
Clair had said, casually : “Any luck ?”
Sinclair had opened his right hand. “These.”
They were half a dozen half-ripened beech nuts,
picked up below a high, solitary and unclimbable tree.
Sinclair told, shortly, that he had wandered for miles
without sighting any animal or bird or fruit-bearing
tree. “And we’d best be getting on again.”
“Why ?” Clair had queried, eating her two
nuts.
“Because you can’t stay unsheltered on a night such
as this promises to be. We’ll try nearer the mountains
for some ledge or rock shelter.”
So once again they had set out southwards, with the
rain presently clearing merely to display a sun hovering
on the verge of setting.
E
66
THREE GO BACK
Subchapter tii
And now, in the last of the daylight, lost, desperate,
and foolish, they stood on the brink of a disastrous
quarrel, Sinclair with every appearance of being about
to assault the armaments manufacturer, Sir John with
his gentle face ablaze. Clair looked from one to other
of them, wanly, but still with that gay irony that was
her salvation, and, after a little calculation, did the thing
that she thought would be best under the circumstances.
She burst into tears.
The two men paused. The American, she observed
through her fingers, went more white and haggard than
ever. Sir John laid his hand on her arm.
“Miss Stranlay, you must keep up. We can’t be far
now from some town or village or a trapper’s hut.”
“It—it’s not that.” Clair thought, swiftly cAm I
overdoing it ? Oh, God, I hope it doesn’t take long,
because I really am sick and tired and ill, and all this
crying isn’t in jest.’ She resumed : “It’s you and Dr.
Sinclair. You’re spoiling all our chances because you
won’t act together.”
There was a silence. Sinclair looked at the volcanoes,
looked at Clair. “That’s true, Miss Stranlay. ... I’m
sorry, Mullaghan.”
“And I, Dr. Sinclair. If you’ll lead on ”
The American turned again and led. Clair thought:
/ ‘Triumph of the civilized habit. Or is it ? According
to all the books they should have flown at each other’s
throats in this primitive milieu, and the winner grabbed
me as prize. . . . Goodness, a damp and dejected prize
I’d have been !’
Suddenly they found themselves in the lee of one of
the foothills, under the mouths of two great caves.
Chapter IV: THE LAIR
Sub chap ter i
WE don’t know what may be in them,” said Sir
John Mullaghan.
They stood and looked at the cave-mouths. They
stood almost in darkness, in a thin line of light, a space-
time illusion of luminosity, for the sun had quite
vanished. Hesitating, they peered at each other in the
false twilight. A little stream of water, hardly seen,
ran coldly over Clair’s toes. She felt iller than ever.
“What can there be ? There are no animals in this
country. Do let’s get out of the rain—it’s coming on
again.”
“Can’t you smell ?” said Sinclair.
Clair elevated her small, rain-beaded nose and smelt.
A faint yet acrid odour impinged on the rainy evening.
Ammoniac. “Like the Zoo lion-house,” said Sinclair,
very low, staring at the near cave-mouth.
The armaments manufacturer showed his latent
quality. He bent down, groped at his feet, and
straightened with a large stone in his hand. He
motioned them aside. Clair stood still. Sinclair seized
her roughly by the shoulder and pulled her to one side
of the near cave-mouth.
“Come out!”
The stone crashed remotely in the bowels of the cave,
ricochetted in darkness, stirred a multitude of echoes!
Nothing else. The twilight vanished. They stood in
the soft sweep of the rain, listening.
67
68
THREE GO BACK
“HI step into the mouth and try the lighter on a bit
of my underclothes,” said Sir John, practically.
“All right.” The American’s voice, imperturbable.
Clair could see neither of them now. But Sinclair’s
shoulder touched hers. She heard cautious, bare-foot
treadings in the dark. Sir John had left them. Clair
thought: ‘Oh, God, why doesn’t he hurry ?’ Her
thoughts blurred. She leant against Sinclair. “I’m going
to be sick.”
He put his arm round her and the quilt. “Not now.
Don’t be a fool.”
She bit her lips, holding herself erect, dizzily. “You’ve
shocking bedside manners.”
“Sh !”
The forward darkness spat sparks, intermittently.
The lighter. Spat. Spat. Something dirty white. A
catch. Vigorous blowing. A glow. The mouth of the
cave. Porous-looking rock. Sir John Mullaghan’s face.
His voice.
“It winds inward. I’ll go and see if there’s any¬
thing.”
“All right.”
Clair said : “No, you don’t. Dr. Sinclair thinks he’s
protecting me. I don’t need it.” She prodded her
protector. “Go with him.”
His support was withdrawn. “Keep where you are.”
A faint glow, over-gloomed by a titanic shadow,
illumined the cave-mouth. Betwixt her and that glow
passed another tenebrous titan. The glow failed, lighted
up again, receded. Alone. Soft swish of rain. Clair
began to count, found herself swaying, shook herself
out of counting. ‘Makes you sleepy.’ A long wait
and then suddenly Sinclair’s voice close at hand:
“Miss Stranlay !”
“Hello?”
WHERE ? WHEN ? 69
“Give me your hand.” She found herself drawn
forward. “Careful.”
“Nothing inside ?”
“Not a thing except a queer kind of nest.”
She stumbled in blackness. “Has the light gone
out ?”
“The cave twists.”
The ground underfoot had a porous feeling; it was
as though one walked over the surface of a frozen
sponge. A few more steps and Sinclair, by the aid of
disjointed gropings with his disengaged hand, guided
Clair round a corner of the ante-cave. She saw then a
roof nine or ten feet high over-arching a cave-chamber
something of the size and appearance of her own small
drawing-room in Kensington. It glittered greyly. On
the uneven floor, tending a small fire that seemed to be
fed with his undergarments and a pile of ancient hay,
squatted Sir John Mullaghan, naked to the waist. In
the far leftwards corner was a hummock. The “nest”.
“All right. Miss Stranlay ?”
“As rain, Sir John.” Clair stumbled again. Sinclair
pushed her past the fire. She sank down on the nest.
Its straw crackled dustily under her weight. The fire.
Sir John, and Sinclair, began to pace a hasting gavotte.
Clair closed her eyes.
‘Tm going to faint.”
She did.
Subchapter ii
She passed from the faint into a sleep, and awoke
several hours later, Sinclair’s hand shaking her.
“Miss Stranlay! . . . I’m afraid it’s going to
spring ”
70
THREE GO BACK
She sat up with a twinging body, brushing back the
hair from her face. The American crouched beside her,
a red-ochred shadow in the light of the fire, his head
turned towards the fire. The fire itself burned and
sputtered sulkily under a strange, brittle heaping of
fuel. And beyond its light, in the darkness, glowed
another light.
Two of them. Unwinking. Clair felt an acid saliva
collect in her mouth. Suddenly the two lights changed
position; they had sunk lower towards the floor of
the cave. Clair understood. It was crouching.
“Don’t scream.”
Sinclair’s words were in a whisper. But the Thing
in the darkness beyond the fire must have heard them.
Its eyes reared up again. Clair shut her own ; opened
them again. The eyes were again sinking. Spring this
time ?
And then the fire took a hand. It spiralled upwards
a long trail of smoke, red-glowing gas which burst into
crackling flame. There came a violent sneeze, a snarl,
the thump of a heavy body crashing against the side of
the cave in a backwards leap. And then the three survi¬
vors of the Magellan's Cloud saw—saw for a moment a
bunched, barred, gigantic body, a coughing, snarling,
malignant face. Then a rushing patter filled the cave.
The fire died down. Beyond its light no eyes now
glowed in the darkness.
Clair sank on her elbow, dry-mouthed. “What was
it ?”
Someone beyond Sinclair drew a long breath. “A
tiger.”
Sinclair spoke very quietly. “Like one, but it
wasn’t.”
“What was it, then ?” Clair saw Sir John Mullaghan
also crouching, a keyed-up shadow.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
71
The American, answering, still stared across the
fire. “Machaerodus”
“What ?”
“Machaerodus—a sabre-toothed tiger.”
There fell a moment’s silence—of stupefaction on
the part of all three. Clair, ill, closed her eyes and
opened them again. She must be dreaming. “But—it
can’t be. They’re extinct.”
“Didn’t you see the tusks ?”
She had. So had Sir John. The latter got to his feet.
He spoke and moved doubtfully.
“It may come back.”
The fire purred and crackled again. He had fed it
from a pile of fuel not in the cave when they first
entered it. The American got up and helped him.
Clair’s head, sleep-weighted, sank again on the nest.
She thought: T’m dreaming. Don’t care though it’s
a mammoth next time.’ The smell of the fuel was
nauseating. She voiced a sleepy question, and, voicing
it, was asleep, and never heard Sinclair’s answer.
“What are you burning ?”
“Bones.”
Subchapter in
When next she awoke, she was in complete darkness.
No fire burned near at hand. She had a sense of having
slept for many hours. She stretched, cautiously, remem¬
bering everything, and found that someone had tended
to her while she slept. Her rain-dampened pyjamas
had disappeared. She was lying not merely covered by
the quilt, but wrapped in it. A keen, cool current of
air blew steadily in her face.
If that three-days Odyssey across the deserted
THREE GO BACK
7*
savannah was a dream ? . . . She was at home in
Kensington. . . . Wrapped in a quilt, lying in fusty
hay ? She called, cautiously : “Dr. Sinclair !”
No answer. She released her left arm, and sought
in the place where he had crouched while they looked
at the eyes beyond the fire. Her fingers touched bare
rock. She sat up, a little frightened, desperately hungry.
“Dr. Sinclair l”
A far-off voice called : “Coming, Miss Stranlay.”
Footsteps, and the darkness receding from the light
of a smoky torch, held in Sinclair’s hand. In his other
he carried a shapeless bundle.
She said: “Goodness, nice to see you. Where’s
the fire ? Have I slept long ?”
Sinclair’s mind said, absorbedly, and for the second
or third time in looking at her: ‘Pretty thing!’
Tousled red-tipped hair, comely sleep-flushed face,
clear, friendly, questioning eyes. Miraculous to wake
from sleep like that. . . . Aloud :
“The fire’s in the outer half of the cave. It’s about
noon. I’ve brought you your things.”
He dropped them in her hands. They were her
pyjamas, dry and warm.
“You are a dear—though you try so desperately not
to be.” The dear grunted. Clair’s eyes twinkled at
him. “Is that a smell of something cooking ?”
“We’ve found some food. I’ll leave you the torch
to dress by.”
He set it against the rock-wall, turned about, and
went. Clair stood up and shook off the eiderdown quilt,
and felt her body with disgust. Grimy, gritty and
granulous. But her sickness of the night before had
passed. She thought: ‘Wonder if it’s safe to bathe
yet ? Nice things, warm pyjamas. Wonder ’
She had remembered the beast which had stalked them
WHERE? WHEN?
73
in the dark hours. Had there been any beast ? She
snatched up the torch and walked past the ashes of the
fire. On the damp floor were multitudes of impressions,
and superimposed on these great pug-marks of a cat.
“A sabre-toothed tiger !”
She picked up the eiderdown quilt and groped her
way through to the front part of the cave, and so came
on the sight of it suddenly, the entrance flooded with
sunlight, and against that sunlight a hazy drift of smoke,
as from the lips of a contemplative smoker, engen¬
dered by the fire. Either side of this fire sat Sinclair
and Sir John—Sinclair in his ragged pyjamas. Sir John
with his slight form even slighter than of yore. Minus
underclothes. Neither of them heard her coming
and she stood for a moment and looked at them with
some little modification of that gay, ironic, contemplative '/
scrutiny she usually turned upon the world. Their
lives had interwoven in hers with a dream-like abrupt¬
ness and intimacy 
‘Sinclair—no more a gentleman than you’re a lady.
No more an American than you’re an Englishwoman.
Why ? Fifty years ago we might have been both—the
tricks are easy enough to learn. ... Sir John—no
doubt about him. A lost aristo who’s mislaid his
guillotine and ruffles ’
Sinclair—he had begun to fray badly, poor boy.
Soon be a catastrophe with that sleeping-suit of his.
The faces of both men were lined with stubble, an
unchancy harvest. Sir John’s a red wiriness of vegetal
promise, with hints of grey, Sinclair’s a blue-black down.
Their hair stood up in tufts and feathers. But both
of them seemed to have washed, and Clair noted the
fact with an interest that put an end to her survey.
“ ’Morning, Sir John. I’ve already met you, doctor.
. . . Oh, not in the wilds.” She motioned them to
74
THREE GO BACK
sit, but flushed a little with a touch of reminiscent
'' wonder. The cosmopolitan had been at least as quick
as the aristo. . . . “Where did you get the food ?”
Sir John was toasting on a sliver of wood a strange-
looking, yellowish piece of meat. Sinclair bent his
dark poll over a roundish, smooth-polished object.
Sir John seemed to hesitate a second in his reply.
“Dr. Sinclair found it, Miss Stranlay. We’ve already
eaten some, but you slept too soundly to be awakened.
Better now ?”
Something funny about this meat. “Yes, much.”
She stared at Sir John’s preparations. “Found it ?”
The American glanced up, impatiently. “Nothing
mysterious. It won’t poison you—I saw to that. It’s
horse-flesh. There was a partly-eaten carcase about a
hundred yards from the mouth of the cave here.”
“Oh. So I didn’t dream last night. There was a
beast like a tiger prowling on the other side of the
fire ?”
The armaments manufacturer held up the skewer
of yellowish meat, looking the most incongruous of
cooks as he did so. “Yes. Some kind of tiger. It
probably killed the pony after it ceased to stalk us.”
Clair regarded her breakfast uncertainly.
“I think I’ll bath first. Both of you have. Where ?”
“Just outside the cave, to the left.”
Clair went out. Sinclair looked after her, looked
at Sir John, said something. The armaments manufac¬
turer rose up and followed Clair. She glanced round from
bending over the streamlet that had gurgled over her
feet the night before.
“I’m sorry, Miss Stranlay, but one of us had better
be near. That beast may come back, though it’s not
very likely.”
“I see.” Clair felt and sounded ungracious—and,
WHERE ? WHEN ?
75
as usual, regretted it. She looked away, across the
tundra flowering into swamp, at the sun-hazed surface
of the mile-distant forest, and then southward, where
swamp and forest crept down to the foothills, and their
long journey through the llanos-land seemed to end.
What was beyond that cul-de-sac ? . . . She became
aware of Sir John waiting. “Sorry. Shan’t keep you a
minute. Do wish I had some soap.”
“There’s red earth on the bank here. I used it.”
He felt his unshaven face, wryly. “It seemed fairly
effective.”
He thought she looked like an absurd boy in her
thin, stained garments. Not at all as he had pictured
her. For he had heard of Clair Stranlay before that
meeting on the beach, had once, on a train journey,
read one of her books. Crude, calamitous, vicious thing.
Very vivid, too. . . . How had he pictured her ? A
dark and beetle-like best-seller, perhaps, or one of those
blowsily mammalian women you meet in French maga¬
zines. Instead : this charming, impertinent boy . . .
He sighed and turned away from that thought. He
turned his head away from her also, looking round the
deserted countryside. The sun seemed warmer. A
little breeze stirred the long grass. The stream glim¬
mered and its gurgling passage was the only sound to
be heard. And the same thought came to him as to
Clair : What lay south ? What country was this, with
wild ponies and tigers ? Tigers ? A sabre-tooth ? But
that was absurd. Probably some freak animal.
He became aware of Clair standing beside him,
dabbing at her face and hands with a bunch of grass.
“That was good ... Sir John.”
He looked gently into her grave eyes.
“What country is this ? It can’t be Canada. And it
can’t be Africa.”
76 THREE GO BACK
He shook his head. “I’m afraid I haven’t an opinion
worth knowing, Miss Stranlay. Tigers, I think, are
found in the East Indies. But to suppose the Magellan's
Cloud drifted across the Atlantic, America and the
Pacific in those few hours four nights ago is absurd.
And I cannot imagine this stretch of uninhabited country
in the East Indies.”
Clair finished dabbing, re-tied the fraying neckloop
of her jacket. “No. But we must be getting near some
inhabited place.”
“I hope so.”
Pie wouldn’t say more than that, though her eyes
still questioned him. They went back to the cave. A
smudge of smoke, fainter now, for the fire was dying
down, rose from it against the limestone hillside.
Sinclair was standing in the sunlight at the mouth of
the second cave, looking intently southward, as both
of them had done. He came and joined them. Clair
was surprised at the look on his usually dour face. It
was alive with some strayed excitement.
“Feel hungry ?” he asked her.
“Shockingly.” But indeed her appetite felt oddly
reserved. She sat down beside the fire, but still in the
sunlight. She picked up the piece of charred horse¬
flesh and began to eat it. Sir John stayed outside, lean¬
ing against the cave entrance, his greying head down-
bent. “How did you manage to cut it up ?”
“With this.” Sinclair was back at the other side of
the fire. He held up an object. Clair peered at it. He
passed it to her. She turned it over, wonderingly.
It was a fragment of stone, she thought, though it
was flint. Even to her unaccustomed eyes it seemed to
have a certain artificiality. She held it away from her
with her left hand, the while she fed her small, stained
mouth with the right. She saw the shape of the thing
WHERE ? WHEN ?
77
better then. It was in the form of a smooth-butted
axe-blade—an incredibly crude stone axe-blade.
“Why—it’s made.”
The American nodded. “It’s made”
“Where did you find it ?”
“In the next cave. Among a pile of bones.”
She remembered something. She questioned him
with her eyes. He nodded.
Human bones. Though I didn’t know that in the
darkness last night when I was searching for fuel.
Fortunately I didn’t burn them all.”
She looked at the thing at his feet, and somehow
didn’t want any more of the horse-flesh. It was a skull
he had been examining. She stood up and went to the
entrance. Sir John glanced at her. Something like a
smile of sympathy flickered over his face. The American
said, abruptly : “You people.”
They both turned. Sinclair had the skull in his
hands. He came towards them. The stone axe-blade
slipped out of Clair’s forgetful hand as she backed
away from the skull. Sinclair sprang forward and
caught it, bruising his fingers. He swore. Sir John
turned his head, Clair tried hard to repress herself,
failed, giggled. Sir John’s laughter joined with
hers.
“I’m so sorry.” Genuinely contrite.
All right. I want to talk to you both about these
finds. He addressed Sir John, still with something of
an effort. “Know anything about crania ?”
Sir John shook his head. “Nothing at all.” He
took the skull in his hand, however, and examined it.
It was complete to jawbone and teeth. He held it out to
Clair. She waved it away.
No thanks. Ghastly thing. It’s got a permanent
frown, too.”
78
THREE GO BACK
Sinclair : “Exactly. That’s the point. It’s not an
ordinary skull.”
The other two regarded it, back in Sinclair’s hands.
“A savage’s ?” said Clair, helpfully.
“Of course it’s a savage’s. Otherwise he wouldn’t
have had a flint hand-axe in his possession when he
was carried back in there and devoured by the sabre¬
tooth.”
Clair shivered. “Was that what happened ?” She
looked over the undulating waste of grass to the dark
boles of the sun-crowned forest. “Ugh.”
Sir John glanced at her, and interposed, gently.
“And what is peculiar about the skull ?”
“It’s as Miss Stranlay says. It has a permanent frown
—look, this ridge above the eyes. And practically no
forehead.” He loosened the clenched jaw. “Look at
the teeth.”
They looked. “Funny,” said Clair, at once repulsed
and fascinated. Sinclair closed the jaw again, set the
skull at his feet, stared at it, fascinated also.
“Not a human skull at all, you know, as we under¬
stand the term human. By rights it belongs to a race that
died off twenty thousand years ago.”
Clair was startled into dim memories of casual
reading in pre-history. “What race ?”
“The Neanderthal. It’s a Neanderthal skull.”
Subchapter iv
By early afternoon they had left the caves some four
or five miles behind, and, tramping along the edge of
the foothills, were nearing the spot where hills and
forest converged. Sinclair, as usual, walked in advance.
He was burdened with the remains of the horseflesh, a
WHERE ? WHEN ? 79
great haunch, and the cord of his pyjama-shorts sagged
under the weight of the flint axe-head. The strange
skull he had abandoned with reluctance.
Clair and Sir John walked side by side, half a dozen
yards behind him. Sir John said : “I’m afraid we’re
rather a drag on our leader. By the way, have you
noticed how much alike your names are?—Clair and
Sinclair.”
She looked after the long-striding figure of the
American, and unconsciously increased her own pace.
He s the saint and I m the Clair. ... Is energetic.
I m sure that’s why they used to martyr saints.” (But
it wouldn’t do to discuss one with the other.) “What
do you think of the skull ?”
“I don’t know what to think. Though I should
imagine that the chances are Dr. Sinclair has made a
mistake.”
Neanderthal man. . . . They all died off in the last
Glacial Age—I think. Or was it just after it ? Perhaps
it was a fossil skull.”
The armaments manufacturer, striding barefooted,
bowed-shouldered beside her, shook his head. “No,
it wasn’t that. I’m afraid I know little or nothing of
such matters, but it was comparatively fresh bone.”
‘Funny if there are any more of them about.”
Sir John also thought that, but did not say so.
Funny ? The coarse grass was warm and dry under
their feet. The last of the volcanoes had disappeared
on the northwards horizon. Sinclair slowed down till
they caught up with him. He pointed.
They were at a slight elevation by then. The forest
did not close completely on the hills, but left a narrow
corridor, a waste, bush-strewn space. Across this space
they looked, and it was as if they were at no slight
elevation, but on a mountain-side. For beyond the
8o
THREE GO BACK
passage-way the land failed completely, as it seemed.
Yet, remote and far away, downwards, southwards,
something like a lake shimmered, forest-fringed ; and
blue and golden, there shone under the sunlight a sug¬
gestion of immense tracts of waste country. All three
of the travellers stared, Clair with sinking heart. It
must be miles to that lake. And no sign anywhere of
a native village or trading station.
“We’re on a high level—a plateau with mountains,”
said Sinclair, unemotionally. “We’ve been travelling
across it for days. That’s why we’ve seen so few animals,
probably. There’s nothing here but strays from down
there.”
Sir John said : “And we’re going down ?”
“Yes.”
Clair smiled at the American, casually, friendlily.
“There’s no ‘yes’ about it. Not until we’ve all made
up our minds.”
Sinclair’s ears tinted themselves a slow red. “I am
going down.”
“Do.”
Sir John interposed. “Really, Miss Stranlay, I don’t
think there is anything else to be done now. . . .
Though possibly Dr. Sinclair might word his invitations
a little more courteously in future.”
Sinclair scowled at him, angrily. “Courtesy ! Do
you realize we’re absolutely lost somewhere in abso¬
lutely unknown and unexplored country ? That there
are machaerodi and possibly other wild beasts in it—to
say nothing of Neanderthalers ?”
“That seems to be the case,” said Clair. “But it
doesn’t alter the fact that your manners are badly in
need of improvement.”
He glanced from one to the other of them, as though
he were looking at idiots. He shrugged. “All right.
WHERE? WHEN?
8l
Bad though they may be, I think it would be ruinous
if we split into two parties.” He bowed, a ludicrous,
angry figure. “Would you mind coming down into the
low country, Miss Stranlay ?”
Clair had a ridiculous impulse and a lovable singing
voice—a deep, untrained contralto. They stared at her
startled as she held out her arms and smiled at the wild
lands below them :
“ ‘Oh,ye’ll take the high road.
And I’ll take the low road.
And I’ll be in Scotland afore ye ;
But me and my true love
We’ll never meet again
On the bonny, bonny banks of ’Loch Lomond !’ ”
She felt her eyes grown moist, involuntarily. Sir
John said, gently : “Thank you. Miss Stranlay.”
“Silly,” Clair confessed.
“Not silly at all, Miss Stranlay.” It was Sinclair,
unexpectedly. “Thank you also. I was a lout.”
“You’re a dear,” said Clair, soberly, and for the
second time that day.
Subchapter v
It was a steeply-shelving descent of nearly a mile,
over the usual coarse grass. At the foot Sinclair waited
—as usual. He avoided Clair’s eyes. He had avoided
them since that remark. “We have about an hour until
sunset.”
Sir John, panting, sat down. “And what are we going
to do until then ?”
The American pacifist seemed for once at a loss.
“Find a place to camp, I suppose.”
F
82
THREE GO BACK
“Looks different somehow,” said Clair.
It did. The forest was more widely spread or the
tundra more enforested, according to one’s fancy.
Some oaks—young-looking oaks—grew near at hand.
Smooth, hog-backed hills rose here and there in the
tree-set waste, but there were no mountains, no
volcanoes. Also, near sunset though it was, this low
country was much warmer than the plateau they had
just deserted. Nor was it so silent. A long-necked
grey bird flitted among the oaks ; they could hear the
swish of its wings through the leaves. Remote among
the low, smooth-humped hills a vast, long-drawn moan
rose and fell; they had not noticed it at first, be¬
cause it was part of the landscape. Now, as it
ceased, they peered in the direction from which it had
come.
“A cow,” said Clair.
It did indeed sound like the lowing of a cow—a
gigantic cow. Presently it ceased with some decision,
and was not resumed. Sinclair stood with his fingers
on his hand-axe. “Bison, perhaps.”
“What is this place. Dr. Sinclair ?”
The question worried all three of them continu¬
ally. Clair put it into words most frequently. Sir John
glanced up at her, then at the ragged bearer of the horse-
haunch. The latter started.
“Eh ? . . . God knows.”
“I doubt it,” said Clair.
The American began to move across the grass
towards the trees. Clair held out her hand to Sir John,
but he stood up without assistance, albeit with a grimace.
Presently they were threading a new belt of trees, very
green and lush with undergrowth, and with their
shadows pointing long, dark fingers into the east. The
grey bird was silent. So was all else of the hidden life
WHERE ? WHEN ? 83
of the tree-spaces—if there were life. Clair heard
herself call in a whisper :
“Where are we going ?”
Sinclair s voice also was low. “Some place where
there’s water.”
They emerged from the trees then, into another
clearing. Doing so, Clair seemed to hear a sound of
low rumblings, like the borborygm in a large and
placid stomach. She thought, rather ruefully: ‘Not
mine’. And went on, following the sunset-reddened
back of Sinclair. Neither he nor Sir John had heard
anything.
But suddenly they did. Fallen boughs crunched and
snapped, and something with heavy tread came after
them from the twilight darkness of the trees.
They all halted, looking back. For a moment they
could distinguish nothing, though the heavy tread
paced towards them. And then they saw it against the
dun light of an open patch—its swaying bulk, its
matted shagginess. Its trunk was lowered, sniffing
the track they had taken.
They stared appalled. They had all seen its like
before—in this or that museum or illustration. There
could be no mistaking those curved immensities of
tusk.
It was a mammoth.
Chapter V: AND I’LL TAKE THE LOW ROAD
Subchapter i
THEY camped a quarter of an hour or so later,
by the mere of the lake that had glittered its
invitation from the northern plateau. Tall reeds grew
far out into the water, and, remotely over that water,
unknown birds croaked and dipped amid long grasses
that Sinclair certified were—of all things—wild wheat.
The American knelt under the moss-shaggy boughs of
a great oak, coaxing Sir John’s lighter to imbed a
spark in a tuft of withered grass. Sunset was again close
—the lingering sunset of a temperate country. It
might have been eight o’clock in the evening.
Clair padded to and fro, bough-collecting, with even
her bare feet a little chilled by the evening dew. Sir
John, outside the obscuring bulk of the oak, was look¬
ing back to the dimness of the plateau—that high land
where they had adventured through three long days.
And the mammoth continued to watch them.
It was halted at a distance of ten yards or so, not
facing them, but in profile. Its great ears flapped medi¬
tatively and every now and then its trunk would stray
upwards into the foliage of a bush, or down into the
unappetizing grass. The sunset glimmered on its
watching eye . . .
It had trailed them like a great retriever, halting
when they halted, coming on again as they moved
hesitatingly away. While they crossed a clear space it
would stop and watch them, pawing a little, rubbing
a gigantic, hair-fringed shoulder against a tree. Then it
84
WHERE ? WHEN ?
85
would pace swingingly after them. Once, apparently
imagining them lost, it had frolicked wildly amid the
bushes, hunting the scent of them with uplifted trunk.
“It must be harmless,” Clair had whispered, walking
between the two men.
“Trying to summon up courage to charge,”
hazarded Sinclair.
“Hope it comes of a timid family.”
“I’m afraid we can’t do anything to prevent it charg-
ing, anyhow,” said Sir John, glancing over his shoulder
and starting a little. “. . . I thought it was coming
that time.”
But it had not, and, the lake opening out before
them, there had been no other course obvious than to
camp. It was eerie doing so with that watching monster
pretending not to watch them. Clair knelt by Sinclair
with a handful of twigs, seeing he had caught a spark
and was cherishing the grass into the parturition of a
flame.
He glanced at her. “The fire may scare it off or may
madden it into making an attack. Scoot round the back
of the tree if it comes.” He spoke in a whisper. “Fright¬
ened ?”
Clair fed the flame with a twig, resolutely keeping
her eyes from the watcher. “Not now. Rather a thrill.
. . . What’s it doing now ?”
Sir John came to their side. “I think it’s going to
charge.”
d he mammoth had knelt on its knees, embedding
its immense tusks in a great clump of grass. There
came a crackling, tearing sound. The mammoth stood
up. Its tusks were laden with grass, like the rake of a
hay-maker. Elevating its trunk to the fodder, it
proceeded to test and devour great wisps.
“Bless it,” said Clair, “it’s having its supper.”
86
THREE GO BACK
The armaments manufacturer ruffled his grey hair.
“One certainly didn’t expect such mildness. A
mammoth !”
There the brute stood, real enough, feeding and
watching them, with the brown night closing down
behind him. The flame came now in little spurts and
glows and the twigs caught and, cautiously, Sinclair
administered first small branches, then larger ones.
The firelight went out across the gloaming shadows,
splashing gently on the red-brown coat and bare,
creased skull of the mammoth. It paused for a little in
its eating, turning its trunk towards them. Then
resumed. Clair sat down and held her head between her
hands.
si “A mammoth in the twentieth century ! It’s—oh,
it’s ridiculous.”
Sir John, standing and looking at the watcher, patted
her shoulder. Sinclair hacked at the dried horsemeat
with the Neanderthal axe. The meat had a faint smell
of decay. He said : cT’ve been thinking about where
we are. I know now it can’t be Canada.”
“And it’s certainly not Africa, as I thought at first,”
murmured Sir John.
“No. I think we’re in Patagonia.”
Clair drew back warmed toes from the fire. Abruptly
the last of the daylight went. The lake misted from a
pale sheen to a dark, rippling mystery. The sound of
the mammoth feeding was oddly homely. . . .
Patagonia ?
“But I understand practically all of it has been
explored,” said Sir John.
Sinclair toasted yellow meat for a moment. “I don’t
think so. Delusion we North Americans and English
have about every country which is shown plainly on
a map, with the main mountains and rivers and a
WHERE ? WHEN ?
87
political colouring. We can’t get it into our heads that
these places are much larger than a home county. And
of course—” He stopped and frowned at the piece of
meat. He addressed Clair. He still avoided, as far as
possible, speaking directly to Sir John Mullaghan.
“Did you notice from the plateau brow the mere tips
of a mountain-range—they must be more than fifty
miles away—down there in the south, Miss Stranlay ?”
Clair nodded.
“I think they must be the Andes. We’re somewhere
in the western Argentine or the foothills of Chili—the
country where Pritchard went to hunt the great sloth.
We may be traversing a mountain kink or fold that
up to this time has escaped notice completely.”
Clair thought. Then: “A kink with sabre-tooth
tigers and fresh Neanderthal skulls in it—and
mammoths ?”
All possible. But his voice sounded less certain.
Sir John said : “But not very probable. We landed
on a sea-coast, somewhere, went inland, and turned
south. That sea-coast, if this is South American, must
have been the Atlantic. And Patagonia, if my memory
serves me, is remote from the Atlantic. Also, it has
grown warmer the further south we have come. If we
are south of the equator it ought to grow colder.”
Sinclair detached the piece of meat from its wooden
skewer and handed it to Clair. He nodded acknowledg¬
ment of Sir John’s arguments and was silent. All three
of them sat and ate the tough meat. Then, stumbling
among the reeds, they went down to the lake in search
of water. At a spot that glimmered faintly Sinclair
lay down full length and drank. Sir John followed suit.
Clair squatted and cupped the water in her hands and
drank that way. As they came back to the fire they
noted the mammoth still in guardianship. Overhead
88
THREE GO BACK
there was a faint pearliness in the darkness of the
sky.
Sir John raked about in the shadows outside the
fire, collecting damp grass and arranging it for drying
to act as pillows and mattresses. Clair sat a yard or so
from Sinclair, looking into the fire, drowsy and still a
little hungry after her meagre ration of horseflesh.
Sinclair had procured a long bough from amid the tree-
litter and was whittling at it doggedly with the flint-axe.
“Stone Age idyll,” murmured Clair.
“Eh ?”
She repeated the words, and, as she did so, remote
away beyond the lake, strange and eerie, that lowing
they had heard in the early afternoon broke out again.
It rose and belled and fell, the calling of some stray
of a Titan herd. Unexpectedly, for he had been quiet
enough until then, the mammoth answered, lifting his
trunk in the remote washings of the firelight and
trumpeting screamingly. Clair thought her ear-drums
would burst. She covered them and heard the noise
die down. The ensuing quietness held no hint of the
distant lowing.
But to Clair, with it dead, there came an almost
passionate wish that it would break out again. She
looked at the two men, at the darkness around them,
at the bulk of the strange beast that guarded them so
queerly. That lowing and wild trumpeting seemed to
have torn down a barrier inside her heart—that calling
across wild spaces heard in the shelter of the camp¬
fire. . . . She had heard it before, somewhere, at
some time, in an era that knew not print and publishers.
Often. And of all sounds it had lived with her through
changes innumerable. She had heard it before in lives
not her own 
Fantastic dream !
WHERE? WHEN?
89
“Miss Stranlay !” Sir John’s hand on her shoulder.
“You’d best lie down if you’re so sleepy. You nearly
fell into the fire.”
Subchapter ii
“Did I ?”
She shook herself and looked at them. Sinclair,
hafting his axe-head on the bough and binding it with
sinews he had saved from the tiger-killed pony, had
half-risen to catch her just as Sir John forestalled him.
He sank down again. The armaments manufacturer,
padding about barefooted, arranged the grass beds.
He looked over at Clair, hearing her low laugh.
“Nothing much, Sir John. But I’d just said to Dr.
Sinclair, before that trumpeting started, that this was a
Stone Age idyll. And just now I caught sight of your
clothes.”
The firelight twinkled on a grey head and the smile
on a gentle, cultured face. “And they don’t fit the part ?”
“Not very well.”
The American laughed shortly. “The warrior was
the armaments manufacturer of the Stone Age, Miss
Stranlay, and no doubt wore appropriate habiliments.”
Clair felt a little pang of shame for him. The fire
simmered cheerfully. Sir John straightened and looked
across at the deportee.
“Yes, the warrior was probably the equivalent of
the armaments manufacturer,” he said quietly. “He
brought order and a livable relationship into primitive
anarchy. And his task isn’t yet finished.”
Clair said : “Perhaps it hasn’t begun in this country
yet. . . . Funniest nightmare of a country we’ve
landed in ! Fd give anything for clothes and a bath-
9°
THREE GO BACK
room and electric light and—oh, for a cigarette !” She
paused and tried to put into unfacile words that strange
aching that had been in her heart hearing the lowing in
the distant hills. She looked at Sinclair’s and
Mullaghan’s listening faces. “But there’s something in
it that’s not terrifying at all. Lovely, rather. The
silence and starkness. . . . Those primitives of the
Old Stone Age—they had some elemental contacts
with beauty that we’ve lost for ever.”
Sir John Mullaghan sat clasping his knees, rubbing
his chilled, bare feet. He shook his head. “They had
this kind of country, perhaps, but it was not the country
you see with your civilized, romantic eyes, Miss
Stranlay. It was a waste of ghouls for them. The night
was a horror to the squatting-places—the time when
the dead Old Men of the tribes returned as stalking
carnivorae, the time of shuddering fear. It was a life
livable only for the strongest and most brutal. For
thousands and thousands of years life was that only.
And here and there rose the soldier and the inventor,
the men who subjected the squalid and lowly, who
built the first classes and sowed the first seeds. And
the long climb from the filth and futility of the night¬
time camps began.”
“Poor ancestors !” Clair said it soberly, her eyes on
the night.
Sinclair finished bonding his axe, and laid it on his
knees and looked into the fire.
“That was the life of the Stone Age savage. Miss
Stranlay. And the strong men and the wise men, the
warriors and the witch-doctors, bound him in chains
of taboo—the first laws—and made him less of a beast.
For twenty thousand years they’ve fashioned new chains
for him, till civilized man has taken the place of the
savage. But it’s been no simple case of design. The
WHERE ? WHEN ?
91
old, meaningless taboos and loyalties—once necessary
and just—are things that threaten to strangle us now¬
adays. The age of the witch-doctor and the warrior is
over. But they won’t believe it. They still preach their
obscene gods and raise and equip armies that now
threaten to smash to atoms the foundations of civiliza¬
tion. It is they who are the ghouls who haunt the con¬
temporary world.”
Sir John said, steadily : “They are the ghouls, if you
like, that guard civilization. The strong man keeps
his house and the wise country an army on the qui vive.
The soldier is civilization’s safeguard, and still, thank
God, defends it against anarchic sentimentalities. . . .
Do you people know nothing of the beast that is in
human nature unless there is force and discipline to
keep it down ? I had a daughter once. Twelve years
of age. Bright and clean and very glad to be alive.
Like Miss Stranlay in some ways. . . . She was missing
one night. She was found under some bushes a mile
or so away from home next day. She had been raped and
murdered by a tramp.”
Clair made an inarticulate sound of sympathy.
Sinclair’s knuckles whitened round his axe-haft. “I
also have seen human beings mutilated and murdered—
in thousands. And through no chance accident of lust
or madness. Sentimentalist ? My God, you old men 1
Sentimentalists we are then, and our fight is for human
sanity. Don’t think we shirk facts. And we’ve learned
from experience. We know that man’s a fighting animal
by nature, that cruelty’s his birthright; and we also
know that what keep us in the pit as animals are the
armies and the armaments. We’re out to smash both,
we who have had some personal experience of both.
And w’e’ll do it. There’s a league of men coming into
being that’ll send a bullet into the brain of every clown
THREE GO BACK
92
who preaches war in future. Sir John—-and a bomb
into the office of every armaments manufacturer who
trades in blood and human agony. ... It is you and
your kind who will not let the ape and tiger die. And
they’re prepared to your challenge.”
Clair’s voice startled them. “I had a lover in 1917.
A boy. He’d have hated to hurt the hatefullest human
on earth. He went to France because I taunted him.
He died on the barb wire at Mametz. All night. He
screamed my name all night. . . . And at heart he was
just a savage filled with lust and cruelty ?”
They said nothing, uncomfortably. Clair thought,
suddenly weary : Tdiotic to speak about that. Oh, my
dear, my dear, who died there at Mametz, that’s a time
long ago, and I can’t do anything for you now . . .’
She leant back with her hands under her head. They
had all three forgotten the mammoth. Now they heard
its steady munching. Clair thought, with a reckless
change to gaiety : Tt’ll have tummy-ache if it’s not
careful.’ She said: “There come the stars. We’re
hopelessly lost, but they’re still the same as ever.”
Unchanged, indeed, and remote and cold as ever. As
though a lampman walked the dark spaces of the night
they kindled in groups and constellations. The night
was very still and cloudless. It was not yet moonrise.
The evening star burned palely beyond the stance of
the drowsily-shuffling mammoth. And over the darkness
of the untrodden lands to the south Jupiter hung like a
twinkling ball of fire.
Subchapter in
In the morning the mammoth had gone. There was
no trace of it but the trampled stretch of grass and a
great heap of dung. Wakening the first of the three.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
93
Clair thought she heard remote trumpetings. But
whether these were memories from night-time dreams,
or the farewell callings of their mysterious guardian,
there was nothing now in the quietude of the morning
to tell her.
The fire was a grey fluff. They had slept beyond the
first chill of the dawn, and the sunshine, like early
spring sunshine in the greys and greens of England,
sprayed through the lattice-patterns of the oak boughs.
The reeds that hid the lake stood in long battalions,
peering into the sunrise, with the urge behind them of a
little wind from the places of the earth that the morning
had not yet touched. Sinclair slept beside Clair with
his arms outflung and begrimed, his bearded face hid
in his shoulder. Clair touched that shoulder with the tips
of her fingers, found it cold, pulled the eiderdown
quilt over it, and herself stood up.
Sir John Mullaghan slept huddled in his stained coat,
his grey-streaked hair ruffled every now and then by
a stray waft of wind from the places of the sunset.
Clair wondered if she should make a fire. But either
Sinclair or Sir John had the lighter. She moved about
under the oak, and further into the bushes, collecting
twigs. She found a stretch of gorse-bushes, very yellow
and scented, still wet with night-mist. It was as she stood
among them that the lark began to sing.
It was at first no more than a remote piping up in
the grey pearlment of the sky. But it came nearer, and
the sound hovered, and, shading her eyes, it seemed
to Clair that she saw the fluttering singer for a moment.
She stood and listened and found herself weeping. She
dropped the bundle of firewood and, weeping, stood in
that morning listening to the amazing sound. Shrill
and strange and sweet, the piping of youth unforgotten !
. . . And they took that youth and smeared it with the
THREE GO BACK
94
filths of the years, murdered it on barb-wire entangle¬
ments, gave it to torture and horrific agonies in the
hands of lust-crazed lunatics . . .
Clair thought: ‘But, even so, we’ve heard it. It’s
worth having heard it though the memory torture us
all our lives.’
It died away. Clair picked up the firewood and went
back to the camping-place. The men still slept. For a
little she considered them and then went down through
the dark, seeping peat-edges to the mere of the lake. A
bird flew out of the reeds as she approached. A king¬
fisher. From her feet the cold of the ground spread up
through her body. Accustomed though she was, she
shivered in the sunlight. She bent and touched the
water and found it—‘wet, of course. And cold enough.
Doesn’t matter. I’m too filthy for description.’
She undressed, a simple matter, and waded out, into
a clamouring pain of coldness. Her hair fell over her
face and she switched her mind to that matter as the
water rose higher, over her knees, creeping upwards.
. . . ‘Getting long, and where will you find a barber’s
shop ? Unless Sinclair operates with his flint-axe. . . .
Now ? Deep enough ?” She halted, half-knelt, and
flung herself forward.
Deep enough.
She swam into the sunrise through a long lane in the
reeds. Beyond that lane cramp caught her right arm
for a moment and she struggled with it, a little fright¬
ened, until it passed. The lake swept to the horizon
almost, she saw, though from its surface there was no
sign of Sinclair’s Andes. . . . Alligators ?
But there seemed nothing living in the region of the
lake, apart from the skimming kingfishers. She turned
round at last and swam towards the remote, solitary
oak. As she did so she suffered from the curious illusion
WHERE? WHEN? 95
that it waved to and fro, violently, as in a high wind.
A thin, pencil-point of smoke was rising. It did the
same.
‘Curious. Something wrong with my heart ?’
Soberly, she reached the shore and dressed, and went
through the reeds, hearing the anxious calling of
Sinclair and Sir John, whom an earthquake of con¬
siderable intensity had disturbed in the preparation of
breakfast.
Subchapter iv
Clair thought: ‘We are in the Hollow Land.’
There were high hills both to right and left now
as they still pressed south. For four or five miles they
kept the bank of the lake, but that was soon left behind
a radiance that presently betook itself from the earth
to the sky. The leftwards hills were the further away,
and betwixt them rose and fell in long undulations a
crazy scarping of nullahs. Underfoot was the long
grass, but of finer texture here than on the northwards
plateau, growing in places lush and emerald, especially
where some stream hesitated and crept and slept and
woke and shook itself and meandered uncertainly
amid the llano.
It was a land of streams. They forded three—one
at a trampled place, where were the imprints of both
tiny hoofs and great paws.
‘‘Why are we still going south ?” Clair asked once.
Because we might as well,” the American returned
broodingly.
Sir John suffered from agonies of stomach-ache
throughout that day. He walked beside Clair with
distorted face and frequently distorted body. Several
THREE GO BACK
96
times he sat down while the other two stood and waited.
Sinclair could do nothing for him—or at least offered
to do nothing. Neither he nor Clair had as yet been
affected by the saltless diet of horseflesh. But the sur¬
viving piece quite definitely began to smell undaintily.
It was fortunate that the country seemed almost
entirely devoid of insects.
Sinclair carried his axe-blade hafted now on a five-
foot pole. He stalked a sound in the bushes with it
once, only to disturb a long, tawny shape which snarled
at him sleepily. Then it turned and slunk unhurriedly
into deeper cover. Sinclair, rather pale, rejoined the
other two.
“What was it ?” Clair asked.
He glanced at Sir John. “A lion.”
They went on. Once, far towards the leftward hills,
and beyond the nullahs, they heard that lowing break
out again. Plangent and plaintive. Several times herds
of small deer such as they had twice seen on the plateau
were observable at a distance, feeding with some dainti¬
ness and apparent enjoyment. Clair looked at them
carnivorously. But the wind went steadily south and
at the first whiff of the travellers, and long before
Sinclair could near them, the deer had gone.
“How many more meals ?” Clair asked the American,
looking without appetite at the shrinking haunch of
horseflesh. Sinclair had dropped back from his old
position in the van and walked beside the other two
now.
“Two, I think.”
Sir John, padding along in pain, grimaced. “You
may count it three. I—I don’t think I’ll be hungry for
some time.”
“Oh, the doctor may be able to stalk something
fresh,” said Clair.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
97
Instead, it was something fresh which presently stalked
them, though they never caught sight of it. The noise
of its padding pursuit and appraisal began to the right
of a long corridor of bushes. The three went on for a
little while, and then halted, listening. The stalker
had halted also. In the sunshine silence they heard the
noise of its heavy breathing. And a sound of a swish-
swish among the leaves. (Tts tail,’ thought Clair.)
Sinclair changed from the left hand side of the march
to the right. They waited. No movement of approach.
They went forward again. The paddings and crack¬
lings came after them, till beyond the bushes they
were in open grassland again and the stalker gave them
up.
At noon they made a fire near the usual stream, and
Sinclair toasted the meat. Sir John lay full-length on the
ground, his face hidden, saying nothing. Clair, who
had been looking about her as they trekked, walked a
quarter of a mile or so away across the llano, into a
patch of gorse-like bushes. Presently she emerged from
these, coming back with her hands held like a cup. As
she came near the fire she called : “Sir John !”
He looked up at her, and smiled wryly, his face
drawn with pain. She knelt beside him. Her hands
were filled with blueberries.
“Now you can lunch.”
“You are a very sweet lady.”
His eyes were grave and Clair looked at him as
gravely. “Thank you,” she said, and emptied the
berries into his hands. Sinclair said, evenly: “You
shouldn’t eat too many of them, else it’ll be as bad for
you as the meat. Some horse, Miss Stranlay ?”
They went on again, after Clair had fallen asleep
and slept a dream-filled hour in the sun. The south¬
wards nullah-jumble drew nearer with its background
G
THREE GO BACK
98
of hills. And on the upper ranges of those hills was a
glittering yellow colourlessness.
In mid-afternoon they came upon the giant deer.
It stood with head lowered, drinking at a pool,
with dark-brown back pelt and white-dappled belly.
It was quite close to them when they came through a
belt of trees on it, and it was a moment before Clair
realized its hugeness. Then she saw Sinclair’s six feet
two in outline against the thing : it had the bulk of a
small elephant.
From its head uprose a twelve-foot spread of antlers,
velvet-rimed. Clair thought: ‘They must weigh
half a ton.’ The brute slowly lifted its head and regarded
them with vague, indifferent eyes. Then it inhaled
deeply, coughed, and trotted away, unhurryingly,
westwards. They stared after it, seeing it clear the dip
of a nullah in one magnificent bound, and then disap¬
pear through a pass in the hills.
And presently over those hills came the hunters.
Subchapter v
They came like figures on a Grecian frieze upflung
against the colours of the sunset.
First, there was the afternoon quietness but for the
scuffle of the grass underfoot. The sun overhung the
hills, the country lay deserted since the great deer had
vanished. Clair had bent to pick a thorn from her
foot and her companions also had halted, Sir John
lifting his face, smelling at some unusual odour he
imagined upon the wind. Then 
The first intimation was a far, wild neighing and
stamping. Clair straightened and looked at the other
two. Their eyes were on the grass-covered hill-top
WHERE ? WHEN ?
99
perhaps a quarter of a mile away. Its rim was set with
hasting dots—dots that changed, enlarged, were heads,
shoulders, flying manes. It was a herd of wild ponies
in panic flight. The drumming of their hoofs came down
to the watchers. Up over the hill into full view they
thundered, with flowing manes and tails, thundering
against the sunset. And behind, company on company,
racing into view, came the hunters.
They ran in silence, tall and naked, the sunshine
glistening on golden bodies, their hair flying like the
horses’ manes. Golden and wonderful against the hill-
crest they ran, and the staring Sinclair drew a long
breath.
“Good God, they are running as fast as the horses !”
It was unbelievable. It was true. And while Sinclair
and Sir John stared at now one hunter, now another,
overtake his prey and spear it with whirling weapon,
Clair Stranlay put her hands to her lips and whistled up
through the evening that piercing blast learned long
before in the streets of Battersea.
Chapter VI : THE HUNTERS
Subchapter i
THOSE ensuing moments ! Looking back on them,
Clair was to wonder, with a strange tautness of
her heartstrings, if they were indeed as her memory
pictured them. If the fervour of the sunset behind the
hunters had indeed been so intense, their approach to
the three survivors of the Magellan so rapid. They had
come fleeting down the hill, a wash of gold, with the
speed of converging clouds in a rainstorm. Abandoning
the carcases of the ponies they had swooped down¬
wards in a bright torrent, and in Clair’s memory she
had fast-closed her eyes at sight of their spears. She
had thought:
‘They will throw those spears.’
But they had not. She had opened her eyes again, to
find that Sinclair, upright and with scowling face, had
moved a little in front of her, as though to shield her
from the approaching savages. Close now. Gold and
naked, with flying hair.
And then indeed in her heart had leapt that strange
quiver of unreality upon which her memory insisted—
or was that a later-learnt thing from Sinclair’s theories ?
For in that moment of mind-tremor it was a torrent of
men from her own land—pale and pinched and padded
who bore down upon her. . . . Then that passed.
She stood shaking, but seeing clearly again.
Two score or more of them, naked and tall and golden-
brown, not one of them under six feet in height. Some
IOO
WHERE ? WHEN ?
101
of them mere boys j no old men. And their faces !
They were the faces of no savages of whom she had ever
heard or read : broad, comely, high-cheekboned, some
with black eyes and some with blue, and one she noted
with eyes that were vividly grey eyes in his golden face.
. . . Sinclair barking out: “Damn you! Keep off!”
They took no notice whatever. Sir John Mullaghan
put his arm round Clair, Sinclair fell back to her other
side. The hunters at that manoeuvre halted, queried
each other with surprised looks, and then burst into
a loud peal of laughter.
Sinclair swung up his axe. “Keep off!”
For answer one of the hunters, armed with a piece of
wood shaped like a boomerang, laughed in the
American’s face and came casually forward under the
threat of the axe—so close did he come that he stood
not three feet away. Clair stared up at him, saw him
young, with white teeth uncovered in an enjoying
grin (and that completes his costume’, added the imp
in her mind)—then found her attention distracted.
Sir John’s arm shot past her, gripping Sinclair’s just as
it was about to descend.
Keep steady, Dr. Sinclair. We can’t do anything.
. . . Ah, it’s too late.”
For the young hunter had wheeled round at a call
from his companions. Most of them had halted in
attitudes of casual surprise or cheerful indifference,
but three of them, older men, were poising their spears,
warningly. They called something again, and the young
man, the mirth falling from his face, drew back. Unex¬
pectedly, Sinclair dropped his axe and stood staring
stupidly.
Next moment, apparently galvani2ed into action by
nothing more than a co-operative impulse, the hunters
swept in and surrounded them.
102
THREE GO BACK
“They’re friendly,” said Sir John. “Keep cool, Miss
Stranlay.”
“I’m going to ”
A hand tugged gently at the eiderdown quilt draped
round her shoulders. She wheeled round, clutching the
thing. An impudent golden face smiled down at her.
Behind came another tug, and she turned on that. The
quilt was in the hands of the young hunter who had
smiled under the threat of the Neanderthal axe. He
dropped it, and stretched out his hands again, his eyes
lighted with amused curiosity. Clair’s heart contracted.
1 “No—no !”
The laughter of the savages echoed up the evening of
the hills. The three survivors of the Magellan's Cloud
found themselves patted and pinched and questioned
in pantomime. The young hunter, smiling, put his arms
round Clair, and in a sudden panic she sank her teeth
into a warm, muscular, golden arm.
The savage drew back with a cry of pain. Sinclair
struggled free from the group surrounding him. He
glanced round and caught sight of Clair.
“Miss Stranlay ? What is it ?”
“Nothing.” She was already repentant. “I was a fool.”
She bent to reclaim the eiderdown. One of the
hunters, like a mischievous boy, kicked it beyond her
reach. Thereat Sinclair flung him nearly as far. The
laughter died down. The levitated hunter picked him¬
self up, his face black with anger. He dropped his
spear, came running into the circle again, pushed his
face close to Sinclair’s, and shouted excitedly.
“Don’t touch him again, Sinclair !” Clair discovered
Sir John Mullaghan, panting, standing by her side.
The hunters had fallen silent, with eager, expectant
faces. Sir John said : “God bless me !”
Sinclair, his head thrust forward as had been the
WHERE ? WHEN ?
103
angry hunter’s, seemed to be replying to the savage in
his own language—a torrent of consonants. At that
the angry one suddenly smacked the American in the
face, and then leapt back lightly out of range. Doing
so, the anger vanished from his face. He laughed.
Thereon all the others shouted with laughter as well,
Clair’s assailant being so overcome that he had to hold
his sides. . . .
The Magellan’s survivors stared astounded.
“Must be a colony of escaped lunatics,” said Sir
John. “I’ll try and get you that quilt. Miss Stranlay.
. . . What now ?”
“Utso! Utso /”
The hunters, yelling, turned and ran, all but three of
them. One of these seized Sinclair’s wrist, another Sir
John’s, gesticulating the while towards the hill where
the pony-battue had taken place. Clair found her right
hand in the grasp of a savage whose face was vaguely
familiar. It was he of the vivid grey eyes.
He waved towards the hill, urgently. Clair, with a
last, desperate glance backwards, pointed to the quilt.
He shook his head. Next moment, in the trail of Sir
John and his captor, Clair Stranlay found herself run¬
ning through the evening shadows of the unknown
land by the side of a golden body and a golden head
which stirred a misty clamour of memories in her mind.
Subchapter ii
There were half a dozen ponies on the hill-brow.
They were no larger than Shetlands. One of them was
not quite dead. As Clair and the grey-eyed hunter
arrived, a savage bent over the beast and, poising a
flint-axe in his hand, neatly split its skull. Half the
hunters faced outwards, their flint-tipped spears held
THREE GO BACK
104
ready. Strange, grey-black things, with high shoulders
and dragging hindquarters, came out of the gloaming
dimness, glared at the groupings of dead ponies and
quick men, snarled disappointedly, and wobbled back¬
wards. A hunter made a feint with his spear at one of
these unaccountable beasts. Thereat, scrambling away
like a calf, it guffawed hideously. Clair felt she was
going mad, standing in the gloaming chill among these
laughing savages and laughing beasts. She found
Sinclair beside her, and clung to him for a moment,
thinking : ‘That scowl of yours is the only sane thing
in this country.’ She shook him.
“Who are they ? What are they going to do ?”
“Wish I knew—the giggling swine ! Especially that
clown who slapped my face ”
“Oh, never mind your face.”
“I’m sorry.” Stiffly.
They looked at each other. Clair began to giggle.
The American still scowled with twitching face. Clair
realized he was almost as hysterical as she was. Realiza¬
tion was somehow sobering. A hunter near them,
bending over the carcase of a pony, pushed his bearded
face towards them, grinning inquisitively himself, as
though desirous of sharing a joke. Sir John Mullaghan
struggled to their side, though indeed no one made any
effort to detain him.
“Sinclair, since you know their language ”
“Oh, yes, and what language is it ?” Clair also had
remembered.
“I don’t know.” He stared at them puzzledly in the
twilight. “I’ve no memory of hearing it before. But
when that circus clown came jabbering I found myself—
answering him.”
“But you tnust know what you answered.”
“I don’t. . . . Good God, are we to stand here
WHERE? WHEN? IOJ
while I’m put through an examination in linguistics ?
Stop that damned giggling, Miss Stranlay. ... I’ll
ask them where they’re going to take us ”
“No need,” said the armaments manufacturer.
Nor was there. The hunters, half of them laden
with portions of pony carcase, began to move down
the southward brow of the hill. They seemed to have
no leader. The move was made in a drift of mutual
convenience. A large, elderly man, over-burdened,
stopped beside Sinclair and motioned unmistakably.
He wanted assistance.
“I’m damned if I do,” said the American.
The man showed his teeth in a grin, lingered, moved
on. It was almost dark. A hunter with his spear slung
on his arm by a thong caught Sir John and Sinclair by
the arms and urged them down the hillside. Looking
after them it struck Clair, absurdly, that he was doing
the thing in sheer friendliness. . . . Next moment she
found herself alone on the hill-brow with the beasts,
now a dark mass like a moving carpet, snuffling up the
hill towards her. She would have run but that a hand
came over her shoulder, and she almost screamed at
that. It was the grey-eyed hunter. He was evidently
the rearguard. He smiled and motioned southward.
He smiled less frequently than the others. His body
smelt of red earth. Clair thought, sickly: ‘Some
caveman stuff, now, of course.’ And so thinking she
was suddenly very sick.
The savage left her side. Being ill, she heard the
sound of a furious scuffle, the impact of blows. The
hunter returned, breathing heavily, glancing over his
shoulder. He caught her arm anxiously. They began to
run downhill together. Thereat a wurr of protest behind
them changed into a scamper of many paws and a
blood-freezing bay of laughter.
Io6 THREE GO BACK
Sinclair, Sir John and the others had disappeared.
Clair ran blindly in the darkness over grass and things
that were probably bush-roots, for she stumbled on
them. Behind, the pattering sound gained volume.
Clair understood. The man beside her could run as
fast as the beasts by whom they were being pursued.
She was delaying him. She shook her arm free.
“Go on, you idiot, then ! I can’t.”
For answer, still holding her hand, he swung to the
right. Clair heard the scratch and scrape of the wheeling
pack behind them. The hunter’s hand shot up and
gripped her wrist.
Next moment they trod vacancy.
Clair heard a feeble little ghost of a scream come
from her own lips. She curved her body automatically
and next moment struck water—water she could not
see. It closed over her body like an envelope of red-hot
steel. Down and down, with burning eyeballs. Some¬
thing tearing at her, something holding her. . . . She
found herself on the surface—the surface of a river it
must be, for the current was strong—trying to swim
and hampered in the effort by the grip of the naked
hunter.
She tried to wrench her arm free, and then imme¬
diately stopped, realizing that he evidently knew in
which direction to swim. Which she as certainly did
not. A short distance away a snuffling clamour and
bestial laughter grew fainter. Clair’s knee struck soggy,
yielding ground. They crawled through a stretch of
swamp ; scrambled up an incline. Clair fell on the
ground, panting. It was black as pitch. The savage
was the vaguest shadow. He pulled at her shoulder
impatiently, saying incomprehensible things. She
raised her head.
Quite near at hand was the glow of five great fires.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
IO?
Subchapter Hi
So it seemed to Clair then, looking at that bright
segmenting of the eastern night. But she was mistaken.
There were five great openings into the cave, and the
segmented glow had birth and being in a multitude of
fires. The light grew brighter as she and the grey-
eyed hunter climbed from the river. Far in ages past
that river had driven through a higher channel in the
limestone bowels of the hillside ; once, indeed, it must
have flowed eastwards an underground river. Then,
in some catastrophic spate, it had burst those stygian
bonds, broken free in an acre-wide vomit of great
limestone boulders, and then sunk and sunk, sweeping
eastwards and downwards, till it flowed, in rough
parallel, a good hundred yards from the gaping cavern
mouths that marked the riven bank of the original
channel. 1’he catastrophe had left a great cave, at some
points narrow, at others wide and sweeping into a glow-
softened darkness ; fires burned in remote sub-caves
far into the rock. . . . Clair stood in the wash of light,
looking at a scene as remote from the life and times of
her country as it was remote from all pictures she had
ever built in imagination of the life of the savage.
There were perhaps two hundred or less human
beings in that immense abandoned channel of the
underground river. More than half were women and
children. Some were grouped round the innumerable
small fires, some lay flat and apparently asleep on skins
by those fires, some stood in groups—surely in gossip !
Ten yards from Clair an old man squatted, his greying
hair falling over his eyes, and, in the unchancy light of
the fires, smote with a mallet at a nodule of bright
I°8 THREE GO BACK
flint. The staccato blows rose at regular intervals, high
above the hum of the cavern.
Men, women and children were entirely naked, and
for a little they saw neither Clair, panting and dripping,
nor her companion, dripping as well, but panting not
at all. Then a voice called something from the group
round the nearest fire, and Clair’s hunter touched her
arm and she found herself walking across the hard,
uneven floor of the cave into the concentrated, astounded
stare of four hundred eyes. Then (so it seemed to her)
the whole cave rose en masse and precipitated itself
upon her.
She said, frightenedly, so frightened that she merely
said it, not screamed it, “Sinclair.”
A man touched her hair, found it unbelievable,
ruffled it wildly, laughed. Two women stroked her
breasts. Someone pinched her. A boy who might have
been five years old slipped through the forest of legs
and clasped Clair’s knees, so that she almost fell. She
clenched her fists and struck one of the women on the
mouth. At that the touching hands left her. The
babble hushed. The laughing, curious eyes darkened.
And from somewhere Sir John Mullaghan’s voice
called abruptly :
“Don’t do that, Miss Stranlay ! They don’t mean
any harm.”
So Clair had realized. It was impossible, but it was
a fact. The golden-skinned nudes were as friendly as
they were unreticent. Clair did something then that
was an inspiration—leant forward to the woman she had
hit, and who had drawn back a pace, and kissed her on
her bruised mouth.
“I—I’m sorry.”
Thus haltingly (and appropriately, she was after¬
wards to think) her greeting to that world from her
WHERE ? WHEN ?
109
own. For answer the brown-haired woman put up
her arms, held her head in a curious way, and kissed
her in return !
(‘And, oh, my good God, she’s a savage !’)
Clair found her hand seized by the woman. She
found herself being led away towards a fire burning
solitary in a sub-cave of the great rock chamber. She
found herself sitting on a badly-cured skin, with beside
her the woman whom she had hit and kissed, bending
over the fire, toasting a long, grey fish in much the same
fashion as Sinclair had toasted the horsemeat. (‘Like
a figure from the Greek vases—a lovely figure,’ said
her mind.) She recovered her breath and looked about
her.
The American and Sir John were hasting towards
her, threading the dottings of fires. Behind them fol¬
lowed the grey-eyed savage.
“Where did you get to. Miss Stranlay ?”
Sinclair was unreasonably angry. Also, it seemed
to her he was still hysterical. He kept glancing from
right to left, towards the cave-mouths, the cavern¬
ceiling, the groups of the golden-skinned. He waited
for no answer, but, gripping his head with his hands,
half-turned away. Clair thought, disturbedly : ‘Good
gracious, what s the fuss—now we’ve fallen among
these nice natives ? They’ll guide us to a town or a
trading-post in a day or so.’ She smiled up at the two
of them.
“Having a walk with a gentleman friend. There he
is behind you.”
The hunter came up, unsmiling. He looked from
Clair to Sinclair, from Sinclair to Sir John. Then his
grey eyes came back to Clair, cjuestioningly. He made
a motion from her to Sinclair.
She said to Sinclair : “What ?”
no
THREE GO BACK
The American stared at her and the hunter abstract¬
edly. He was certainly on the verge of a breakdown.
He said, “Eh ?” and then, to the savage, a bark of unin¬
telligibility. The savage found it intelligible. He
answered. Sinclair’s hands went again to his head.
“He wants to know if you are my woman.”
Clair sat up with some abruptness. “What have you
told him ?”
Sir John Mullaghan said, very evenly : “I think
Sinclair had better say ‘Yes,’ Miss Stranlay.”
Clair found the three of them watching her—
Sinclair with a strange, dazed look on his face. (‘Not
thinking of me at all.’) The woman toasting the fish
looked up with wondering, friendly eyes. Clair thought:
‘Silly ass—go on, agree I’ and so thinking found her¬
self for some reason shaking her head at the grey-eyed
hunter.
He smiled, gravely; nodded, and walked away.
Clair, with a little catch of breath, watched him go.
To what had she committed herself ?
Subchapter iv
That question was to return with frightening intensity
a few hours later.
The fires had died down considerably. Heaped with
damp grass and heavy boughs they smouldered with
the smell of garden rubbish burned in an English garden.
The smoke drifted out of the circle-radiance of each
fire, coiled to the roof, and then, in an army of ragged
banners, went north into the unexplored darkness of
the ancient river-bed. Outside, a wind had risen that
soughed eerily among the stars. On either side of the
fires the naked hunters and their women slept, some-
WHERE ? WHEN ?
Ill
times as many as eight or ten to a fire, sometimes only
two. Clair had witnessed, and in the sleepy stirrings of
the dark continued to witness, scenes of a kindly sim¬
plicity unbelievable. Naked savages in a naked cave
in an unknown land! Sir John Mullaghan had
emerged once from the bizarre cavern background and
the neighbourhood of the distant fire where he had been
adopted.
Comfortable, Miss Stranlay ? If you want Sinclair
or myself during the night, just shout. One of us will
keep awake.”
“Oh, don’t. I’m sure we’re safe enough. Who on
earth are these people, Sir John ?”
The grey-haired armaments manufacturer—surely
the most grotesque figure ever seen in these sur¬
roundings !—put his hand to his head, bewilderedly,
much as Sinclair had done.
“I’ve no idea—unless I’m to accept Sinclair’s new
theory. Perfectly mad.” He stared down at her with
something like horror on his gentle face. “At least, I
hope to God he’s mad. . . . Don’t talk about it, Miss
Stranlay. We’ll discuss the matter to-morrow. Have
you noticed the paintings on the roof ?”
“Paintings ?”
“Look. Amazing things, aren’t they ?” He muttered
to himself, distractedly. “And the final proof for
Sinclair’s sanity. . . . Oh, they can’t be.” He shook
himself. “Good night, Miss Stranlay.”
“Good night, Sir John.”
She had stared after him, troubled and puzzled.
Sinclair ? . . . And then her eyes had turned to the
wild beauty and vigour of the painted beasts that stood
and charged and fled in panic flight amid the coiling
of the fires smoke. Here was their sabre-tooth, in
black and grey; yonder, a red mammoth; centre the
112
THREE GO BACK
great arch of the cave chamber a nightmare monster
bunched in polychrome, gigantically, for an attack.
. . . Savages—and these paintings ! Where were they ?
What country was this ?
She turned now, the heavy pelt of an unknown animal
beneath her, and lay on her right shoulder. She pulled
another skin, long-haired and warm, up to her neck,
and lay sleepless, looking down the stretch of the
caves. Savages. Awful people. Only they were
neither savage nor awful.
No other words than negatives in which to state the
facts.
A yard away the woman she had hit slept by the side
of a broad-chested hunter with one eye and a face dis¬
figured as though half of it had been torn away in red
eclipse by the stroke of a great paw. He had come into
the sub-cave the while the woman stolen from an Attic
vase had been feeding Clair on a piece of fish and a hand¬
ful of green, rush-like things ; he was evidently a late
arrival from the hunt, and the woman his squaw. Clair
had shuddered at sight of his face, and then saw that
the hideous grimace on it was an interested smile. Her
pyjamas again, of course. He had reached out and down
an inquiring hand—and then withdrawn the hand,
shamefacedly, as the woman said something to him,
sharply. . . . Squaw !
Clair looked over her shoulder at them in the cave-
silence now. They might have been Iseult and Tristan
together in that unshielded embrace.
She closed her eyes—and instantly opened them
again. Somewhere close to the cave-mouths a savage
snarling had broken out. Clair raised herself on her
elbow. She could just see through the nearest entrance,
greatly pillared by nature, like an archaic temple. In
the pearl starshine stalked two dim shapes, long-bodied,
WHERE ? WHEN ?
II3
sinister. They seemed smooth-skinned in that light,
like great hounds. Were they coming into the cave ?
They growled again, and she realized the brutes were
hesitating, seeking to summon up courage for just such
a raid. But while she thought so a figure beside one of
the far fires arose, stirred the fire near him to a blaze,
and with blazing torch came sleepily down the length
of the main cave, stirring each fire. Lights yellow and
red and lilac fountained with much crackle and twinkle.
The beasts in the starlight vanished. Clair sank down
again, watching the man with the torch.
He stopped beside her fire, stirring it as he had done
the others, but more cautiously. Then he laid down the
torch and crossed towards where Clair lay. She closed
her eyes, fast.
With that blinding of herself the silence of the night
and cave fell upon her senses acutely, like a sharp pain.
It was actual physical relationship, not of hearing alone,
this silence. The crackling fires had ceased their crack¬
ling, burning now in a steady loom. Outside, the wind
had died away, perhaps awaiting the moonrise—or even
the dawn, for how could one know the hour ? And
bending over her was a naked savage.
She bit her lips, hearing the fervid beating of her
own heart. He also would hear it, and at that thought
she tried, foolishly, to ease its noise. She almost suffo¬
cated. Should she shout for Sinclair ?
She opened her eyes. She knew him then. It was
the grey-eyed hunter. And it was someone else ; the
face of the boy who had died outside Marnet-^ bent over her in
dim scrutiny.
So, for a moment, then he turned and went, and
Clair laid her head in her arms and slipped into uncon¬
sciousness.
H
Chapter VII : A SLIP IN THE TIME-SPIRALS
Subchapter i
IT was next afternoon.
Clair Stranlay lay sleeping in the sunlight of the
bluff that fronted the caves across the river. She was
high up there, and had found a place where the sere
grass was less coarse than usual, and soft to lie on.
She had not intended to sleep, but to lie taking mental
stock of the forenoon’s impressions, to brooding over
the symptoms of a mysterious insanity hourly displayed
by Sinclair, to watching the unending play of life in
the cave-mouths opposite. So indeed she had done for
a little after climbing the bluff, seeing the remote golden
figures of hunters or women stroll out against the lime¬
stone pillars of their habitations, seeing the moving,
hasting, recumbent dots that were children sprayed out
in all directions from the cave-mouths to the river.
Then sleep had come upon her, unawares, yet gently,
so that even sleeping she was conscious that she slept
and slept comfortably. Almost it was as though she
were deeply asleep and dreaming that she slept.
So the new-comers over the grass, from the opposite
way up the bluff that she had taken, did not greatly
startle her. She opened clear, undrowsy eyes and
watched Sir John Mullaghan and the American sit down
beside her, one on either side, so that all three had view
of the cave-mouths opposite.
“You’ve been a long time,” she said. “If there is
time in this place.”
The two men glanced at each other, swiftly, queerly.
114
WHERE? WHEN?
115
then looked away again. They said nothing. Sir John
passed his hand over his grey hair in characteristic
gesture. He had begun to fray badly, Sir John ; he
seemed to have frayed overnight. He still had trousers
and coat, but the trousers were now shorts, the coat
lacked sleeves. Sinclair 
Clair glanced at herself, and made hasty redraping
of her rags. “Goodness, our tailors will do a thriving
trade when we do get back !”
“If we ever get back,” said Sinclair.
Clair had half-expected some such remark. Yet it
startled her. “So there’s something behind their friendli¬
ness ? Do they—do they intend to do something to
us ?”
“Eh ?” The American looked blank for a moment.
Grinned without mirth. “Oh, the cooking-pot or some¬
thing like that ? I imagine they’ve never dreamt of
cannibalism. No, it’s not that. We’re prisoners—but
only as result of the most fantastic accident. Frankly,
Miss Stranlay, I don’t think there’s any chance of us
getting back to civilization again.”
“But—we’re not going to stay here always ? We
can start out exploring again, and we’re bound to
reach some place in touch with civilization. Some time.”
“I doubt it.”
“Why ?”
The American looked round the lilac, sun-hazed
hills. Below them went on the drowsy play of activity
of the naked figures at the cavern entrances. Curlews
were crying over that stretch of marsh across which
Clair and the grey-eyed hunter had run the night before
to escape from the giant hyenas. . . . His gaze came
back to Clair’s face.
“Because I don’t think there’s such a thing as civili¬
zation in existence. I don’t believe there’s a restaurant
n6
THREE GO BACK
of a dress-maker’s shop or a doctor’s surgery anywhere
in the world.”
Clair nodded, chewing a stalk of grass. “I know. I
felt like that last night. . . . But it’s only an illusion
we play with, of course.”
Sir John struck in, quietly. “Sinclair means it
seriously, Miss Stranlay.”
Clair sat up, looking at them both. Sunstroke ?
But Sinclair was merely scowling, as he always did when
brooding on a problem, and Sir John’s face was sane
enough.
“Seriously ? But—we came out of—civilization five
or six days ago.” She indicated the frayed rags that
clad her. “This sleeping-suit was made in the Rue de
la Paix.”
Sinclair drew up his knees in front of him and clasped
them. “I don’t mean anything illusory, symbolic or
allegorical when I say there’s no such thing as civiliza¬
tion. I just mean it, Miss Stranlay. There’s no such
thing ; there won’t be any such thing for thousands of
years.”
“Perhaps you’d better detail all the evidence, as you
did for me, Sinclair.”
“Yes.” The American turned his square, firmly-
modelled head. Clair, troubled though she was, had a
little shock of enlightenment. Of course—that was it!
The hunters had heads like that! “Let’s go back to the
beginning of all these happenings, Miss Stranlay ”
“Oh, let’s. But why ?”
“A minute. Remember what happened on board the
Magellan’s Cloud ? First, there was that submarine earth¬
quake. Then the airship’s wireless failed to get any
message from outside, though the set was quite
undamaged. Then it grew inexplicably cold for that time
of the year, and we saw islands appearing in mid-
WHERE? WHEN?
II?
Atlantic—and quite evidently islands not newly risen
from the sea. And then—the moon appearing at the
full, though no moon was due for another five days.”
Clair wriggled herself flat again in the sunlight.
She felt a strange uneasiness. “Yes, I remember all that.
And it was a different moon.”
“It still is a different moon,” said Sir John. “I went
out of the cave early this morning and saw it. Intense
volcanic activity must still be going on up there.”
“More than likely. You’ve got all these facts, Miss
Stranlay ? Then, the Magellan's Cloud was wrecked
against a mountain in a land that couldn’t exist. . . .
We spent a deal of argument in the last few days trying
to guess what the land was. I suppose it was necessary
to argue to keep sane. I was never very convinced by
my own arguments. Now we’ve had time to think, it’s
plain that the airship didn’t diverge sufficiently from its
course—or go at such an altered speed—as reach back
either to Africa or forward to Canada or Patagonia.”
“Yes. But we’re somewhere.”
“Obviously. But it isn’t any place you ever heard
of, is it ? It is, in the geography of the twentieth century,
an impossible place, because the airship couldn’t have
reached it.”
Clair had begun to see. “Then—it’s a new country,
somewhere in the middle of the Atlantic ? . . . But
that must be nonsense. The sun’s got at us all. . . .
It’s too big not to have been discovered before. It
must be as big as ancient Atlantis.”
There was an unnecessary silence. Sinclair brooded,
Rodin s Thinker in rags. Sir John had turned his
face into the blow of the sunlight wind. Sinclair spoke.
Exactly. That is where I’m convinced we are—in
that continent which once filled the eastern trough of
the Atlantic.”
118
THREE GO BACK
Subchapter ii
Clair covered her ears. “ ‘Once filled it ?’ Stop,
please. ... I feel as muzzy as a fly in honey. Once.
. . . That was thousands of years ago, Atlantis. How
can we be in Atlantis now ?”
“Because the now is thousands of years ago.”
Clair laughed and patted her ears. “There’s some¬
thing wrong with my hearing. You’ll have to examine
my ears.”
“It sounds very confusing, Miss Stranlay, but I
think Dr. Sinclair’s cumulative evidence is unim¬
peachable.”
“Evidence of what ?”
Sinclair seemed to have lost something of his old-
time, ready exasperation. He did not rave at her
stupidity, Clair reflected, as he would certainly have
done three days before. His voice was very quiet.
“Let me go on with the evidence first. We three
survived the Magellan's wreck, we found a plateau
practically without animals, and entirely without human
beings in its northernmost part. And there was a long
mountain-chain that must be a vent of the central fires
of the earth, with thirteen unknown volcanoes on it.”
“Were there thirteen ? I never counted.”
“Yes. Towards the end of the plateau we sheltered
in a cave and were almost killed there by a sabre-tooth
tiger. And in the cave I found the bones and skull—
fresh bones and fresh skull, not fossils—of a Neanderthal
man. We came down from the plateau and were chased
by a mammoth. We saw an Irish elk, and, late last
night, hyaenodons. All these animals—and the Neander¬
thal man—had long been extinct before the twentieth
century. And, last of all, we were made prisoners by
WHERE? WHEN?
ll9
these people”—he waved his hand towards the caves
—“whom at first I thought were merely an unknown
tribe of savages.”
“And aren’t they ?”
“I don’t think so. I know what their language is
now, and why I answered in it so readily. It’s Basque—
an elementary and elemental form of Basque. My
mother was Basque. I haven’t spoken the language
since childhood, but last evening found myself speak¬
ing and thinking in it half-unconsciously. . . . It’s
the loneliest language in twentieth century Europe, as
I suppose you know. No affinities to any other, just as
the Basques have no apparent racial affinity to any
existing group. It’s been speculated that they’re the
pure descendants of the Cro-Magnards—you’ve heard
of them ?”
It sounded to Clair foolishly remote from their
trouble of finding a way back to a knowable coast and
civilization. She wrinkled her sunburnt brows. “I
think so. Yes—I went picnicking to the Cro-Magnon
caves once and drank bad Moselle there. They were
the Stone Age people who painted all those French
and Spanish caves, weren’t they ? Painters !” Apparent
enlightenment came on her. “And you think our
hunters are a stray tribe of Basques ?”
“No, I don’t. I think they’re proto-Cro-Magnards—
ancestors of the French Cro-Magnards and remote
ancestors of the twentieth century Basques.”
“Ancestors ?”
Sir John patted her shoulder. “I think you’d have
done better to tell her your theory right out, Sinclair
—rather than lead up to it with evidence.”
Still, miraculously, Sinclair kept his temper. “All
right. Plainly, then, Miss Stranlay, and fantastic as it
may sound, I believe we’re not in the twentieth century
120
THREE GO BACK
at all—that through some inexplicable accident con¬
nected with that submarine earthquake the Magellan's
Cloud fell out of the twentieth century into an Atlantic
atmosphere that had never known an airship before.
That was why she could get no reply to her wireless
calls. This is not the twentieth century.”
“What is it, then ?” Clair heard her voice in the
strangest, attenuated whisper.
“I don’t know. But from all the evidences, I should
think we’re somewhere in the autumn of a year between
thirty and twenty thousand years before the birth of
Christ.”
Subchapter Hi
“It will always remain unreal—and oh, nonsensically
impossible to believe !”
More than two hours had gone by. Clair’s face was
more pallid than either of the men had ever seen it, and
indeed it had required something of her disbelief and
horror to make them realize the thing themselves, albeit
they had met that desperation of hers with irrefragable
fact after fact. Now Sinclair pointed down to the
mouths of the caves where the golden children played.
“Are these people unreal ?”
Clair looked down. “No, they are real enough.”
She spoke in a low voice, so that they hardly caught
her words. She thought for a moment and then smiled
from one to the other of them. “Thank you. It’s—•
a devil of a thing. I don’t think I’ll think about it
much ... if I can. Or at least not deliberately try to
go mad. . . . All this stuff about the time-spirals
and retro-cognitive memory—maths have always given
me a headache. The world used always, I thought,
WHERE? WHEN?
121
to roll along a straight line called Time, instead of loop¬
ing the loop with a thousand ghosts of itself before and
after it. And none of them ghost, and none the reality.”
Sir John said: “Fm not a mathematician either,
Miss Stranlay. But I take it they’re all realities in the
loop-spirals. And for a second—at that moment of the
submarine-earthquake—two of the loops touched, and
the Magellan’s Cloud was scraped off one on to the
other.”
“Like a fly off a pat of butter ?”
“Something like that.” He smiled at her from
behind his grizzled beard. That was better. The
Cockney was coming to her help. Clair said, very
softly :
“Please. It’s a September afternoon in London now.
There are dead leaves in the parks, and a lot of people
at the Zoo drinking tea under the trees. And motor-
buses going round Trafalgar Square and the pigeons
are twittering on the roofs of St. Martin’s in the Field.
And there’s been an accident in Hammersmith Broad¬
way, and an ambulance has come up, and the policeman
is shooing back the crowd. And Big Ben says it’s twenty
past three, and Jean Borrow in my flat is writing a Lido
novel, and there’s an unemployment procession, and
there’s Bond Street and shops and early door queues
in Leicester Square for an Edgar Wallace play. . . .
Just now. And it’s not now. It won’t happen for
twenty-five thousand years. Year after year. I’ve been
speaking just a minute. And it’s a long time until
sunset. And till the sunset of to-morrow. And until
the winter comes here on those caves. And until the
spring of next year. Year after year, till we’re all three
dead. And years after that, till this country’s dead and
no one really believes it existed. And years after that,
with spring and summer and birds over the hills and
122
THREE GO BACK
belling deer, and people in love and sleeping together
and having babies and watching them grow up, and
the babies becoming old men and women, and dying,
and their descendants seeing another spring. And an
ice age coming—slowly, through thousands of years.
And passing away through thousands more. And at
the end of that time—London will still be in the future.
. . . It’s not now, it never can be for us, nor for any¬
one now alive. . . . Up through thousands and thous¬
ands of years we’ll never see ”
Her voice had risen ; it cracked on the last word.
Sinclair was on his feet. He took her by the shoulders
and shook her. Laughing and crying, she stared up in
his eyes. Sir John half stood up also, made to interfere,
refrained. Clair struggled. Her hysteria died away.
Sinclair’s fingers relaxed. Clair found herself staring at
him resentfully, flushed, rubbing her shoulders.
“You beast t”
He was panting. He sat down. “Anything you like.
I tried to be an effective counter-irritant. Feel better ?”
Clair shuddered. “Don’t look at me, you two, for
a bit.”
They didn’t. After a little they heard her say:
“Sorry I went like that, especially after my promise.”
“I felt like going that way myself last night.”
“Did you ?”
The American nodded. “And we’re to make a com¬
pact, all three. If one of us ever feels that way again,
we’re to get to the other two at once. Promise ?
“Yes.”
Sinclair nodded to Clair’s spoken reply and Sir
John’s nod, and they said nothing for a little. Clair s
mind felt as though it were slowly recovering from a
surgical operation. Atlantis l She said: “And what
are we going to do ?”
WHERE ? WHEN ?
123
“What is there we can do ?”
This was Sinclair. Clair turned her eyes to the arma¬
ments manufacturer. He smiled at her. He looked ill,
she reflected. He said, gently :
“At least, we have all our lives to live—now, as
in that time that is not yet, that time that is thousands of
years away. And they are our lives. . . . There’s the
sun and the wind on the heath, brother. I wish I could
remember more of Borrow.” Below their eyes, in the
still sunshine, the life of the cave-mouths went on.
“And those people among whom we’ve come—if we
can live their life, they’re livable companions, aren’t
they ?”
“Oh . . .” Clair sat up again. “I knew there was
something you two had left unexplained. Most important
of all. You can’t explain it.” She turned to the American
accusingly. “If these are the ancestors of the Cro-
Magnards who are to become the ancestors of the
Basques ”
“And perhaps our own ancestors. Your own remote
ancestor may be one of these children playing by the
river there. Miss Stranlay.”
“Oh, my good God !” She was checked for a moment,
and again the curtain of horror waved before her eyes.
And, queerly, something came to her aid. It was
memory of the grey-eyed hunter. “But that doesn’t
matter. Won’t bear thinking about. If these people are
as far back in time as you imagine—they’re remoter from
civilization than any savage of the twentieth century.”
“Far remoter,” said Sinclair. “Their weapons and
implements are palaeolithic flints. They seem to have
no knowledge of even the elements of agriculture.
They wear no clothes at all, they haven’t even arrived
at the idea of storing water in calabashes—as I found to
my discomfort last night.”
124
THREE GO BACK
“They’ve no tribal organization,” said Sir John.
“That is plain enough already. None of the ultimate
divisions of power and responsibility have been yet
evolved.”
“But—theories, Sir John, and yours, Dr.
Sinclair. . . . Where is the raving Old Man with his
harem of wives ? And where’s all the cruelty and fear
and horror ? They’re not savages. They’re clean and
kindly children. Listen !”
Some jest of the caves. The shout of laughter
came up to them on the bluff-head. Both the men
were silent. Clair thought: £Oh, shame to wreck your
nice theories!’ and said: “So it must be the twentieth
century and Patagonia or some such place after all.”
The American shook his head. “It’s not the twentieth
century ; our data is stable enough. It’s just that all
the history books and all the anthropological theories
of the twentieth century tell the most foolish lies. It’s
just that Sir John Mullaghan and I and thousands more
have been victims of the shoddiest scientific lie ever im¬
posed on human credulity These proto-Cro-Magnards,
these earhest true men on earth—absolutely without culture
and apparently absolutely without superstitious fears,
cruelties, or class-divisions. It means that Rousseau was
right (or will be right ? How is one to think of it ?)
and the twentieth century evolutionists all wrong.”
Clair said, steadily : “These—like our ancestors ;
perhaps some of them our own ancestors. . . .” For
a moment it seemed to her that her two companions
were ghouls squatting beside her in the sunlight. “And
I knew it—women always knew it! But you two and
the thousands of others who led the world swore that
men were natural murderers ; you killed five million
in France to prove your theories. All through history
you’ve been doing it. . . . The boy who died on the
WHERE? WHEN?
I2J
wire outside Mametz—he was one of these hunters, I
saw his own face last night. And you and the world told
him he was a murderous beast by nature and ancestry !”
She was aware of the armaments manufacturer look¬
ing at her, doubt and a grey horror in his face.
Perhaps this is only a stray tribe of primitives unlike
all others.”
£4 “No.” Sinclair spoke. Abruptly, as with an effort.
“They are no stray tribe. You are right, Miss Stranlay.
You are woman, for that matter, of fifty tortured
centuries accusing us. . . . And we’ve no defence.
We never tried to find out the real facts of human
nature. . . . By God, but some did ! Some were
trying. I’ve just remembered. There was a new school
of thought in the world out of which we came. The
Diffusionist. And we thought them fantastic dreamers !”
“What did they dream ?”
Why, that primitive man was no monster, that it
was the early civilizations and their offshoots that
bedevilled him. If a Diffusionist were here at the moment
he would say that these are men as Nature intended
them to be. So they will continue for thousands of
years till by an accident in the Nile Valley agriculture
and its attendant religious rites will be evolved.
And from that accident in 4000 b.c. will rise, trans¬
forming the world the castes and gods, the warrior
and slave, the cruelties and cannibalisms, Sir John
Mullaghan’s armaments, the war that murdered your
lover, Miss Stranlay, and my League of Militant
Pacifists.”
They stared at Clair uncomfortably in the bright
sunshine. A party of hunters came over the eastward
hills—golden figures against a golden background.
They were singing, these dawn-men—godless and fear¬
less and hateless and glorious, Sinclair thought, they
126
THREE GO BACK
who should have slouched through the sunlight
obsessed and obscene animals ! . . . Sir John was
greyly conscious of Clair’s silent figure.
“But I still don’t understand. If this is the world
of twenty-five thousand b.c., as we’ve calculated, what
is its population ? Are there other men ? Is there a
Europe ? And that Neanderthal skull—it didn’t belong
to a species of man like one of these hunters, surely ?”
The American made an abrupt, half-despairing gesture.
“How can we know—now—since all our other beliefs
about these times go phut ? Something like this, I
imagine : Atlantis here is a great waste of land, the
youngest and most unstable of the continents. It must
stretch at points almost across to the Antilles and
America. And wandering through it are possibly a
few scarce family-groups like our hunters. Possibly—
but our hunters may be the only true men as yet in exis¬
tence. They must have been wandering this land for
thousands of years. In the east there, towards Europe
and in Europe itself there are Neanderthal men—
unhuman, a primitive experiment by Nature in the
making of man. They also must be few enough in
number, though their species probably spreads far into
Asia and Africa. And somewhere in Central and South-
Eastern Asia at this moment may be other family
groups of true men, not so very different from these
golden cavemen of ours, slowly wandering westwards....
There is an Ice Age coming, a few thousand years hence, and
at the end of it the Neanderthalers will die out and
these hunters, or rather their descendants, reach Europe
and spread over it and intermarry with those remote kins¬
men of theirs from Asia. . . . Something like that.”
He jumped to his feet. “Oh, by God, if one could
only tell them—those hunters of ours !”
“Tell them what ?” asked Sir John.
WHERE? WHEN? I2y
“History—the world that is to be. Remember that
kindly chap who took you and me prisoners—we
thought we were prisoners and we weren’t at all! He’s
never heard the words for war or prison. Or that
hunter who brought Miss Stranlay to the caves. .
If they knew what their children there in the sunlight
are going to inherit—thousands of years away ! All the
bloody butcheries of the battlefields, the tortures and
mutilatings of the cities still unbuilt, the blood-sacri¬
fices of the Aztec altars, those maimed devils who die
r, the C^imifeS °f EuroPe- • • •” He looked down at
Uair. You re a novelist, Miss Stranlay. You were
born in the slums—thirty thousand years in the future.
o you remember it ? Think that it still has to happen
—for these.” 1 r
Clair said, in a pale, quiet voice : “Will you two
leave me alone ? Oh, I won’t go mad again.”
E°n tstay to°Hte. We’ll watch for youfrom the cave.”
“AH right, Sir John.”
She heard the scuff-scuff of their receding footsteps.
She was alone. A lapwing came wheehng over the
hill-brow and passed towards the marshes. Drowsiness
had settled on the caves. Clair Stranlay laid her head
on her arms and began to weep—to weep and weep
as she had done never before in her life.
Sub chap ter iv
For a little, weeping, her thoughts were a static
confusion. Then they combered into a wild clamour—
an affrighted clamour, though the fear was of a differ¬
ent order from that which had horrified her into hysteria
in the presence of Sinclair and Sir John
^ ‘But what am I to do ? Oh, my good God, what ^
128
THREE GO BACK
I may live to be a hundred—days and days and months
and years—among horseflesh and fires. No books.
Never read a lovely piece of prose again. Never have
the fun of correcting my own proofs. Or lying on a
soft, clean bed. Or smoking cigarettes. Never talk to
the people who like my kind of jokes, or twist an
argument; or be clever and bright. Or wear pretty
clothes and have men want me. . . . And be safe—
safe and secure. ... I can’t do it, I can’t!’ The
grass rustled under her as she lay and wept, terrified.
She closed her eyes, tightly, to make sure that this
country and the American’s talk were all part of a
dream. Ever so tightly. In a moment, when she opened
them, she’d know. It couldn’t be, it couldn’t be. . . .
She opened her eyes on the afternoon of the pale
Atlantean hills.
As she looked across them with misted eyes, far and
remote, and heard by her for the first time since their
coming to the caves, there rose and belled and quivered
in the air the sound that had startled the mammoth miles
away by the side of the great oak. It rose and fell, rose
again, died on a long, strange note, that mysterious low¬
ing. Wonderful thing. Breath-taking thing to hear.
If only she had a notebook and pencil!
Both of them thousands of years away.
‘Let’s think calmly, then. If this were only a novel
—one of the kind you’ve wanted to write for a holiday.
Think that this isn’t yourself; only your heroine. It’s
she who’s lying on a hill above a lost Atlantis cave,
watching the children of the dawn-men playing by a
lost river. . . . And you’re comfortable in your
Kensington study, planning out the synopsis. What’s
she going to do next ? How’s she going to live ? She
must live—you’d never be mean enough to kill her.
But hon> ?’
WHERE ? WHEN ?
I29
It was late in the afternoon now—those afternoons
that seemed to contract so steadily with the wearing of
the week. She saw the smoke far up the opposite hill¬
side—from some high vent that aerated the caves—
thicken from pale blue to violet black. They were
building up the fires. Soon the main body of the
hunters, that had left at dawn, would return. The
individual hunters must long ago have returned. Sinclair
and Sir John waiting for her. Hungry. Hungry herself.
She stood up. The wind had turned cooler. She
shivered. Her ragged jacket flapped, and the pyjama-
trousers blew against her legs.
She looked down at herself—and, looking, started
at the thought that came to her.
Opposite, the loitering figures by the cave-mouths.
All her life among them . . .
‘Do it. Sometime you’ll be forced to do it. Good¬
ness, why wait till then ?’
A fox prowling up the side of the hill heard her
laugh, and at the sound stopped and bared his teeth,
brush cocked. He crept behind a tussock of grass and
wormed his way through the heart of it and looked
at the strange hunter with the uncouth skin. ... He
bristled a little at sight of what the hunter did, and
waited till she was gone, and for nearly an hour later
circled slowly round a strange, grassy fluffment that
was yet, he knew, no grass, and intriguing, though verv
unlikely eatable.
Subchapter v
Sinclair was the first to see her coming, splashing
through the shallow natural ford of the river. Reaching
the near side she paused to shake the water from herself.
The sunlight caught her then, dazzlingly. Deliberately,
I50
THREE GO BACK
walking with head down-bent (in thought, somehow he
knew, not in dejection) she came up the incline towards
the mouths of the caves.
Sinclair said : “By God, well done !”
“Eh ?” Sir John Mullaghan had not seen her. Now
he did. He hesitated, then nodded. “Splendid. Sensible
girl.”
“I’ll go in,” said Sinclair.
“That would be a mistake. Much better to stay here
and look at her and talk to her as we would have done
yesterday. . . . Hello, Miss Stranlay. That is the
sensible thing to do. I wish I weren’t so old, otherwise
I’d follow suit.”
Clair thought, ‘You dear,’ gratefully. She looked
at both of them, and found it now very easy. Sir John’s
eyes were naturally kind, the American’s at the moment
deliberately so. She said: “It feels good. Especially
coming through the river. And I always hated bathing-
dresses. . . . Only I hope winter doesn’t come too soon.”
“Both Sir John and I will be forced to it in time,
anyhow,” said Sinclair. And added, easily : “Shall we
walk over to your fire with you ?”
Clair realized, suddenly, something of the ordeal of
that. Or need it be ? She felt her nether lip begin to
tremble ; stayed it.
“Oh, no thanks.”
She smiled at them and went into the cave; and, so
seeing her for the first time, the women of the cave
rose like a flight of birds and settled around her.
Unreasonably, abruptly, Clair felt not afraid at all.
Standing smiling and nude, pearl and rose, under the
touch of their friendly golden hands, she thought:
‘. . . as though I were freed from a horrible skin
disease—free for the first time in my life. Oh, winter,
don’t come too soon 1 I want to live 1’
Chapter VIII: A LOVER FOR THE DARK DAYS
Subchapter i
BUT that night the rain set in, blowing squallily
into the mouths of the caves, so that the flames of
the fires danced and spat and flickered, and long serpent-
shapes of smoke wound and whorled everywhere.
Amid them blew sharp, piercing shafts of wind, and
Clair began to realize something of the life of those
people in the winter months. She lay wakeful beside
her fire, and Sinclair, who could not sleep either, came
over to her while the beating gusts shook the lime¬
stone hills and moaned far away in the subterranean
depths of the ancient river-bed.
“Shocking night.”
Clair stirred the fire gently with a bough, and
nodded to him. He stood, naked of shoulders and legs,
looking into the fire himself after that first sharp
appraisal of her. He said : “Missing your clothes ?”
Clair wound the odorous bearskin more closely round
herself. I suppose I am—in spite of my immunity
from cold. Silly perhaps of me to part with them.”
“Let me feel your pulse.”
He did. It seemed quite normal. She startled him
with a question. Do you think we’ll pull through the
winter months—especially Sir John ?”
“What ?”
Oh, you know. You will, I think. You have physique
for it, and most of the other advantages. I may 
through the accident that winter-bathing was my
hobby—though goodness knows I feel like a white
132
THREE GO BACK
snail without its shell among all these golden
people.”
“You looked lovely enough for the Parthenon
frieze.”
He said this impersonally. Clair nodded. “I know
I’m not unsightly. But mentally—coddled and
cowardly. Best-selling never trained me for a winter
in Atlantis.”
He was silent. He bent down to place a burning
twig more evenly. The wind whoomed, blowing his
hair and beard, as Clair saw looking up at him from the
shelter of her bearskin. In shadow and in flickering
light the Cro-Magnards slept, disregarding rain and
squall—all, except three very young babies who wailed
softly in the far corner of the cave. These apart, even
the very youngest slept soundly though the wind
occasionally lifted a skin covering and drifted it yards,
leaving exposed those nude bodies that had indeed the
colours of a fresh gold coin. As though made of gold
leaf. Outside, against the cave-mouths, the wavering
curtains of rain. . . . Atlantis ! Lost in Atlantis and
pre-history ! Clair, forgetting the silent Sinclair, leant
on an elbow, gazing round at the sleeping hunters
with golden, easy bodies. And for some strange,
fantastic reason she thought of lines in Tennyson :
''Ah, such a sleep they sleep.
The men I loved /’
These cavemen, the men of the dawn ! And sud¬
denly it was to her as though they lay dead, they and
their women and children, and over them indeed came
stalking those ghoulish shapes with which the world
remote in the future was to identify them—great beasts,
manure-flanked, slime-dripping, with fetid jaws and
WHERE? WHEN?
133
rheumy eyes, tearing at the throats of these dead men
of the dawn, mangling and destroying and befouling
the human likeness from the lovely limbs and faces.
. . . She started, hitting her head against the sandy
floor. Sinclair had turned his head, sharply, looking at
her.
“You’re sleepy now. Good night.”
“Oh—I was dreaming awake. Good night—it’s
ridiculous to say Dr. Sinclair. What is your name ?”
“Keith.”
“Good night, Keith.”
“Good night, Clair.”
Alone again, she lay on the verge of sleep, and
thought: ‘Those babies. Poor things. Awful for them.’
Two of them had been born that afternoon. Both
had been dead before sunset. Their bodies had been
carried along the river bank to the edge of the marsh
and abandoned there, Sinclair had said.
‘Awful. How it’s raining ! Drumming like a London
roof under rain, almost. London roofs—but you
mustn’t think of them. Nor all your London days.
Over, all days, very soon, I suppose.’
She grew wakeful again at that thought. Sinclair
had gone without answering her question. Over : all
the bright, burnished hours, the days of summers and
autumns, the good things to eat, the ease and pleasant¬
ness. ... To come to an end and a blinding in darkness
at last, somewhere, in some dark cave, without medical
attention or understanding. And someone, unless
Sinclair or Sir John was still alive, would carry her body
outside the range of the caves ; and leave it for a beast
to devour.
She looked, and so for long until the fires died
continued to look, into a night that was a pit of
terror.
134
THREE GO BACK
Subchapter ii
But that next dawn 
She awoke luxuriously, in the embrace of a strange,
secret exultation. Why ? Something awaiting her ?
She put aside the fur and got up and shivered in the
dawn chill, and saw then that it was but barely the
dawn.
No one stirred. Far at the furthest fire the watcher
of the fires was smoothing a stick with a flint. He heard
her, lightly though she walked, and looked round, and
flung back his hair from his face, and smiled. A boy.
She smiled herself and warmed herself by the fire of
another household, scraping away ash and refuse and
replenishing the cone-shaped structure with boughs
from a pile stacked near. Then she went to the nearest
mouth of the cavern, and at her appearance the sun that
had been hesitating behind the hills came over them,
and she stood and shivered with pleasure in its first
beams. The guard hunter came to her side ; said some¬
thing unintelligible; motioned towards the river. A
Hon and a lioness, grey beasts rather than tawny in that
light, were standing watching them, not twenty yards
away. The hunter gestured with the half-smoothed
bough in his hand. Promptly the lion disappeared
through the soft, wet grass. The lioness growled
and stalked after him despondently.
The hunter laughed.
The caves began to stir. The naked women awoke
and fed their babies. The men, naked equally, arose
and drifted about and were scolded, and grinned, and
crowded the cave-mouths as though in casual gossip.
Clair saw Sir John Mullaghan rising, with some appear¬
ance of chilled joints, from a heap of boughs. A Cro-
WHERE? WHEN? I35
Magnard helped him up. A frizzling smell began to
pervade the cavern. Breakfast. It was deerflesh, cooked
in the same monotonous way as always. Frying-pans,
pots and pantries were as unknown as gods, chancels
and torture-chambers. Afterwards the Cro-Magnards
would wander down to the river in twos and threes,
and drink.
Clair ate her charred venison with a hunger that
surprised her. She had learned a few words of the
proto-Basque in the past twenty-four hours, and with
their aid gathered from the woman, Zumarr, that Belia,
the hunter with the mutilated face, admired his guest’s
new appearance. So, apparently, and with much
astounded calling one to the other, did as many of the
Cro-Magnards as had not seen her before in natural
garb. They dropped pieces of venison and came running
to look at her. Zumarr shooed them away, vigorously.
The others who had come to look at her the night before
laughed.
And Clair thought a surprising thought: ‘These
people without religion are the most spiritual the world
will ever see ! They are quite unaware of their bodies.
They aren’t personal possessions to them, as mine is to
me. They must feel through them, impersonally, just
as they feel pleasure in the painting of sky and earth
by sun and mist. And they don’t dream of refusing
other people the right of looking at sky and earth . . .’
The men went away in the early morning, after
drinking at the river and indulging in some horse-play
when three of them were thrown into the water, and the
others apparently in a mood of self-retaliation—flung
themselves in on top. Watching them, Clair said to
Sir John : “But I thought swimming was a very arti¬
ficial acquirement of human beings ?”
Perhaps this family group has wandered from the
THREE GO BACK
136
shore of some inland sea in Atlantis. They’re certainly
very cleanly, most of them, though it’s plain it’s not
because of any code. They are because they enjoy it.”
“Where’s Keith Sinclair ?”
Sir John smiled. “He’s going out with the hunters.”
Clair saw him approaching then. It was apparently
for him that the watcher of the fires had been smoothing
the bough through the night. He carried that bough
now, straightened, and with a carefully-knapped sliver
of flint wedged and bound in it. Clair reached out her
hand and took the thing and examined it, and some of
the women came and looked at the three of them,
smilingly. One, a girl, giggled. And Clair thought:
T hope I’m not examining it too intently. I should
be just as casual as he was.’
The American nodded as she handed it back. There
was a flush on his dour face, a sparkle in his eyes. “I
expect I’ll be the worst kind of amateur. At the stalking
as well as the running—in spite of my atavistic legs.”
“Atavistic ?”
“Hadn’t you noted them ? I’m fairly Cro-Magnard
altogether in physiognomy. And the twentieth century
seems to have guessed correctly from study of the
fossil remains of these people found in the French
caves that their long shin-bones were developed by
racing game on foot. ... By the by, this is a feast
day.”
“Feast ?” Sir John, a grotesque figure in his rags, had
sat down. He smiled at them, greyly. “I’m sorry. Miss
Stranlay. I’m still a trifle upset internally. . . . Did
you say a feast, Sinclair ?”
“Yes.”
“But from what you were telling me of the Diffu-
sionist theory of history last night I understood that
ritual feasts came only with civilization ?”
WHERE ? WHEN ?
137
“There seem to be two exceptions. Perhaps they’re
memories of the old pre-human mating seasons. In
spring and autumn they occur, as far as I can gather
from the old flint-knapper, Aitz-kore ; and the autumn
one comes after the first night of rain.”
“What’s it for ?” Clair asked.
“Why— You won’t be shocked ?”
Clair laughed. Even Sir John, with closed eyes,
smiled. The American hefted his flint spear.
“It’s the time, I understand, when the men and
women choose their lovers for the winter—or those
already mated exchange.”
“Will there be—?” Clair’s question hesitated in her
eyes. Sinclair’s reply hesitated on his lips.
“I don’t think so. But I don’t know. Sir John and
I will take you out for a walk when it comes off, if you
like.”
“No. If we’re here for the remainder of our lives
that would be too suburban. ...” She suddenly
gripped his arm. “There’s my hunter.”
No other. Clair had not seen him all the day before.
He went and sat down by a fire and ate some scraps of
venison surviving the breakfast. A baby came and fell
over his feet. He righted it, absorbedly, and put it aside.
The baby procured a bone, and sucked it. Clair
shuddered.
“Been out on a lone trek, I should think,” said the
American. “They often do that, the young and unmar¬
ried, according to Aitz-kore. Wander off sometimes
and don’t come back. Hello, they’re waiting for me !”
“Good hunting !”
“Thanks.” He called over his shoulder. “Don’t
stray far from the caves, either of you.”
Scouts had already gone. Others straggled west¬
wards by the marsh, going casually, for there was no
i38
THREE GO BACK
game near at hand. The American pacifist joined a
golden-skinned group and companioned them out of
sight, his white starkness very conspicuous. Standing
in the sunlight of the cave-mouths, Clair looked after
him and stretched her own smooth-skinned body
luxuriously, and sighed deeply. Sir John looked up
inquiringly.
“Nothing, Sir John, except— Did you ever sleep
on Box Hill on a Sunday afternoon ?”
He shook his head, his face gentle still, if a little
twisted. She did not notice. She was twenty millennia
away.
“Heat and stickiness and someone playing a melo-
deon, and poor, life-starved louts prowling among the
bushes. Goodness, the stickiness and the taste in one’s
mouth! Horrible clothes. When we might have
been like this. . . . Box Hill!”
Sir John also had fallen into a dream. Box Hill!
His company; his constituency; that journey to
America. . . . Here in the sunshine of Atlantis one
began to doubt them. Had they ever been ? . . . He
found he had been thinking aloud. He found Clair’s
hand on his shoulder. Her lovely face was lighted but
dreamy still.
“Perhaps they were, but—need they ever he ? Perhaps
men dreamt the wrong dream. We are such stuff of
dreams. . . . Perhaps it was only a nightmare astray
on Sinclair’s time-spirals out of which we came. . . .
It feels so here this morning. As though all the world
could begin again ”
Begin again ? Sir John put his head in his hands.
Begin again ! Who indeed knew what was possible
in this fantastic adventure—if only the pain would go
and he could see and understand more clearly. . . .
WHERE ? WHEN ?
139
Begin again ? Poets had dreamt it, and they had changed
the world with other dreams. . . . Shelley, of course!
Long since he had read Shelley :
‘Tie •world’s great age begins anew.
The golden years return.
The earth doth like a snake renew
Her winter skin outworn :
Heaven smiles, and faiths and empires gleam
Like wrecks of a dissolving dream’
Subchapter in
It was mid-afternoon.
The caves had emptied their entire population on to
the plateau east of the river bank. They had trooped
out in little groups, men and women separately for
once. A couple of jackals, roused from a bed of reeds,
had distracted somewhat the attention of the processions^
the entire tribe engaging in an idiot chase of the beasts!
pelting them with stones, shouting and hallooing,’
until long after the snarling brutes were out of sight.
Clair, laughing and panting, a Greek among Polynesians,
rejoined Sir John and Sinclair, grey-haired the one,
black the other, and now with her red-tipped mop
coming between them.
“Feel as though I were going to the world’s first
picnic 1”
Beyond the nullahs was a flattish stretch of grass,
short-cropped perhaps in the hour-passing of some
enormous herd. Right of it lay the river. Over the
westward hills beyond the marsh hung the sun, high
up. The grey-gold land drowsed. And the Cro-
Magnards’ laughter went up a little wind that turned
back from the east towards the deserted caves. The
140 THREE GO BACK
women and children grouped themselves, sitting or
standing or lying, round the eastwards verge of the
sward. The men held over to the other side and also
lay or sat. A silence fell. The three survivors of the
Magellan's Cloud looked at each other in some doubt;
finally reached a spot that seemed neutral, neither for
men nor women. They lay down, resting on their
elbows. The silence went on.
Suddenly a blackbird began to pipe in a thicket near
at hand, breaking the tension for the three aliens at
least.
“ ‘And we have Box Hill here and now’,” misquoted
Sir John Mullaghan, gently.
The sound had stirred the Cro-Magnards also. A
man rose slowly from the midst of the male embank¬
ment, and slowly walked across towards the gathering
of women. The sunshine glided over grey-black hair.
“It’s the old flint-knapper, Aitz-kore,” whispered
the American, interestedly.
So it was. Still the silence went on as he passed
over the grass. The rustle of his passage if not his foot¬
falls could be heard. He arrived at the end of the
women’s line, and, slowly, passed up the ranks of the
women, scanning each face. They looked him in the
eye. One or two of the younger ones giggled. But for
the most they kept the initial silence. Sir John whis¬
pered :
“His wife is there in the middle.”
Aitz-kore neared her. Clair found herself holding
her breath. The flint-knapper passed the woman without
a change of countenance. Something seemed to con¬
tract in Clair’s throat.
Aitz-kore reached the end of the line, paused,
shrugged, turned back, walked slowly over the track
he had already made in the grass, his face like his name.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
141
a pointed hatchet, old and sharp. He halted in front
of the woman who had been his wife. She had sat with
head down-bent, but she raised it now. Clair was
too far off to see her face, but she knew she was weeping.
The flint-knapper held out his hand. The woman
took it and rose up. A yell of delight rose from hunters
and women alike.
“He’s selected her again from all the women of the
tribe,” Sinclair explained.
The two of them walked down to the southwards
end of the plateau, turned leftwards, in the opposite
direction from the caves, and were out of sight before
Clair glanced for them again. She had been intent on
the second venture.
Again a man had crossed the open space, walked the
line, and made selection of a woman—a young woman,
and comely even among the comely. But he had less
luck than Aitz-kore. The woman shook her head.
Thereat the hunter, after a moment’s hesitation, walked
back to the place from which he had come.
It was now the woman’s turn. She rose. She was
enceinte, but comely enough in carriage still. Leisuredly she
crossed to the seated rows of men, hesitated not an
instant, but held out her hand. Instantly a young man
—a mere boy—sprang to his feet and took her hand.
Again the strange cheer went up from the gathering.
Clair’s eyes sparkled.
“Kidnapping.”
“Young enough,” Sinclair agreed, absently. “Wonder
if he’s the father of her baby—or that man she has
just refused ?”
Clair wondered that also, looking after woman and
boy as they broke into an easy, long-legged trot, south¬
wards, across the sward, and then turning east and
racing for the hills. Another woman rose up and crossed
142
THREE GO BACK
towards the men’s side, stopping mid-way to fling back
a cloud of russet hair from a flushed, high-cheekboned
face.
“She has a lovely figure,” said Clair.
“They all have,” said Sinclair.
And it was true. Neither the steatopygy of the
savage nor the pendulous paunch and breasts of corset-
wearing civilizations were here. They mated as they chose,
those golden women ; they bore children, many and
quickly, unless they tired of mating ; they died in great
numbers in childbirth, they and their children. And
they lived free from the moment they were born till
the moment when that early death might overtake
them. The eager, starved, mind-crippled creatures of
the diseased lust of men were twenty thousand gener¬
ations unborn. The veil, the priest, the wedding ring,
the pornographic novel, and all the unclean drama of
two beasts enchained by sex and law and custom were
things beyond comprehension of the childlike minds
in those golden heads or the vivid desires of those
golden bodies. . . . Golden children in the dawn of
time, they paired in the afternoon sunshine and in pairs
melted away into the east. Clair, warm and comfortable,
her breasts pressed in the grass, found herself nodding
drowsily. Every now and then, however, she would
start to half-wakefulness as another shout went up,
another nuptial couple wheeled out of the gathering.
Suddenly, in a long quietness, she started fully awake.
“Keep cool. Miss Stranlay.”
“By God. . . . iErte.”
Clair raised her head. An intenser silence than ever
before had fallen on the gathering. Few of the Cro-
Magnards were sitting now. All stood to look. And the
reason was the grey-eyed hunter, i£rte.
He walked from the far end of the men’s line. His
WHERE ? WHEN ? X45
head was a little down-bent, as though in deep thought.
Under his left arm was his spear. Disregarding the
waiting line of women he came, straight towards where
the three survivors of the airship’s wreck lay. Clair
thought, breathlessly : ‘Cooler, now. Must get back
to the caves soon. Sir John—wonder if he’s feeling
better ? . . .’ Defence. Not thinking. Taking no
heed. But in some fashion she felt as though she had
just finished running an exhausting race. Sinclair, his
eyes on the hunter, said :
“Just shake your head, Clair. There’s no compulsion
among these people.”
But Clair’s head he saw as down-bent as the hunter’s
own. She saw the nearing feet in the grass, but nothing
more. And then he was close ; had halted. She raised
her head.
They looked at each other for a long time. She
heard the American say something; something quite
incomprehensible because of that drumming noise in
her ears. She was looking up, even in the still sunshine,
not into the face of /Erte alone. Her heart was wrung
with a sudden, wild pain of recognition, and then that
passed, leaving a tingling as of blood, long congealed,
that flowed again. ... A gentle voice came nearer
and nearer out of the aurulent silence. Sir John’s.
He 11 go away. It’s just that he doesn’t realize that
you are different.”
“I’m glad.”
They saw her swing to her feet. For a moment the
long, sweet lines of her figure also glimmered pale
gold. She stood beside the hunter.
“Miss Stranlay !”
There was urgency and appeal in the simultaneous
cry. Clair looked back at them, shook her head. They
had grown the mistiest of images.
THREE GO BACK
144
And then she put her hand in the hand of the hunter,
JErte, felt that hand close on hers, felt herself drawn
forward, heard a groan from Sir John Mullaghan.
She closed her eyes, and when next she opened them
found before her the eastern hills and two shadows
treading a deserted land.
Sub chap ter iv
Rain came on again that night. Winter was not far
off from Atlantis. Distant in the north the volcanoes
smoked, and sometimes, in the lifting clouds of rain,
could be glimpsed as the beating of damp beacons
remote in the mirk. Clair, lying sleepless with her lover
for the dark days, saw them, pregnant, dark blossoms
high up in the sky. Remote there was the plateau crossed
by herself and Sinclair and Sir John only three days
before. Fantastic journey. Fantastic climax to it, this.
. . . The hunter stirred, dreamlessly, dark and golden
and close, and she peered at him, then at the passing
curtains of rain.
A lover for the dark days ! A lover dead and dust
twenty-five thousand years before she had been born !
What dream was this that had led her feet from a
Kensington flat to that running across the hills from the
mating place of the dawn men ?
They had run beyond the sight and sound of that
mating place, and then, at the over-quickening of
Clair’s breathing, the hunter had slowed down and
looked at her inquiringly. They were in a treeless
stretch of long grass, the river deserting them and
holding southwards. Across the grass, a mile or more
away, two great hairy beasts shoggled through the
afternoon, one after the other. Woolly rhinoceroi.
Clair, panting, had brought her eyes back to Akte.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
145
They had smiled together. Clair had thought: ‘And
where from here ?’
He had answered that by taking her hand again and
breaking again into the trot that was probably his
customary pace. The trees drew nearer. Clair saw that
they were beeches, with great open spaces between.
The rhinoceroi had disappeared. Clair, breathing
desperately, lay down. iErte halted, laughed, gestured,
his black hair falling over his face. Then he laid the
spear down beside her and vanished among the beeches.
When she had recovered her breath she heard the
sound of him returning, and saw what he carried. It
was a great water-melon. She sat up, looking at him
lightedly. His grave eyes laughed down at her. Abruptly
he dropped the fruit. She found warm, aurulent arms
round her. The grass was warm. A cricket was chirp¬
ing. Clair shook her head, and saw that gestured denial,
unreal and unconvincing, in the eyes so close to hers.
“Not yet.”
And then she had thought, with a cool clarity, as
he put his hand on her shoulder : ‘But that’s a lie.’
So it had been. Lying with her hands clasped behind
her small head on which the hair was already too long,
she had thought: ‘I’ll hear that cricket all my life
long.’ And then she knew with utter certitude that at
last was here fulfilment of a phrase that twenty thousand
years away was to sing like a bugle-call through a dank
ritual mumble. “ I thee with my body worship.” For one
moment the knowledge had been merely terrifying, as
though she stood in the imminent threat of mutilation.
She had struggled a little, but the singing of the cricket
was already lost. Some other song came and shaped to
a clamour in her heart, till she knew it one with herself,
and never would she be wholly herself again. . . . She
had reached up and kissed the Cro-Magnard’s lips, and
K
THREE GO BACK
146
then, perhaps a full minute later, with that wilder music
dying in her ears, heard suddenly the chirping of the
cricket, and realized that it had never ceased . . .
Where would the night find them ? Back in the caves ?
JErte had shaken his head when they stood on their
feet again and she gestured that question. He picked
up his spear. On the young, bearded face close to hers
she saw, with a quiver of wonder, a mist of perspiration.
He looked down at her, grave again, though with
shining eyes. Haunting face . . .
He said : “Over the hills.”
They had perhaps half a score of words between
them. As they went across the sunset land he taught her
three. One was his own name. And for the other two
Clair looked in his eyes, wondering again, suddenly
so pitiful that she almost wept, and then suddenly
laughing so that she found herself caught and held
again, and it was still longer before the hills came in
sight.
But at length they drew nearer, great redstone masses
unusual enough in the Atlantean scene. Gorse in
thickets climbed their flanks. Birds rose whirring at
their approach. Plover. It grew cold. Suddenly their
shadows began to race hillwards.
“Do hope you’ve some place in mind where we can
shelter.”
Strange jargon in that sunset land ! The English
speech, so fine and splendid and flexible an implement,
fashioned from the blood and travail of generations of
Aryans yet unborn. Thousands of years yet before
from Oxus bank dim tribesmen would drift across the
Urals, and the first English word issue from barbarous
lips. . . . She became aware that they were threading
in single file a long cleft in the hills. Golden flanked as
the hills, iErte led the way.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
147
Beyond the winding cleft, she realized they had
swung north-eastwards. Across the savannah waste,
remote, towered the plateau where she had journeyed
from the wreck of Magellan's Cloud. A week ago !
There lay the lake in the dying light. Perhaps if
they listened they would hear that lowing again. She
had caught the hunter’s arm then, and stayed him,
listening. But from the dimming plateau-world and its
foreground had come no sound other than a faint rustle,
as though it were a painted screen rustling in the wind.
They climbed. The lake receded, blurred, vanished.
And at length, on a bush-strewn ledge, yErte had drawn
aside a bush and shown their shelter for the night. She
understood then the reason for his disappearance the
day before. Some twelve to fourteen feet deep, the
shelter, though not more than four feet high. Round
the walls were things that looked to Clair like paintings,
but the light went then and she could make nothing
of them. The hunter motioned her inside. He was
standing against the sunset. It was very still. She heard
the beating of his heart and thought that were the light
clearer she might verily see that beating. . . . Almost
a shadow, some Titan threatener of the ancient gods,
against the coming threat of darkness. His black hair
blew softly in the wind. And Clair, sitting, rubbing her
shapely, surface-chilled self, remembered more
Tennyson :
‘Mz«, her last dream who seemed so fair.
Such splendid promise in his eyes ’
Man. yErte. One and the same, here in the night
that was the morning of the world. And if she closed
her eyes for a moment she would see him hanging on
the barbed-wire entanglements of a Mametz trench.
THREE GO BACK
148
hear again that moan that shuddered still, undying,
unceasing, in a night twenty-five thousand years away :
“Clair ! Oh, Clair !
She had called him in then, startledly, her face
quivering, and he had come, and ceased to have any
symbolical significance whatever, and had been merely
the strange, dark hunter, and again, of course, the
lover. And, lying on the verge of yet another abyssal
descent to that place where all colours and sounds
merged in a harmony that God had used as model when
He painted the first rainbow, Clair had thought, very
practically : ‘In a minute I shan’t be able to think at
all, but just now, oh, my good God, I am hungry !’
The thought and the fact of her hunger had returned,
however, as they sat again in that twilight, her arm round
the bare shoulder of the hunter. She told him in a slow
murmur of words of which he had no understanding,
and he had understood and brought from the back of
the cavelet cooked fish, several of them, wrapped in
great leaves. She sat and ate with great appetite, wiping
her fingers in the grass, and reflecting on the amount
of germs she must be eating. . . . Her world had
been haunted by the wriggly shapes of germs, even as
the world of the Middle Ages by devils.
Then she had found herself drowsy. So had been
the hunter, untroubled by either germs or devils. They
had lain together and from the cave recesses he had
brought forward an unfamiliar skin ; she was to discover
in the morning it was a lion skin. It was warm ‘if
smelly’. The hunter lay athwart the entrance. He
piled the skin round her, laid his head on her breast,
kissed her there and was asleep in a moment.
But at that, somehow, sleep had gone from her.
The cold had closed it, despite the hunter and her rug.
She thought of Sinclair and Sir John, several miles away.
WHERE ? WHEN ?
149
Wondering about her ? They would go back to the
great cave sometime . . .
She abandoned that train of thought, hearing the
soft coming of the rain. The volcano lights forty miles
in the north seemed to spit and hiss through the inten¬
sity of the downpour. They drove not into the shelter,
bright, splashing spear-heads as she saw them in the
ghostly light. The hunter slept as lightly and soundly
as a child.
A child. For that was what he was. So she had
said of him and the others, and so they were. Lover !
It was she who had abducted a boy. She was twenty
thousand years older than this head that lay so close to
her, and the hair that tickled and the shoulder grown
chill and the hands that touched her. Behind her
marched the bloody ghosts of all history ; behind the
ancestry of this golden boy beside her in the dark was
nothing but long millennia of vivid, harmless lives,
reaching back to the time when men were not yet
men . . .
A child. Instantly the word had a different meaning
for her. Her lips grew dry. Beyond Airte was the
rain-curtain. She reached out her hand to it. Damp and
cool the fingers she brought to her lips. And already
her startlement had passed.
A child.
She laid her head by that other in the darkness. She
lay in quivering wonder, unafraid, on the brink of sleep.
A child. Spring-time fields at night under the fall of
the rain . . .
Wonderful thing if that should happen in some
to-morrow of this dream !
Chapter IX : SIR JOHN A PROPHET: HIS
PROPHECY
Subchapter t
IT did not rain the next day, nor the next. Instead,
they burned with the vivid radiance of a Mediter¬
ranean summer; they burned their sights and sounds
into the soul of Clair Stranlay. Each evening found her
and the hunter back in the painted cavelet—an aurochs
stood in challenging regard of a chrome-red lion in
that cave, and iErte was the artist—but nights and
evenings were only so many jade beads on the golden
garments of the suntime hours. Clair in those hours
discovered the wonder of her own body as she dis¬
covered the wonder of the earth itself—as though it
were a thing apart from her, yet no more apart than
grass and trees and that aurochs’ calling and the cry of
a wounded deer. This body of hers ! A stranger that
was yet herself, one with whom she went out into
mornings that changed from dull grey to amethystine
clarity and a hold-your-breath silence, from that to a
nameless stir and scurry and beat that brought the sun
orange and tremendous above the Atlantean hills,
pringling with warmth on chilled back and face,
though one’s feet, running in the grass, were chilled
still. These, and the smell of the smoke from the fire
kindled in the bright weather and drifting blue wave¬
lets across the face of the hunter. Noon, and lying
together in sunlight in a sunlight dream, with each pore
of her skin hungrily drinking in that sun, and the
smell, the chloric smell, of the crushed grass under
her head. Crickets chorusing; it was a land of
150
WHERE? WHEN?
IJI
crickets. Sunset and the hasting homewards of bird
and sun and cloud and themselves. These the background
for hours such as neither she nor any of her century
had ever lived.
But the second nightfall a troubled, brooding look
came into the grave eyes of JErte. He turned at the
mouth of their shelter and pointed towards the plateau
that with each falling of dusk kindled its volcano-torches
to watchful brightness. He gestured ineffectively.
He and Clair looked at each other dumbly in the dusk.
Something 
And next morning they went out from the painted
cavelet of sixty hours’ residence, and Clair never saw
it again. For that morning they went west before the
sun, slowly, in no great hurry, yet with intention.
Once they stopped to bathe in a lagoon from which they
were evicted by the splashings and blowings of a great
beast such as Clair had never seen before—a thing with a
body like an unfortunate beer-vat, four stumpy legs, a hide
that seemed to suffer from mildew and a head that was
a bewildering confusion of teeth, tusks, horns and
bosses. It splashed and paused and pawed, watching
the bathers, and Clair felt the hunter tug at her hair.
She turned, treading water, and followed him. Nor
any too soon, for the multi-horned animal at that
moment charged them from the bank with the speed of
an express train and something of its whining uproar.
Clair it missed by inches, but they were good as so many
miles, for the beast’s speed carried it into deep water
where it floundered and squawked piercingly, evidently
unable to swim. Its musk odour lay like a scum upon
the water. Eyeing it, the hunter hefted his spear thought¬
fully, and then shook a regretful head as it gained a
sandbank and stood blowing and dripping there.
Bogged, he would evidently have considered it a titbit.
152
THREE GO BACK
“I’d sooner eat a goods-wagon,” Clair told him.
She told him many a thing as unintelligible. She
found it a saving necessity to keep herself in remem¬
brance that a week before she had been Clair Stranlay,
not a naked wanderer (albeit with a comely enough
nudity, as the pools still told a disinterested survey) in
a love-cycle with a savage through a land lost in the
deeps of time. A savage ! At that her laughter went up
to the soaring circus of carrion birds gathered in haste
to watch the shoreward meanderings of the ill-tempered
monster. The hunter’s contralto laugh joined in,
shortly, his grey eyes upon Clair, and lighting as they
were wont to do.
And suddenly, in the aurulent loveliness of the day,
Clair felt sick with a strange, queer dread.
Subchapter ii
Sinclair saw their home-coming in the late after¬
noon of that third day. Sitting a little beyond and
above the cave-mouths, peeling a long wand and
binding either end of that wand with deer-gut, he saw
them come. He paused at work and shaded his eyes with
his hand. He swore, with the ancient outward
mechanism of emotion that the days were indeed
wearing to meaninglessness.
Clair Stranlay !
(Ten days before: Magellan's Cloud; passengers’
gallery; a languid loveliness in an expensive frock,
with painted lips and ironic, inquiring gaze . . .)
‘Safe, anyhow.’
Safe they seemed. They came over the hills, the
hunter pony-laden, Clair carrying his spear. She was a
white slip-painting on an Athenian vase; in the blaze
WHERE? WHEN?
M3
of the sun setting she saw the American and waved the
Old Stone Age spear. He waved in reply and then
returned to work on the peeled wand. He was almost
alone at the cave-mouths, for of the mating couples who
had taken to the hills, Clair and fErte were the last to
return.
They splashed through the river, stopping midway
for Clair to lave the hunter from head to foot, for he
was very warm, having killed the pony on the run only
a few minutes before. Sinclair descended from his
ledge.
“Hello, Keith!”
“Hello, Clair.”
She found his stare impossible to meet. A slow wave
of colour ebbed into her cheeks and passed across her
breast. She thought: T will look at him,’ and look
at him she did, resolutely, then. His gaze passed over
her shoulder. She leant on the spear, pleasantly tired,
and looked round for fErte.
He also stood looking at Sinclair. And then a queer
thing happened. A shadow came on his face; he
seemed to flicker before Clair’s eyes, to vanish. . . .
Moved, of course. Slipped into the caves . . .
“Good God !”
Clair said, standing wiping herself with her hands,
there being nothing else with which to wipe herself:
“Why ?”
“Your hunter. Where is he ?” The American
looked round about him in some puzzlement. “Sight
of him with you makes me realize more than anything
else the damnable impossibility of it all. Where did
you go ?”
She told him something of the two days. A boy
came wandering out of the caves, saw her, gave a hail
of welcome that brought out Zumarr and others. She
i54
THREE GO BACK
stood in the midst of a laughing, friendly throng,
unalien to them, as Sinclair realized, as she had never
been to her own century. Clair Stranlay, the best¬
selling novelist, had shrugged aside the dream of
civilization and come home to the welcome and under-
standability of an Atlantean cave !
Darkness was very near. Now the radiance from the
cave fires stole out across sedge and savannah in pursuit
of the hasting daylight. Returned, the hunters were
singing in unison, and Sinclair heard their singing with
voices from his childhood :
I followed my brother into the sun.
In the sunrise-time.
And we crept beyond the place of the bear
Sleeping and sad and a foolish bear
In the sunrise-time.
To the ridge where the wild horse run !
Tunning and pawing and making their play
In the sunrise-time.
And we lay and awaited, still as a deer
In a thicket at bay :
Till the stallion came near with the mares
Of his choice
In the sunrise-time.
And my brother slew with a blow of his spear
The stallion red like the sun himself
In the sunrise-time.
Tut I, I followed the mare that was grey
Swiftly out of the place of the ridge
Swiftly past the lair of the bear.
The sleeping and sad and foolish bear.
In the sunrise-time.
And we ran with the sun
Swift and swift and the mare was mine
And 1 slew the mare with a blow of my spear
And I drank its blood and I warmed my hands
In the blood of the mare
In the sunrise-time.
WHERE? WHEN?
155
“ What are they singing ?” he heard an English voice.
He found Clair alone with him again. The others had
drifted back to the caves to join in that song. A chill
wind came down the Atlantean river.
“Singing ? I suppose it is a song. About killing a
horse.”
“Filthy business. I helped AiLrte to kill one.”
“You helped at the same business before you met
him. Remember that little deer up on the plateau ?”
Clair remembered. “And we thought we were in
West Africa. Instead ”
The instead was beyond speech. Sinclair looked
across the river. He said, abruptly :
“You and the hunter—I hope you’ve taken care
there won’t be ?”
She stared at him, shook her head. “How could I—
here ? Besides ”
She heard then a child wailing in the caves, one of
the innumerable children who could and did die so
easily. She shivered. But another thought had been
with her throughout the past two days, and she put it
in words now, to herself more than to Sinclair.
“I want one ! We’re here for life—however long
our lives may last. If we come through the winter we
may live as long as the average. . . . And we can
alter things—we have a doctor among us !—change
things so that babies won’t die so readily. . . . Oh,
I’ll hate the bother of it. But I’ll have one—next
spring.”
“I wouldn’t.”
“I know.”
She could not resist that. The Battersea imp was a
ghostly presence enough these days, but undead still.
Sinclair laughed shortly, straightening up where he
sat, clasping his hands behind his head.
THREE GO BACK
156
“Listen, Miss Stranlay, we’re here by such kind of
accident as probably never happened before. Twenty-
five thousand years or more before the birth of Christ.
It means hardly anything saying those words ; but
they have meaning. We’re here, members of a tribal
group that, for all we know, are the only human beings
yet on earth. Certainly it’s ancestral to the Cro-
Magnards and half the modern population of Europe.
And there is no Europe yet, there is no modern popu¬
lation.” He spoke very slowly and casually.
“And if you have a baby and it lives and also has
children—can you see the road they’ll travel in the next
twenty-five thousand years ? This is the Golden Age
of the human race. I don’t know how long it will be
before the Fourth Glacial time. Perhaps three thousand
years. But it’s coming, and by then the descendants of
these people—the descendants of your baby—will
have drifted across to the fringes of Europe. Through
thousands and thousands of years they’ll drift with all
the chances of famine and starvation and mauling and
killing by beasts that are Nature’s chances, and may be
shared by this baby of yours and its children, and
endured because of the things between that will be like
the happiness in the lives of these present hunters—
like those two days you’ve spent with the hunter vErte.
But this life does not last for ever.
“In the Nile Valley, four thousand years before the
birth of Christ, an accident is to transform the human
race and human nature. Do you know that there will
be descendants of yours whom they’ll stretch out on
sacrificial altars—babies of yours—and rip their hearts
out of their chests ? Do you know that babies of yours
will be tortured in dungeons, massacred in captured
cities, devoured at cannibal banquets ? In Tyre they’ll
burn alive those children of yours inside the iron belly
WHERE ? WHEN ?
157
of Baal, Rome will crucify them in scores along the
Appian Way. They’ll chop off their hands in hundreds
when Vercingetorix surrenders to Gesar. Can’t you
hear the chop-chop of that axe, and hear mounting
down through the years the cry of agony from those
children of yours that may so easily be ? I can. I
can close my eyes and hear the dripping of their
blood.”
So could Clair. “I never thought of that. Oh . . .
horrible and terrible !” She covered her face. “Why
did you tell me ? Perhaps—perhaps there were babies of
mine who died on the barbed-wire there in France, who are
starving in the London streets now, drowned in some awful
Welsh mine. . . .” She took her hands from her face.
“But it’s a lie. I don’t believe this can ever end. Oh,
Keith—help me ”
He did not move. He said to her, as she stood
weeping : “Fantastic stuff we are. Miss Stranlay ! Not
you and I only. All the human adventure. . . . Here,
on an autumn night in Atlantis. On the edge of an
adventure that probably no other thing in the cosmos
will ever attempt. . . .” He paused; he stood up
with clenched hands. “By God, if we should ever get
back !”
“Back ?”
He laughed. “I still can’t forget, still can’t realize
that this is reality for us. Of course there’s no going
back.”
He stood beside her, silent. Clair’s thoughts were a
grey blur. There came a drift of laughter from the
caves. It was as though they stood, an old man and
woman, outside a children’s playground. And then
Clair knew some more immediate matter worrying her.
She touched Sinclair’s arm.
“I’d forgotten. Where is Sir John ?”
158
THREE GO BACK
Subchapter Hi
Sir John Mullaghan lay wrapped in a long, dark
skin that might have been a dyed sheepskin but for the
fact that there were no sheep in the world where he lay
dying. Clair, kneeling beside him, knew that he was
dying, even as he knew it himself. His face, grimed and
hirsute, as though it were the face of the one-time
armaments manufacturer dead and dried and smoked
in some head-hunter’s hut, looked up at her and then
suddenly shrivelled and then grew bloated in one of
the spasms of pain that were unceasing.
The odour of that corner of the cave was horrible.
But Clair knelt unhorrified. The din of the golden
communal life was stilled about them—strange thing
this prehistoric foreshadowing of long sickroom
silences round many a bed of pain through many a
thousand years ! In the roof-spaces of the cave the
great aurochs stood belling eternally, the mammoth
walked the open plains with flailing trunk, the uiratherium
strayed from his geological epoch still bunched in
frozen charge. . . . Clair saw that the night had come
down.
“I’m glad you’re back safely. Miss Stranlay. Nice
honeymoon ?”
She smiled down at him, unsteadily. “Lovely.”
“That’s good.” His grey head moved dimly, the
words came staccato, as by an effort. “Unfriendly—if
I’d gone—without waiting for your return.”
“You’re not going. It’s just difference of food,
Keith says. We’ll hunt up berries and green stuff for
you to eat. You’ll be well as ever in a day or so.”
“Sinclair didn’t say that, I fear. I’m poisoned—
very unpleasantly and thoroughly, and can’t eat any-
WHERE ? WHEN ?
I59
thing. All in all, a very shocking exhibit. Miss Stranlay.”
She saw the ghost of a smile. “Nature didn’t design
me for a caveman, I’m afraid. . . . You’ve come back
in time. There is the rain again.”
So it was. Thunderously. Suddenly, beyond the
cave-rims, the cup of darkness cracked. Lightning
played and shimmered in the interstices, filling the cave
with echoes. Then the darkness closed again. Clair
saw Sinclair standing beside them, kneeling beside
them.
“Drink this, Mullaghan.”
“What is it ?”
“Herb broth. I found a hollow stone and have had
it cooking the last two hours.”
The grey head moved upwards painfully. Clair
looked away. Then :
“Sorry, Sinclair, I’m afraid I can’t.”
“All right. Don’t worry. I’ll bring some water.”
For a full minute after the American had gone he
lay so silent that Clair thought he had fallen asleep.
But he moved, again in pain. He chuckled, unexpectedly,
surprisingly.
“The head of the League of Militant Pacifists acting
as sick-nurse to an armaments manufacturer !”
“I’ll help him now I’m back.”
He spoke, but did not seem to answer her. “And
Clair Stranlay, the pornographic novelist. But there
are fine things in her, I think, though her books are the
nonsense of the half-educated. Fine things in her,
Merton, though she was born in a Battersea slum.
Courage and honesty and a happy pessimism. . . .
Her books ? They are just such desperate, half-articu¬
late, half-unconscious protestings as Sinclair’s threats
of sabotage and assassination. . . . The savages of
civilization . . .
160 THREE GO BACK
“ ‘Savages !’ My God, Merton, the fantastic nonsense
we have been taught! I lived in the midst of a
Palaeolithic tribe twenty-five thousand years ago.
Heroes and kindly women, kindly children all of them.
And you have spent your life blackening the memory
of them in your lectures and classes—and I have spent
mine in murdering their descendants.
“I didn’t know . . .”
He quivered. Clair put one hand on his forehead,
the other under his neck.
“Sir John ! Don’t worry. None of us knew. Do
sleep and don’t worry.”
He said, in a whisper : “We murdered her lover—
a boy—on the barbed-wire outside Mametz. She told
me. That was why she went away with the hunter
that afternoon. Lost somewhere in the Atlantis
hills . . .”
The night wore on. Sound of human voice in the
great communal cave ceased but for those occasional
whispers of clear-headed delirium. Once iErte came
and touched Clair questioningly, but she shook her
head, and did not watch him go. Sinclair came and
went continuously, with water which he boiled above
the far, bright fire by the near entrance. Once he said
to Clair :
“You can’t do anything. You had better go and lie
down.”
“Not until he sleeps.”
“Mr. Speaker, in moving support of this Bill for
disarmament by example, I am aware that I am con¬
tradicting previous utterances of my own and taking
a line of action in direct opposition to that pursued by
the great party to which I belong, and to my own
private interests. But I plead for my former attitude
an ignorance of the essential nature of man as crass as
WHERE? WHEN? l6l
any member of this House may ever have confessed to.
I lived the scientific delusions of my age—strengthened
as these delusions were by the act of a stray madman
which brought a very bitter tragedy into my own
life. . . . But the wreck of the airship Magellan’s
Cloud on the ancient continent of Atlantis and my
experiences there in company with two other survivors,
amongst primitive men who were our own ancestors—
literally, sir, opened my eyes.
“I found no ‘howling primordial beast’; I saw
nothing to indicate that man is by nature a cruel and
bloodthirsty animal. It became plain to me that the
vicious combativeness of civilized man is no survival
from an earlier epoch; it is a thing resultant on the
torturing dreads of civilization itself. The famous
Chinese poet and philosopher, Lao-Tze, writing of a
Golden Age which has been considered mythical, yet
describes in vivid detail the character and conduct of
those Old Stone Age primitives among whom I lived
during an eventful fortnight:
“ ‘They loved one another without knowing that to do so was
benevolence ; they were honest and leal-hearted without knowing
that it was loyalty; they employed the services of one another
without thinking that they were receiving or conferring any gift.
Therefore their actions left no trace and there was no record of
their affairs . . .’”
The sound of the rain ! Clair heard it rise gustily
and drown in momentary volume of sound the speech
that Sir John Mullaghan, remote in space and time,
was delivering to the English House of Commons.
The helpless pity of the first hour of watching was
past. In an unimpassioned clarity her mind went on with
that speech, as though she also were addressing an unborn
multitude in that future from which she had come,
and which she would never see again. . . . No Record ?
L
THREE GO BACK
162
Except that somehow Zumarr and yErte and Bella,
each and all of them sleeping here in this wild night,
were to live through the ages, to pass undying through
them, to rise again in the Christs and Father Damiens,
the Brunos and the Shelleys, the comradeship and com¬
passion of the slave-pit and the trench. No record !
They were to live though all else died; they were
ghosts of a sanity that haunted mankind.
This adventure in pre-history ! As if any woman
whatever who had loved a man and been by him loved,
known him in the intimate hours when the tabus passed
and he lived as man indeed—as if she did not know the
true nature of the kindly child immortal, though cult
and environment twisted his mind and instincts, though
press and pulpit shouted that he was by nature a bat-
tling animal, a sin- and cruelty-laden monster! What
slum-dweller did not know his neighbour a peaceable
man unless one of civilization’s innumerable diseases
drove him to momentary madness . . . ?
She started drowsily, sleep pressing on her eyelids.
Sir John talking or herself thinking ? She heard him
then, his voice clear and sharp :
“Gentlemen, we must transform our factories to other
purposes. There are still bridges to be built and tunnels
to be excavated. Flying machines. . . . We have
barely glimpsed the universe in which man adventures,
yet you and I have sat in this room and planned murder
and destruction and called it business and patrio¬
tism ...”
He murmured a phrase: “The Militant Pacifists.
. . .” Then : “Sinclair ? We will have him on our
board.”
Sinclair came tiredly through the red-ochred mirk
at that moment, and again held water to dim lips. All
the cave was as some gigantic Akkadian sarcophagus ;
WHERE? WHEN?
163
it seemed to Clair, as once before, that it was a place of
the long-dead in which she knelt, and overhead washed
the Atlantic. ... Sir John said, very distinctly :
“Miss Stranlay—I thought she was here ?”
“So she is. Here she is.”
He peered up at them, his eyes very bright. “I’ve
been dreaming—that next war. You two—promise
me you’ll get back, get back and tell them !”
“We’ll get back,” Sinclair said, steadily.
“You must get back. They’re planning it again. . . .
Tell them, Sinclair. Fight them even with your bombs
if they won’t listen. . . . They shall listen. For there
was hope even in that age out of which we came—
more hope than ever before since civilization began.
Else we could never have dreamt this dream, we three
who are its children. The slaver and the soldier passes
and Man will walk the earth again . . .”
He began to speak in a low, singing voice, so low
that Clair had to bend nearer to hear him :
“TA world's great age begins anew.
The golden years return.
The earth doth like a snake renew
Her winter skin outworn :
Heaven smiles, and faiths and empires gleam
Tike wrecks of a dissolving dream . . .”
Clair felt the American’s hand on her shoulder in
the ensuing silence. He gave a sigh of relief.
“He’s sleeping now. We can take it easy. If you’re
as dead-beat as I am— Hell, what was that ?”
Chapter X: EXODUS
Subchapter i
IT was as though a great beast stirred in dreams
under the floor of the cave. Clair was instantly on
her feet beside the American. She saw it was close to
dawn; the river glimmered beyond the fires. The
watcher of the fires himself squatted not far away,
nodding, undisturbed, though the faintest rustle of a
nearing beast would have roused him to instant
activity.
Clair whispered : “What was it ?”
“Remember back beside the lake ? Some kind of
earthquake shock. . . . Here it is again.”
The cave rocked. They held to each other for a
moment. The shock passed. Clair peered past the
drowsy fire-watcher. “These people must be used to
it. None of them have wakened.”
Not a hunter or a woman had stirred. They lay and
slept in healthy disregard of the earth’s freakish moods.
The fires burned low, yet glowed enough to show
the painted uiratherium still bunched with head eter¬
nally lowered. Funny to think that that beast (‘at this
moment!’) in the twentieth century might still survive
in this cave long sunk two miles or more below the
level of the ocean ! . . . The thought made Clair
whisper another question :
“Wasn’t this continent sunk in an earthquake ?”
She saw a pallid flicker of a smile on Sinclair’s face.
“Will be. . . . Let’s see if anything’s happening out¬
side.”
164
WHERE? WHEN?
165
The fire-tender nodded to them. They paused at the
cave-entrance and looked out. Nothing. The rain had
cleared away. The sky was pallid with the waning lights
of the stars awaiting the morning. The crispness of the
air caught at their throats. But there was also in that
air an unusual quality.
“Sulphur,” said Sinclair. “Stay here. I’m going out
to look.”
He vanished, tall and white, into that waiting unease
of the morning. Clair thought: ‘Dictatorial still.
But a dear.’ Yawned. ‘Oh, my good God, what
wouldn’t I give for a cup of tea !’
Startling thought! Years, surely, since she had
visioned such wistful amenities ! . . . She yawned again.
‘Thank goodness Sir John’s asleep at last. . . .
Eaough !’
She became aware of a pillared whiteness, like Lot’s
wife, against the remoter greyness of the morning.
It was Sinclair, beckoning.
The grass was wet and cold. The morning wind
blew chill on their unclad bodies as they passed together
outside the furthest flow of the cave-fires’ radiance and
climbed Over the smooth back of the bluff. And, as
they did so, the smell of sulphur increased with every
step they took. Nearing the top of the bluff, Clair,
looking upwards, suffered a curious optical illusion. It
seemed to her that the grass on the knoll, that the whole
summit, was lighted to an unwonted glow, as though
a great fire were kindled on the other side. But, the
summit attained, she saw she had suffered from no
delusion. She gasped and stared.
In that hour they should have seen but a little way
across the jumble of foothills and nullahs towards the
mountain land from which they had descended a
short week before. Instead, all that landscape which
THREE GO BACK
166
should have lain in morning darkness was lighted
uneasily, a welter of unstable candle-points of flame,
and backgrounding it, mile on mile, from one end of
the horizon to the other, was a dark-red glow that
glimmered and faded and grew to purple being and
then died again, yet never quite, like a fire that lives in
a half-charred stick. Momentarily, as they watched, the
red and ochre faded from the glow, yet that was through
no waning of its strength, as they saw, but with the
coming of the morning. And with that coming the
mystery grew plainer. The whole of the dim moun¬
tain-land of their first adventures had vanished into
some fissure of the earth from which now arose the
corona of its destruction. Twenty miles away to the
north the vivid line of flame stalked the horizon, and in
the nearer distance they saw a pale advancing gleam.
“Floods—it’s the sea 1” said Clair.
Sinclair peered forward from beneath his hands.
“Hell, and it is ! We’ll have to run for it.”
But he did not. He said, a second later : “It’s advanc¬
ing no longer. Only through the light growing it seems
to be. The floods have stopped.”
So it seemed, now. Daylight was almost upon the
land, and the havoc of fire and water grew clearer. The
sea had come far in—in places it was not more than
two or three miles distant. More than that. They stood
now on what was a great promontory, for this was
higher land than to east and west. And, advancing out
of the water-threatened, cobalt valleys were long trains
of moving objects that ran and squealed and jostled.
Clair saw them coming, up out of the morning, dipping
and rising, here and there covering the hills in dun
hordes.
“Trek of the animals,” said Sinclair. “Look—the
mammoths 1”
WHERE ? WHEN ?
167
A great herd of them led the exodus. They came at
racing speed, great tusks uplifted, trunks uplifted,
untrumpeting, with flying coats of dun red hair. They
thundered past not half a mile away. Then Clair saw
her first aurochs, also running in herds, the gigantic
beasts whose lowing she had listened to many a time
since that first night by the lake. Horned and maddened,
with belching breaths of spume they ran, swinging
round the corner of the bluff so that Sinclair, seeing the
danger there might be to the cave-dwellers below,
turned and ran down the hill, calling to Clair to stay
where she was. Safest place. . . . Clair sank down in
the wet grass, staring appalled. It was as though the
hills were the contours of a wet corpse, hideously,
titanically be-magotted.
“Oh, horrible !”
The hills drummed with flying hoofs. Great deer,
an Irish elk, a pack of Hons like loping St. Bernards,
here and there a trundling bear. Then herd on herd of
ponies, with manes in quivering serration. The day
brightened, and with its brightening the glow in the
north abruptly flickered and vanished. The pulsing
flight of beasts thinned, but the birds still passed over¬
head in great flocks, tern and snipe and partridge either
momentarily startled or out on definite migration
through the weaving of some mysterious instinct. Up
till then no animal had attempted the scaling of the
bluff, but now two leopards did so. Sly and suave, they
came in loping bounds, not greatly frightened, evidently,
though in flight. One had been swimming, and the
water glistened on its sleek black coat. They slithered
leftwards at sight of the kneeling woman. Then one
crouched and snarled 
The charge of the brute rolled her on the ground.
It had charged, not leapt, being over-hungry, and had
i68
THREE GO BACK
hit her with its shoulder, instead of pinning her to the
earth. Its body sprawled across her, furry and musk
and smelling vilely of the cat-house. She thought,
vividly : ‘My throat!’ and screamed, and saw the other
leopard looking away, with pricked ears. She caught the
wurring muzzle of the brute above her. Screamed again.
Thereat, unaccountably, it vomited blood all over her.
She was dragged to her feet by d3rte. She wiped her
face ; she laughed hysterically.
All over in a minute. Three of the hunters, Airte
included, had seen the leopards and raced them up the
opposite side of the hill. She saw Sinclair ascending
more slowly, now that she was safe. yErte laughed.
She could not look at the smoking, furred thing on the
ground. The other leopard had fled.
When Sinclair came up she was still trembling, as in
the throes of a fever.
“Goodness—I—I always did hate cats. Never bathe.
. . . Silly to shake, but I can’t stop it. I think I’ll go
down to Sir John.”
Sinclair looked at her apathetically ; sat down. She
was safe ; the caves were safe. He felt he wanted to
sleep for a month.
“Sir John is dead,” he said, tiredly.
Subchapter it
The sun lay brave on the hillside. The day marched
bannered across the Atlantean sky. Little clouds tinged
with purple went sailing by, free and very fleecy and
lovely. More of the bird-flocks came from the north,
holding into dim southern regions of the Pleistocene
earth. Far below, in the open spaces between the caves
and the river, the Cro-Magnards cut up the meat which
WHERE? WHEN? 169
had come, alive and maddened, past their doors in
such abundance.
And on the hill-brow Clair and Sinclair watched the
passing of the day. Clair lay with her breasts to the
earth, thinking, and yet trying not to think. She raised
her face once, looking at the American.
“But it can’t be ! He can’t have died. We don’t
belong here ; it couldn’t have happened this way in
time ! Else he was dead long before he was born. This
would have happened to him before we knew him.
Before the Magellan was wrecked he was dead.” She
giggled a little and dropped her head on the grass again.
“We’ve been talking to a corpse all this last fortnight.”
Sinclair said nothing, bleakly. Clair, exhausted,
dozed. Later, she felt a hand on her shoulder, and
aroused to Sinclair speaking at last:
“I won’t leave you long. Shout if anything comes
near.”
“Where are you going ?”
But he had gone. She sat, clasping her knees, sun-
warmed, earth-kissed, vividly aware of the beauty and
pleasure of her body. And below, in the Cro-Magnard
caves, was that other body, finished with this and the
sun and the rain and the hearing of laughter for ever.
Impossibly dead in an impossible country in an impos¬
sible epoch. She remembered, numbedly, half-forgotten
things about him—his courteous care of her, and her
flouting of it, in that march across the plateau ; his
pathetic adaptations to Cro-Magnard ways. . . . ‘Oh,
my good God, I am so tired V
She looked back over the bluff. Sinclair and two
hunters, burdened, were coming up. A few feet from
Clair they halted. One of the hunters was /Erte.
They lowered something to the ground.
Next instant she found z£rte beside her. He put
THREE GO BACK
170
his arms round her. He laughed, gravely, and pointed
down to the river in the sunlight. His brows knitted
puzzledly as she shook her head and indicated the body
wrapped in the pelt from the cave. He glanced at it
indifferently, smiled again, and tried to pull her to her
feet. She shook him off; his touch was suddenly as
shuddersomely repulsive as that of an unclean animal.
“Keith—send him away”
She did not look round again as the American spoke
to the two hunters, but she heard the sound of a linger¬
ing, puzzled retreat through the low, brittle grass.
Then the noise of Sinclair digging with a hand-axe.
At that she rose and went and helped him. They worked
in silence.
“Stand away, Miss Stranlay.”
She stood aside and looked down over the flood-
sodden lands. Already the darkness waited for them.
She heard Sinclair dragging the body to the shallow pit.
Then a sound of scraping and the fall of earth. Sinclair
said :
“Throw some earth, Miss Stranlay.”
She turned round, seeing the grave almost com¬
pleted. She picked up a handful of clayey dust and
dropped it through her fingers. Sinclair replaced the
turfs and walked over them, stamping them gently.
Then he held out his hand to Clair and she went to
him.
Subchapter in
It seemed to her that something had numbed her
body and brain alike, through and through, in the next
twenty-four hours. The second nightfall Sinclair came
and sat down beside the fire of Zumarr, who glanced
WHERE ? WHEN ?
171
at him questioningly and from him towards another
fire at which the hunter JErte. had again taken up
quarters, as in times before the Mating for the Dark
Days.
“Clair.”
She roused a little. “Oh, it’s you, Keith.”
He stretched himself out beside her. His square,
dark head was oddly similar to Zumarr’s. She thought,
apathetically: “They might be brother and sister.”
He put a twig on the fire, absently, scowlingly, as was
his habit, and watched it consume. Abruptly he said :
“This can’t go on, you know.”
She said, dully : “What ?”
He seemed to be considering his answer. Then :
“These people aren’t to blame, Clair, but you. I
mean your hunter and the others when they thought
Mullaghan’s death and dead body of no account.
Neither, really, were they. Death is of no account in
fundamental human values—the things these people
live by. Your hunter saw a man lying dead—one to
whom he had never talked, a puzzling stranger, a man
who had presumably lived to the full, and was now
dead, as was the order of things. And if your hunter
thought about it at all, it was simply that he himself
would also die some time, but meantime there was
living to be done—eating, and sleeping with you, and
painting his pictures, and hunting, and every moment
in which to live his body before he also was dead. That
was all. It was perfectly natural.”
“I know. And it has made me sick and frozen.”
“It has no cause to make you any such things. If
he’d seen Sir John lying ill or wounded he’d have
carried him miles to safety. You know he would. They
are absolutely unselfish and absolutely natural. Nothing
horrible in death to them; there is nothing horrible in
172
THREE GO BACK
death. It is merely that you and I are laden down with
the knowledge of that past that is not yet—with all the
obscene funeral rites in our memory and that ritual of
sorrow that isn’t natural at all, but was an artificial thing
foisted on human nature in a matter of mistaken science.
It is these people who are clean and you who are
diseased.”
“I know,” Clair said again. And suddenly she found
words. “Oh, Sinclair, I’ll go mad, I know I will, in this
horrible place, among these horrible people ! Natural
and clean ? Of course they are. Splendid and shining
and lovely, all of them. JErte—he’s been my lover and
is closer to my life than the blood in my body. . . .
And they’re not kin to me at all. I’m separated from them
by a bending wall of glass. I’m not human if they are.
I’m the diseased animal, and it’s not the winter or the
memory of Sir John that’ll kill me. It’s realization of a
fact. I can’t go on with it, I can’t!”
“You filthy little weakling.”
He said it in a low, even voice. Clair suddenly found
herself in the cave. Something seemed to cataract and
then clot about her heart. She stared at the American.
He looked at her evenly.
“You little gutter-slut of the London slums ! I
thought you had guts in you. You haven’t. You’ve a
pious, rotten romanticism that’s no relation to reality.
Think I don’t know—that I haven’t watched your
antics ever since I was fool enough to drag you out of
the Magellan ? And I was a fool; I fooled myself about
you. Here, especially. I thought this place and these
people had done to you what they did to me and poor
Mullaghan—discovered the human in you. But there
wasn’t a human to discover. You’re only a sack of
second-rate opinions and third-rate fears. Human ! A
thing like you ! ”
WHERE ? WHEN ?
173
Clair shook herself and leant forward to the fire and
also put a twig on it. Then she laughed and gave a long
sigh, and, looking at Sinclair, shook her head.
“Thanks. But it’s really not necessary. . . . Or not
now.”
He flushed, suddenly, darkly. “I thought it might
work.”
“It has, in a way.” She raised her head and looked
across the cave towards ^Erte’s fire. “Goodness. . . .
Sorry I’ve been all you said.”
“You haven’t, of course. . . . But I need help as
well, Clair. All this stuff I talked—about the natural¬
ness of regarding death casually—I know as well as
you do that it’s impossible for us, just as it’s impossible
for us ever to live the lives of these hunters. I know
that wall of glass as well. . . . But Mullaghan’s gone,
and if you went and I were left on my own—I also
don’t want to go mad . . .”
Clair said, soberly : “I’m both sick and sorry. Oh,
I’m damnably selfish.” She held out her hand. “I
don’t think we’ve ever been friends. Can’t we be ?”
He held her hand a moment. She thought: ‘Funny
how like his eyes are to someone’s—’ He said : “This
is the last night in these caves.”
She was startled. “Why ?”
“You haven’t heard, of course. They’ve left you
alone, thinking you’re sick. But the exodus was decided
on this afternoon. There’s no game anywhere in the
flooded country round about, nor anywhere to the
south as far as the hunters have penetrated. That earth¬
quake and the sinking of the mountain-land has left
this section a deserted peninsula. The cave is going to
be abandoned to-morrow.”
“And where are they going ?”
“Southwards, somewhere, in pursuit of the game.
174
THREE GO BACK
And it’s not only threat of famine, of course. You
haven’t noticed, not being outside the cave. But there
was frost this morning; the new lagoons, half salt at
that, were covered with ice. It’ll be a winter of such
terrors as these people have never endured—at least
as far north as this.”
Clair looked at the painted animals overhead. “And
they’re to leave. . . .” It seemed that she herself had
occupied these caverns for months. Then : “We knew
that this happened in pre-history, of course—or will
happen. . . . Goodness, tenses do get mixed in the
time-spirals. ... Is this the coming of the Ice Age ?”
“I don’t think so. It’s just that Atlantis is the most
unstable of the continents. That, of course, we know
from the future out of which we’ve come. It’s doomed.”
“And these people ?”
“They’re the ancestors of the Cro-Magnards from
Cro-Magnon in France, remember. So some of them
at least are to push eastwards, and some years or genera¬
tions hence strike Europe. Or at least, that preceded
the future in which we lived.”
“Isn’t it bound to happen, then ?”
“Not necessarily. Perhaps the future we came from
was one of many possible futures ”
She leant forward in excitement. “I thought that—
once—but I’d forgotten.”
“There was nothing fixed and real about that
twentieth century of ours, Clair. Civilization as we
knew it—it has still to happen. Perhaps it need never
happen. Perhaps we can prevent it, sabotage it in
advance ”
It had grown dark again. The Cro-Magnards were
turning to sleep. The evening was frostily clear and
set with frosty stars. Clasping her knees and looking
out as she listened to Sinclair, Clair thought of Sir John
WHERE ? WHEN ?
175
Mullaghan. “Think but one thought of me up in the stars—”
said a vagrant line. . . . She turned her attention to
the American.
“There is no need for the processes of history, as
we knew them, ever to take place. You and I can alter
the very beginnings. Listen ! We’re going south, and
it will get warmer. Somewhere beyond the southwards
mountains we saw from the plateau these people will
find new hunting-grounds. Then you and I can get to
work. We can teach them the beginnings of civiliza¬
tion without any of civilization’s attendant horrors.”
“What, for example ? I’m horribly ignorant.”
He shook his head. “It’s just that you don’t realize
what you know. Pitchers—they’ve never thought of
using gourds to store water at night. That for a begin¬
ning. Then in hunting : I’m engaged in making a
bow. But these are the lesser things. Somewhere beyond
those southwards mountains we’ll find a river and
wild millet or barley or corn. We can start the first
agriculture—ploughing and seeding will be simple
enough. That for next spring. And in the summer
get them to build a corral and drive wild cattle into it;
they can tame them in a few years. Next autumn take a
party prospecting in the mountains—I know something
about metals. . . . Flax or hemp growing, perhaps.
Even with crude metal implements and rough fibre
bandagings I could save half the women who die in
childbirth. And iodine and suchlike are easy enough
extracts. ... We can leap twenty thousand years and
take these people with us if we plan it carefully. Preserve
this sane equality that’s theirs, take care that no idea of
gods or kings or devils ever arises in their minds.
We can transform humanity.”
Clair began to kindle to his words. If they could !
“But—aren’t the cruelties and the tabus bound to rise
THREE GO BACK
I?6
with civilization ? Better to leave our hunters alone for
the Golden Age that is still theirs than try and fail.”
“We won’t fail. Much better to leave them if there
was any chance of failure. If there was no choice for
the future but history as we know it, a thing inevitable
awaiting these people, it would be better for them and
better for the world if we poisoned them all or drove
them to death by starvation. But there’s no reason
why we should fail. The foul things of civilization were
an accident. . . . Time and history will go on long
after we’re dead here in Atlantis, Clair, but there need
never be a pyramid built or a city massacred or a war or
a miners’ strike. We can re-make the world.”
“Goodness, we will! . . . Keith, there’s Gloezel!”
“Eh ?”
“Don’t you remember reading about it a few years
back ? That place in France where heaps of Neolithic
relics were dug up, and were said to be fakes because
they were mixed with modern-looking bottles and jars
and the scratchings of a primitive alphabet ? . . .
Perhaps this experiment we’re going to try was known
to us already in that twentieth century from which we
came ! Perhaps Gloezel saw the end of this plan of
yours, and men of those days forgot your teachings,
and the civilizations and the savageries rose in spite of
the dream we brought these hunters.”
Sinclair laughed and stood up. “Perhaps there have
been other voyagers into time than you and I. Perhaps
time and history cannot be altered. Yet if they can ”
Somewhere in the depths of the caves a sick child
was crying He stood and listened to it and then looked
down in Clair’s fire-bright face.
“There need never be a lost baby crying again in the
world that we can make.”
And with that he left her, and Clair lay down, and
WHERE ? WHEN ?
177
saw him stride into the far shadows, and a hunter rouse
and look after him. For a moment she hesitated, and a
shudder as of nausea passed through her. Then she
raised her head and called.
“iErte 1”
So it was that Sinclair, coming back to He down by
his own fire after tending that crying child, saw the
hunter and Clair, the lovers for the dark days, asleep
in each other’s arms.
Subchapter iv
And next day the Cro-Magnards of that nameless
valley in Atlantis left the fires in the painted caves still
burning, and gathered their children and their imple¬
ments and the skins of the beasts they had killed in
generations of hunting, and forded the river, and turned
to the south. The rain cleared, and a cold sun shone,
and far in the north the new lakes shivered in a brisk
wind. They passed through a deserted country, with
not even birds in it. They passed out of the Atlantean
valley as dream-people pass from a dream dreamt by a
drowsy fire. Coming from the east or west hundreds
of years before, their ancestors, a people with a
no-history of millennia, descendants of the dawn-men
who Hved in Java and Peking and the Sussex downs,
had descended upon the valley, a place of good hunting,
and settled there. And the years had passed in the flow
and ebb of death and love and birth, times of plenty
and times of famine, with neither memory of the past
nor fears nor hopes for the future. The sun and the
wind, the splendour of simple things, had been theirs ;
theirs that Golden Age that was to five for ever, a wistful
thing in the minds of men. Now they were out on an
M
THREE GO BACK
178
adventure that followed no road Clair Stranlay could
foreplot.
They carried their sick and their aged with them,
and they went gaily enough, with laughter and singing,
the young men stringing out far in advance across the
southern savannahs. They went in no great order, but
a friendly southwards drift. Alone perhaps of them all
Clair and Sinclair stopped and looked back.
“There will be fishes swimming in that cave years
hence,” said Clair.
“Poor Mullaghan 1”
And that was strange enough to think of also. Thous¬
ands of years away, perhaps preserved uncorrupted and
incorruptible by the pressures of water and rock, the
body of Sir John Mullaghan would lie in that grave
they had dug for it with the flint spears of Cro-Magnard
hunters. The knoll glimmered.
“And now—” said Sinclair.
So they too turned about and went, their white
bodies strange phenomena still in the wake of the
golden men of the dawn. The savannahs rose green
and brown and cobalt in the distance. Far and remote
beyond these, many days’ journeyings away, were the
mountains where Sinclair planned to change the course
of history.
Behind, the winter followed on their tracks.
BOOK II
WHENCE? WHITHER?
If I have been extinguished, yet there rise
A thousand beacons from the spark I bore.
—SHELLEY
Chapter I : CLAIR LOST
Subchapter i
CLAIR STRANLAY was lost.
She looked back, shading her eyes with her
hand against the pale afternoon sunlight, to the track
she had taken across the withering grass to this emi¬
nence in the southern foothills. But all the country
was desolate and deserted, except by a far loch where
curlews called and called. Nothing moved or took to
itself animate being in that still land, with the forests
marching on its fringes and the sun—silver, not gold
at all—brooding upon the quietness. Up that track
she had come. But before that ?
She sat down to consider the matter. There was the
forest. But which forest ? The country was ribbed with
just such masses of trees, and the rise and fall of nullahs
confused all knowledge as to whether one mass was a
separate entity or the winding continuation of another.
. . . Goodness, such a fool not to watch the course
of the sun !
“I’m shockingly hungry,” said Clair, aloud.
The silent countryside took no notice. Clair pushed
her hair from her eyes and stood up again. It would be
nonsensical to rest now. Somewhere, from higher up,
she would be bound to see the hunters or the encamp¬
ment.
She climbed through grass that was sedgy because
of a trickle of water from the hillside. A ridge, like the
scales on the back of a stegosaurus, ran along its sum¬
mit. Here the grass gave place to lichened rock—granite
181
182
THREE GO BACK
rock, she noted, and red granite at that. The sight
brought back a memory—oh, holiday bathing at
Peterhead in Scotland, of course. Twenty-five thousand
years before.
The red slivers cut her feet, hardened though these
had grown. But at last, though with some difficulty,
she attained a platform-ledge that dominated all the
hill and indeed all the country. Panting, she looked
again into the north.
Made miniature in distance, the land was otherwise
unchanged. No sign of the Cro-Magnards or their
encampment anywhere.
If she made a fire 
Realization of a startling fact chilled her a little.
She had nothing with which to make a fire. She glanced
down at the short-bladed flint spear in her hand. Flint.
But no iron pyrite. The hunters used tinder and a
drum-stick—things she was incapable of operating.
No chance of raising a fire. Must watch for one instead.
For how long ? She looked at the sun. Perhaps
three hours more of daylight. She turned round, slowly,
in a circle, looking about her. So, very suddenly, she
became aware at last of the mountains of the south.
From her stance, and for the first time in the south¬
wards trek, she saw them uprise plainly. Not only so,
but gigantic. They filled all the southern horizon with
their tumbled shapes. Distant, Andean, some trick of
refraction allowed her to see the sun filtering into
immense canyons, splashing in remote upland tarns,
crowning each point with quicksilver. The signifi¬
cance of that last gleam dawned on her.
‘Snow.’
They were perhaps twenty miles away. From right
to left of the horizon they stretched unbroken, tenebrous
and question-evoking. Were they passable ?
WHENCE? WHITHER? 183
She thought: ‘Keith’s plan to take the hunters
south of them—he may never be able to carry it out.
Necessary to try out our experiment on a southwards
river, protected by mountains in the north. . . . Wonder
what he’s doing now ? Missed me ? Sure to.’
She had an afterthought, and smiled at it, absently.
‘And Mrte as well, I suppose.’
How far away, both of them ? Miles and miles,
surely. Goodness, what a fool 
But thinking that wouldn’t help.
It was nine days since the beginning of their trek
from the ancient cave. Acting on the apparently casual
suggestion of Sinclair, the Cro-Magnards had held as
directly southwards as the nature of the country allowed.
It was to them a matter of indifference what direction
was taken, so long as game grew more plentiful. And
certainly neither to left nor right was there that plen-
titude. But one colony of lions the general exodus of
the animals had left behind, and on the fifth night of
the trek these beasts, made bold by hunger, had raided
the camp, a score or more of them. Clair and Sinclair
had been awakened by the screams and shouts, and
stirred to see a fire geyser under the impact of a lion
landing from a misdirected spring. Clair had caught
up a torch and thrust it into the face of one brute.
Near her Zumarr had been killed and nearly disem¬
bowelled by the stroke of a huge paw. The fighting in
the semi-darkness about the fires had gone on for many
minutes. Then the Hons had retreated, dragging several
bodies with them. Devouring these, they had squatted
all night in a semi-circle beyond the fires, evidently
determined not to abandon the neighbourhood of this
store of food which had descended on their famished
land from the north. Sinclair had gone about, binding
up such wounds as grass and sinew seemed capable of
THREE GO BACK
184
salving. JErte had come to Clair and crouched by her,
looking towards the noise of the lions’ grisly banqueting
and gripping a spear in either hand. Then, towards the
dawn, the Cro-Magnards had begun to move out
towards the lions, discovering them replete and somno¬
lent, all but two or three cubs which had had little
share of the human meat. Out there, beyond the camp,
a running fight began, three men and more to one
beast, until the morning came. Half a dozen or so of
the lions escaped. The rest, dead, were skinned, and the
Cro-Magnards cooked and ate meat from their
haunches. Both Clair and Sinclair had refused it.
Throughout the next day and the next, holding
south again, no game at all had been encountered.
Food was growing very scarce, and the half-dozen
lions, made cautious, but still hungry, followed up the
trek, roaring despondently at night-time but ventur¬
ing on no more raids. But, on the morning of this day
on which Clair sat lost on the summit of her hill, a boy,
slipping out of the camp in the early hours on some
boyish foraging of his own, had wandered for several
miles and then returned in a glow and much excite¬
ment. The lions had vanished from about the camp,
and he knew the reason. A herd of mammoth, many
bulls and cows and three young ones, was gathered
feeding near a stream and a hill.
The news had emptied the camp, at racing speed,
of the golden men. Clair had caught up a flint spear and
ran by Sinclair’s side, the spear a thrilling complement.
“Though goodness only knows what for. Unless to
tickle the mammoths. . . . What, for that matter, are
any of us going to do with spears against a mammoth ?”
“zErte was telling me,” Sinclair had said. “We’ll
drive one of the animals into the river and attack it
there.”
WHENCE? WHITHER?
185
So they had done. One bull, perhaps the leader of
the herd, had charged the yelling attack of the Cro-
Magnards, a magnificent spectacle of wrath with
uplifted trunk and threatening tusks. Him they had
allowed to pass without casualty, and, once past, he
had stood a moment meditating discretion or valour,
and then taken to the open land and safety. The others,
all but the selected two, had followed him. Driving
those twain into the river was the task. Under the urge
of a hail of stones one of them at length galumphed
forward into the muddy embrace of the waters and
sank to the knees and was held there, like a fly in glue.
And, as by so many hornets, hewing and stabbing, he
had been instantly assailed. Not so the second. It had
broken away to the right, trampling several hunters
underfoot and impaling one on a great broken tusk.
Sinclair had taken abrupt command, his dour face
flushed; perhaps the first commander in the world,
for even in hunting parties the Cro-Magnards had no
leaders. They were an orchestra without a conductor,
yet a fairly efficient one at that, acting with a serene
co-operativeness that suggested to Clair telepathy.
But, under the direction of Sinclair’s shout, such of them
as had already attended the panicked antics of the
second mammoth broke into two parties. One raced
for the hills, the other held in the track of the beast.
Clair had joined the first group, and ran with them,
feeling in a very glow of health, and had slipped and
fallen; and had laughed and scrambled to her feet and
reclaimed her spear. Then she had found herself alone
and lost.
As simply as that. For a time she had heard receding
shoutings and once a wild trumpeting of agony that
made her cover her ears. She had made in the direc¬
tion of both sounds, as she believed. Neither could
i86
THREE GO BACK
be more than half a mile distant. And no sign of hun¬
ters or hunted had met her eyes. She had found herself
in a series of low valleys, one fitting into the other
with the suave necessity of shallow boxes in a Chinese
puzzle. And when finally she had emerged from
the labyrinth into open country again, it was a country
of which she had no knowledge. No river was in
sight, other than one glistening far across the savannah.
It had seemed too distant to be the one where the first
mammoth had been killed, and she had disregarded it
and searched in other directions. And when she would
have sought for it again it had disappeared.
She had wandered the deserted Atlantean country
since then, once stopping to drink at a pool, once
finding a nest with three eggs in it, curious speckled
eggs which she had broken and eaten raw, very thankful
that they were fresh. She had even thought of the
curate’s egg while doing so, and laughed, feeling
refreshed. Then she had hunted on again.
And this seemed the day’s end of the hunt.
Bound to follow her. But could they ? With a
certain uncertainty gripping her she turned now from
survey of the gigantic bastion in the south, and looked
at the country out of which she had climbed. They had
no dogs, they had no special scent themselves ; scent
was nothing to primitive man, was probably a later
acquirement of specialized savages. She would have to
wait until darkness and then look for the light of a
fire somewhere down there. And food 
Beyond her hill, eastwards, was another, and between
the two of them a gleam of water. She realized the thirst
parching her throat, and began to descend from the
scaled back of the granite stegosaurus. The sun flung
her a long shadow eastwards as she walked, but it was
only as she neared the foot of the hill and the water
WHENCE? WHITHER? 187
was near that she saw a mist was rising or descending
from nowhither. Between her and the distant, nameless
Andes the undulating, sparsely-forested land was
sheathed in an uneasy garment of damp wool. By the
time she had knelt and drunk and stood up again, the
mist was all about her. She stood in uncertainty of it,
walked a few steps, halted, determined to climb her
hill again. But the hill had disappeared. Or rather the
hill-summit had.
Now she walked along a rolling shoulder of earth
that was either of the original eminence, or of that
second hill she had seen in the east. A tickling sensa¬
tion disturbed her chest; then her nose. Abruptly she
began to sneeze, desperately. She sought for a hand¬
kerchief she did not possess. The fit passed in a moment,
but not the constricted feeling in her throat. She
thought, dismayed : ‘Goodness, if I’m in for a cold !’
She came to another tarn. It reflected her face and
body as her feet touched the edge. She leant on her
spear and looked down at herself.
‘Pretty thing still,’ she said, and rubbed her chill
arms and flanks, still regarding herself. A woman had
come into the water and looked up at her gravely, from
under a heavy, short-cut mane of brown hair with the
red slightly bleached from it. But the red tints were
still in eyes and brows, and her face had a brownness
set on it evenly, as though out of a jar. So indeed her
whole body was tinted, yet in some fashion that left it
none the less white. Rubbed to warmth, she picked up
the spear again, and, leaving that reflection of herself
to dream of her for ever, perhaps, in that lost pool,
went on into a mist that presently cleared, like a curtain
drawn aside, to disclose the splendours of the sunset
on the Atlantean Alps. They changed and took
separate form and advanced and retreated as she looked.
i88
THREE GO BACK
like a company of warriors in gold and grey and the
panoply of war.
With purple from the murex the sunset had garbed
them, and with the red of rust, and a blue—an ultra-
marine blue that must have found its colours in those
high, glacial snows. . . . Clair had never seen such a
sunset, and the stalking approach of darkness at her
lower level was almost upon her before she noticed it.
With that darkness came a bitter coldness and a wind
that seemed somehow dissociated from the cold, but
cold itself . . .
And suddenly Clair knew that she was being tracked.
The beast had snuffled in a peculiar way. She
wheeled round and saw nothing. Then—a hump of
rock she had not noticed when she passed that way. It
was not a hump of rock. The beast was crouching.
There was not light enough for its eyes to gleam, she
saw merely the dim shape, hunched, and the twitching
of its ears. She thought: Ts it going to spring ?’
She turned round and went on. The padding came
on as well. This time she wheeled so rapidly that she
saw the beast, not crouching this time, but on its feet,
its ears still twitching.
And it was not a beast l
Subchapter it
To Clair it seemed that she stood and faced the
thing through minute after minute of horror-struck
silence. The spear was gripped and useless in her hand,
for the blood had deserted her hand. It grew momen¬
tarily darker, in wave on wave of lapping shadow from
the sunset fire in the mountains of the south. And still
Clair Stranlay stood and stared wide-eyed at that hideous
apparition out of pre-history.
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
189
It was a male, with the bigness of a gorilla and some-
thing of its form. It was hung with dun-red hair;
crouched forward, its shoulders were an immense
stretch of arching muscle and bone. Its gnarled hands
almost touched the ground. It smelt. It stared at her
filmily, and a panting breath of excitement came from
its open jaws.
A Neanderthaler !
The thought flashed through her mind and was
instantly disputed and dismissed. For the thing had an
immense bulge of forehead and no downwards-pressing
neck constriction such as she had read the lost race of
Neanderthal possessed. Nor had it a single implement
or weapon about it. It crouched, a strange, strayed,
hungry, pitiful beast, looking at her. What it was she
did not know, was never to know, that member of
some lost, discarded genus of sub-men that time was
utterly to annihilate. Lost as herself she suddenly
realized it was, and with that realization blood came back
to her hand. She raised the spear and shouted, “Shoo!”
The thing, half in sitting posture though it was,
sprang back a full yard, and then, as Clair, desperately
afraid, made at it, turned and shambled off in a rapid,
baboon-like scrabble. And as it went it uttered a strange,
moaning cry, growing louder and louder as the body
behind the voice receded and finally vanished into the
evening. Clair, sobbing hysterically, no sooner saw it
out of sight than she turned in her original direction
and ran and ran, slipping and falling over rocks and
once becoming desperately entangled in a soft and
hairy bush which seemed to grasp at her with clammy
hands. When finally she stopped, panting, there was
no echo of that moaning ululation to be heard in the
deserted hills, nor any sign of her stalker.
The running had warmed her, but now, stopping.
THREE GO BACK
190
she felt the wind drive against her bare skin icily. Some
shelter she must have before the night came. And there
was little chance in these hills, for they were of granite,
not the familiar limestone so frequently honeycombed
with caverns. Yet, in the thickening nightfall, she had
not gone more than a dozen steps when fortune favoured
her and up the brow of the hill she saw an indentation.
Attained with panting effort, she discovered it a fault
in the strata that left a roofed, triangular recess some
nine or ten feet deep, inadequate enough, but better
than nothing.
Grass. Grass to warm it and herself.
She laid down her spear and ran to the foot of the
hill where grass, sere and dry as hay, rustled and whis¬
pered eerily in that voiceless country. She tore up
great armfuls of it and carried it up to the ledge. Mean¬
time the force of the wind had increased, and as she
made the last journey sleet began to pelt her body, as
though she stood in an ice-cold spray from a bathroom
tap. But the ledge was a heaped fuzz of hay. She ran
inside, seized the flint spear, lay down on the hay and
wound herself into the swathes, rolling over and over
till the faintly burred heads had entangled her in a
great coverlet from head to foot. She left her right arm
bare and gathered more of the hay and piled it above
her in blanket-like layers. The exertion had warmed her
again, faintly, but her whole body was still an icy numb¬
ness. When she finished and raised her head it was
to see the blackness complete but for a strange
phenomenon. A white curtain wavered and shook in
front of the ledge of refuge. And the rock sang as it
waved and shook.
Hail.
Winter.
She found she had forgotten hunger as she had
WHENCE? WHITHER? 19I
forgotten to be afraid. Yet the numbness of her body
had not spread to her mind. She found herself thinking
and remembering in a passionate dispassion.
She thought of Mtte and that first night she had
lain with him in the cave far to the north, watching the
volcanoes burn in the land that the seas were soon to
devour. And instantly the memory passed from her.
Neither JErtz—his face seemed to take shape in the
darkness and then fade at once—nor that pitiful shade
of Mametz seemed of importance. She thought of
Sinclair, and he passed from her mind, a dour, enig¬
matic ghost. Sir John Mullaghan—less than a ghost.
So with all she had ever known, all the tenants of the
ancient world of comfort and security. Only in the sound
of the bitter hail-storm that thudded upon the hills,
remained one piercing memory ; the face of the beast-
man, lost and desperate as herself, astray in time and
the world.
Had he found refuge or was he out in this ? What
a jest of God ! Millions and millions of years ago He
had brought a warm, fetid scum to anchor on some
intertidal beach. And it had fermented through long
nights and noons ; and it was life. And life climbed and
branched and flowered from it. And the dragons
passed and the mammals rose and the great apes walked
the hills of Siwalik. Westwards they wandered,
through millennium on millennium, gathering their little
skills with stock and stone. And one by one God
murdered and discarded them. For they bored Him.
Heidelberg man with the mighty skull, the ape-hunter
of Piltdown, the chattering beasts of Broken Hill and
the Java jungles—they passed and were not, bloody
foam and spume on a sea that whimpered cruelty and
change. Till this Atlantean night of hail all these
experimentings of Nature’s thousand millennia—they
THREE GO BACK
192
ended here in a nameless hill-land with the ape-beast
and herself, last representatives of their kindred
experiments . . .
She quivered to a misty drowsiness, even while a
faint voice protested through her frozen serenity:
“But you are not the last!” Last she was. Poor
humanity, that had dreamed so much and so splen¬
didly—to end its dream with her ! . . .
Thereon, warmed by the heat her body had engen¬
dered in the hay, utterly exhausted with her day’s
marchings and searchings, Clair laid her head on her
hand, and slept, while the hail ceased and the hand of
winter drew back, hesitating a cosmic moment, from the
night and hills of Atlantis.
Subchapter in
It began to freeze as the night wore on. The cold
grew more intense. But it did not penetrate the grass
coverings wherein Clair Stranlay lay enwrapped. Not
cold but cramped position made her awake, and, shift¬
ing her aching hip, she saw that the hail had ceased and
the moonlight had come. It flooded all the uplands
and came in little waves into the recess. She lay and
looked out, suddenly vividly awake. What had she been
imagining before she fell asleep ?
Suddenly she remembered and laughed a little at the
memory. The night bent eagerly in to listen to her.
She thought: ‘You were hysterical, I suppose. The
last woman in the world. . . . Still, supposing Keith
Sinclair is all wrong, and it’s into the future we’ve
strayed, not the past ? Then this damn hunger of mine
must be the accumulated hunger of centuries. . . .
Pate de foie gras sandwiches—remember them ? They
were very good. And spring lamb. And black coffee.
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
193
And green chartreuse. And—you’d better not go on.’
She pressed her hand against her small, flat stomach.
Her back ached. Those kidney-pill people would give
anything to have her as an illustration. “The Cave-
woman’s Bowels. . . Every picture tells a story.
Bright moonlight.
She wriggled a little, cautiously if light-headedly,
towards the fore part of the cave. Now she could see
the moonlit lands. The silence of the day that had
encompassed her wanderings was as nothing to this.
Over a crisp white shroud that draped the countryside,
nothing moved or cried. Had she indeed dreamed ?
Was this not perhaps verily the end ? Far below, to the
right, a stretch of water gleamed icily, burnished and
unrippled. Silence and the sweetness of death in the
silence, and beyond the water the black armies of the
trees.
‘Forest and water, far and wide.
In limpid starlight glorified.
Fie like the mystery of death.’
And God ? Was there indeed no God, were He and
His variants no more than mistaken science—results
of that seasonal ritual that grew in the Nile Valley when
men ascribed the time of flood and ripening to the
mysterious, animate sun ? No more ? And the Christ
and the Buddha and their dream of a Father Who knew
if a sparrow fell ? Were these no more than thin plaints
of this lost adventure of mankind, crying for warmth
and safety and comfort ?
‘Fo, I shall be with you alway, even unto the end of the
world.’
‘Until the day break and the shadows flee away ’
‘Father, in Thy gracious keeping,
Feave we now thy servant, sleeping?
N
THREE GO BACK
194
Phrases innumerable, lovely and gracious and
shining, came to her out of the silence. Things from the
Anglican burial service, from the poets, from forgotten
hymns . . .
‘Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting . .
‘Tor God so loved the world that He gave His only
begotten Son ’
1 So runs my dream, but what am I ?
An infant crying in the night.
An infant crying for the light.
And with no language but a cry ’
Was that God only the Anglicized version of the
Nile-lands sun ? A dream. Himself a hope and a terror
as yet unborn, undreamt of here in the wastes of
Atlantis or elsewhere in this world that awaited the
coming of the last Ice Age ? Before Adam—this was a
night before the birth of God !
Omnipotence and Omniprescience still unborn. Far
up there in the stars God still lay unborn and unawak¬
ened. . . . Or dead, dead indeed if this were the last
night of the world, swinging now a frozen star about
an extinct sun.
‘Then what am I ? Why was I born to think these
things ? Oh, somewhere, surely, in some age to come,
there’s explanation. Of me and Sinclair and Sir John
and the beast-man lost in these hills. Somewhere . . .’
She covered her eyes from the bright moonlight.
No sound, no answer came to her. None had ever
come or ever would come.
And then Clair felt no longer afraid. She dropped
her hands. She addressed the frozen world in a whisper.
“You lovely thing, you can kill me and finish me.
Very easily. But not that question. It’s beyond your
killing. It’ll live long after you’re dead yourself.”
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
J95
Subchapter iv
In the morning she encountered and speared a half-
frozen hare by the verge of the loch. Shuddering, she
cut its throat and drank its blood. By nightfall she was
far from the ledge where she had sheltered, holding
across the savannah towards the southwards mountains.
That had seemed the only hope left. Towards those
mountains Sinclair was guiding the Cro-Magnards
and somewhere on the verge of them she would over¬
take or intercept the trek.
The sun had risen, powerful and hot, and the thin
frost-rime went fast from grass and forest. Clair ran
as much and as often as she could, but many times had
to sit and rub her numbed feet, agonizingly, back to
circulation. No wind came across the hill-jumbled plain,
and the southern peaks seemed to come but little closer
with the passing of the day. Yet the hills where she had
encountered the ape-man receded almost into flatness.
She made up her mind to perch in a tree during the
night; so all day she kept near the winding forest-
belts, lest darkness overtake her remote from the
shelter she had determined on.
For shelter, cold apart, would be necessary. The
land now swarmed with game. Once she came on a
nest of hyaenodon, rolling and playing and snarling
happily in the sun. They desisted at sight of her, and
crouched with lolling tongues, looking at her quizzi¬
cally. Two, hardly more than puppies, got up and
cantered after her, falling over the grass-tussocks and
their own legs, foolishly. A great gaunt female the
size of a young heifer whined them back. Further on
she saw a herd of aurochs among the trees, and remem¬
bered the Latin tale of these animals having no knees
196 THREE GO BACK
and being unable to kneel or lie, or sleep otherwise
than unchancily poised against the bole of a tree. The
Romans had been misinformed. Many of the great
beasts squatted, cud-chewing and somnolent, with
bulls on guard here and there. Clair passed too far
off for them to take offence at her. The wonder of this
passing through a land filled with wild beasts, and
passing unharmed, wore off in the trudging hours. She
thought, with a return of her usual gay irony : T’m
the essential Cockney still, I suppose, and can’t get
rid of the notion that it’s really Regent’s Park or the
Bronx—and if any of the beasts break loose I can scream
for a keeper.’
But in late afternoon the direct sunlight vanished,
extinguished in a driving storm of snow, soft, powdery
stuff which felt almost warm at first, but speedily lost
that quality. The landscape became a wavering scurry,
as though the very savannahs were seeking shelter.
Clair turned into the safety of the trees, treading a
great nave of pines with underfoot a thick carpet of
needles which pricked her feet. Scotch firs grew here
as well, and under one of them she crept and sheltered,
watching the afternoon pass greyly and the storm
continue unabated.
She could still see the land she had crossed, and,
presently, in a late clearing of the snow-squall, a figure
nearing the forest. A human figure.
She knew it a dream or a mirage and looked away,
and rubbed her eyes, and looked back again. Then she
started to her feet and found herself running towards
him, calling and sobbing. He saw her, dropped his
load, and came running towards her and caught her in
his arms.
“Airte !” she cried.
It was Keith Sinclair.
Chapter II: A LIGHT IN THE SOUTH
Subchapter i
HE said, breathlessly, “Clair ! Are you all right ?”
And she could not answer because her head was
pressed against his chest, and she was breathless with
running and surprise, and felt she never wanted to
speak again ; only to hold to him and hold to him and
never let him go. So for a time they stood in each
other’s arms, and then somehow they were apart, Clair
looking up at him, still unbelievingly.
“You are Sinclair ? I’m not the last left alive ? Oh,
Keith! . . .”
He turned away and picked up the bundle. It was a
great bearskin. Beside it he had dropped a hunting
spear and something else—a huge, stringed bow that
reached almost to his shoulder. He turned round to
find Clair drying her eyes ineffectually. He saw her slim
and brown-white and grimy, with snow in her hair and
a ripple of gooseflesh across her shoulders. Bless her
for those winter dips of hers. . . . He said : “My
God, it’s a long way to Kensington !”
“I thought I was lost for ever. I thought—” She
darted forward and seized his spear and bow. “You
dear to find me ! I’ve got a tree to shelter under. Come
along !”
The snow had begun again and they ran for the
shelter of the forest. Under the Scotch fir no snow
came, and only a waft of faint ice currents from the
wind. Sinclair dropped his bundle and bent and untied
it, not looking at her as he asked the question :
197
THREE GO BACK
198
“Have you had any food ?”
“I killed a hare this morning and drank its blood.”
“And no fire ? How did you pass the night ?”
“Sheltering in a ledge up on the hills back there.
I saw all the world lying dead last night, Keith.”
He said, with a grimace of dour humour : “Why
didn’t you wave to me ? That’s what I felt like !”
He was gathering pine-needles and broken branches.
He placed a little circle of rotten wood fragments round
the heap and then fumbled in the bearskin. Some
tarnished thing shone in his hand. Clair drew a long
breath.
“Sir John’s fighter. Does it still fight ?”
“He never used it after we came among the Cro-
Magnards, you know. And the wadding is still a little
damp with petrol—I hope.” He flicked the fighter
open. A tiny, white-yellow flame kindled the wick.
Shielding it, he knelt to the heap of twigs. The wind
had ebbed round and came from the north now. The
flame ran swiftly along a twig. Clair, standing, stared at
it fascinatedly. A fire again ! Sinclair put up a hand,
iron-cold even upon her chill-accustomed skin, and
pulled her down.
“Sit here and don’t let it out. I’m going to erect a
break-wind.”
He bent and disappeared out of the sheltering circle
of the fir-fronds, returning in a moment with an armful
of boughs. He went back, foraging, and she heard
him snapping off others. Presently he was beside her
again, and began to construct the break-wind, inter¬
weaving from the ground up to the fir-fronds a wall
of boughs. Abruptly the wind ceased to blow upon
Clair’s back. The fire changed from a sulky negli¬
gence to a gossipy crackling. Sinclair lay beside her.
“That’s that. God, I am glad to see you.”
WHENCE? WHITHER? I99
She saw then that he was utterly exhausted. His
face was pinched and dented with cold and other things,
his eyes bloodshot. Also, his feet were so torn that the
blood had splashed in long streaks up past his ankles.
She gave a cry at sight of them.
“They’re all right.” He was lying with closed eyes.
“Stopped aching, and the dirt in them’s clean enough.”
He tried to rouse himself. “There’s pemmican in that
parcel. Twine the bearskin round you. Keep up fire
. . .” His voice trailed off into unintelligibility. She
thought he had fainted and leant over him in some
consternation.
He was asleep. Probably he had not slept all the
previous night.
She undid the bundle and found inside it smoked
meat, as he had said; strange spongy stuff she had never
seen before. Mammoth meat ? In the bundle was a
package of stone-tipped arrows. Nothing else. She
cut off some of the meat with the blade of the spear
which had companied her, and mounted the spongy
slices on arrow-heads, and crawled out from below
the tree to collect more fuel. There, beyond the shelter
of the break-wind, she realized the salvation of
Sinclair’s coming. The snow had ceased again, but the
wind was almost a solid thing, and awful in its numbing
coldness. Darkness was driving across it, an opposing
force, and she stumbled chilledly in shadows, presently
sobbing through her teeth as she faced about to return
to the fir. There she found the meat smoking and
Sinclair still fast asleep. She flung the skin over him
and tucked it about him, and he stirred a little and
muttered something ; and she bent to hear what it was.
“Road to the south. She’ll have taken the road to
the mountains.”
So he had guessed and followed on that chance ?
200
THREE GO BACK
But a hazardous enough guess, and when had he made
it ? Not until he had reached one of those hills in which
she herself had sheltered last night. That was obvious.
. . . Keith Sinclair ! And she had thought—she had
known as she ran towards him—that he was z£rte.
Where were the hunters ?
Useless questions. She thought: ‘Oh, it is good
to eat/ and ate the meat slowly, carefully, wondering
if she should awaken Sinclair to share with her. But
he was obviously more tired than hungry. The saltless
stuff in her mouth went over without effort nowadays.
But a drink—it might be impossible to find any water.
She looked beyond the break-wind and saw only a
smouldering landscape on the verge of night. But
the break-wind had collected a drift of snow, and she
gathered a handful and ate it, though she knew she
invited stomach-ache. But her mouth and throat felt
instantly cold and moist, and she finished the sliver of
meat in her hand, and looked for the rest, and gave a
little gasp. Oh, my good God, had she eaten all that ?
So it seemed. She piled more boughs on the fire.
Now the wind was crying overhead. The Scotch fir
drummed like a harp played on by a blind harper. She
found handfuls of damp leaves and cones and packed
them about the fire, their resinous smell homely in her
nostrils. Then she crept to Sinclair’s side and lay down
beside him. Under the bearskin his body had generated
a grateful warmth, and now an additional warmth came
out from the fire. She stretched herself beside him and
he moved in sleep, as if making way for her. She patted
his shoulder, soothingly, and saw his shadowed face in
sleep, not so worn now, but blued still under the eyes.
He moaned a little as he moved his torn feet. She lay
in compassionate alertness, not touching him. The fire¬
light flickered and flapped in a stray eddy of the wind.
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
201
Clair tucked the bearskin around herself and then
leant over and tucked the other side round Sinclair.
So raised, she looked out from below the whistling
fronds of the tree, into the darkness of the forest and
tundra, a darkness based on a ghostly greyness that was
the snow. She felt a drowsy content upon her. She
thought, withdrawing a chilled arm into shelter:
‘Goodness, how little we need for comfort!’ Two
naked savages in a forest on a snowing night. A fire,
food, a break-wind and a bearskin. And men had toiled
and planned and invented elaborate explorer’s equip¬
ment and central heating and safety lavatories vwhen
they might have had this for nothing—and conquered
the stars and split the atom in the generations devoted
to worrying over houses sound-proof and wind-proof,
and, as they had had at length to construct them, fool¬
proof. . . . Her hair blew a little ; she felt it rise and
undulate pleasantly on her head. She was about to
lie down when something in the night, far away, caught
her attention.
At first she thought it was a star and then realized
the impossibility of that. The night was too dense with
storm-clouds. And, though it had the twinkling immo¬
bility of a star, it was too low down there in the
horizon of the south. But it gleamed brightly, like a
torch in an unsteady hand, winking, as it seemed, across
the leagues of tundra in the drive of the same blizzard
as whoomed against the break-wind. What could it be ?
Another volcano ? But there had been no sign of a
volcano during all her southwards tramp of the after¬
noon. The Atlantean Alps were great, glacier-studded
masses, not like that line of fires that had marched to
the right of the original trek of Sir John and Sinclair
and herself from the wreck of Magellan's Cloud. No
volcano. It must be a fire.
202
THREE GO BACK
But kindled by whom ?
Staring across the night, a maze of drowsy specula¬
tions unfolded in her brain. Other Cro-Magnards ?
But were there any, other than those she knew ?
Perhaps—who knew !—another party of explorers from
the outer rims of Time, sucked into this epoch by just
such accident as wrecked the Magellan’s Cloud. No
impossibility. People perhaps out of an age even
remoter than the twentieth century, stray Utopians
perhaps from a.d. ten thousand, with the most fantastic
notions of the twentieth century, and never having
heard of the Cro-Magnards at all . . .
Still—perhaps simply a consignment from the same
age and era as had caught the Magellan 1
She lowered her head, and then, he being at last
fast asleep, snuggled close to Sinclair. The remote,
mysterious fire had vanished from her range of vision.
She closed her eyes. Other twentieth century
explorers ! . . . Who would they be if she had the
selection of them ? The Archbishop of Canterbury, of
course—to see what he thought of a people who knew
not God; Mr. H. G. Wells, to find out what he
thought of primitives who were neither stalking ghouls
of the night nor those vexedly flea-bitten savages who
scratched throughout the early pages of the Outline ;
President Hoover and Mr. Ramsay MacDonald—to
learn a little about the original nature of man, and be
shocked to death to find their ancestors so unwarlike
that they needed no elaborate conventions to restrain
themselves from throat-cutting and the disembowel-
ment of babies; Mr. Henry Ford, with his tight,
narrow face, to die of a broken heart in an auto-less
world ; Charlie Chaplin to poke the aurochs with his
sdck . . .
A small and sleepy chuckle stole out to the fire, and
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
203
the two under the bearskin lay very still indeed the
while the night went on and the wind rose to a super¬
blizzard, rose to the roar of a Russian shoom, and then
fell and died. But all through these hours, and into the
pale coming of the next dawn, enigmatic, the fire in the
southwards mountains winked across the wastes.
Subchapter ii
The American was the first to awake, what of his
unquenched hunger from the previous day. All his
trunk was very warm; but his feet ached as though
they had been frozen and were now in the process of
thawing. The fire was out and the wind had died
away and it was the beginning of daylight. He put
aside the bearskin from his face and discovered then the
reason for some of his warmth. Clair lay with her arms
around his neck, fast asleep, her grimy face laid in the
hollow of his shoulder.
He remembered at once, and then, not moving, lay
and looked at her. For a moment the temptation made
him dizzy. All the repressed and thwarted desires of
his ancestors for six thousand years were behind him,
urging him to it in that Atlantean forest that was to be
a rotted myth before those ancestors were born. But
there were other and older ancestors. . . . He scowled.
“You scabrous lout,” he commented to himself.
He withdrew his shoulder as gently as possible and
stood up and shivered in the waiting coldness of the
morning. A moorhen twittered. Water was not so far
off. He stepped gingerly towards the fire and collected
charred boughs, and scrunched around in search for
Sir John’s petrol-lighter, and found it laid neatly at the
base of the fir, in company with his bow. His spear
was nowhere to be seen, because at the moment Clair
204
THREE GO BACK
lay on it. He started a fire and then crept out from
below the fir and held down through an avenue of
pines to that twittering that told of the moorhen’s
splashings. The sun came up over the eastward tundra
at that moment and followed him. He found the water,
a stream that meandered southwards towards the
mountains, and sat down on its snow-covered bank. He
was half-frozen already with his walking through that
snow, but the cleansing of his feet at once was impera¬
tive. He set to work with handfuls of ice-cold water.
Several times he felt he was about to faint in the spasms
of agony that travelled up his body. Clair’s voice spoke
behind him.
“Keith ! Why didn’t you ask me to help ?”
He looked over his shoulder and saw her shivering
behind him and carrying the bearskin. “Go back to
the fire.”
“Don’t bully. We’ll go when you’re all right again.
Sit on this and I’ll bathe them.”
He rose and then sat down, as she had told him.
And then she saw a curious thing. His black hair was
almost ashen grey. She stared at it appalled, half¬
kneeling in front of him and looking up. Sinclair said :
“What is it ?”
“Your hair.”
“My what ?”
Of course he didn’t know. She hesitated, beginning
to lave his feet. He scowled at her, inquiringly. He
put up his hand to his head. “Seems all right.”
“It’s turned grey,” said Clair, gently.
“What 1”
He was astounded for a moment. He laughed. He
muttered something unkind about the influence of
Hollywood and was palpably ashamed of himself. But
Clair kept her head down-bent. Had he been through
WHENCE ? WHITHER ? ZOJ
as bad a time as that ? Hers had been nothing to it.
Of course he had thought her lost for ever, killed most
probably. . . . His feet made her shudder, and he
shuddered himself as she tended them and drew out
long slivers of stone from the right one.
“That was from the time I had a slip and glissade on
those infernal red hills.”
“If only we had something to bind up the cuts
with ”
“I’ll make some sandals from part of this bearskin.
They’ll do, thanks. Let’s get back to the fire.”
At the fire Clair knelt and toasted herself and more
of the mammoth meat. Sinclair made his moccasins.
“How did you find me ?” Clair asked.
“God knows. How did you get lost ?”
She told him of the circumstances the while the day
brightened; then heard of his own Odyssey. Her
absence had not been discovered by him until the
afternoon of the day on which she had been lost. He
had hunted from group to group, asking about her,
and finding her nowhere. Presently the whole camp was
aroused and, excepting those Cro-Magnards engaged
in the boucanning of the mammoth meat, every hunter
and woman had set out in the search for her. From one
of the hunters the American heard of Clair’s joining the
party which had made a dash through the hills to inter¬
cept the second mammoth. Thereat, in company with
Airte and three or four more, he had set out to retraverse
that route. In the hills they had scattered and presently
Sinclair, in a muddy patch on the other side of these
hills, had come on the imprint of a naked and recent
footstep which he knew was Clair’s 
“How did you know ?”
From the arching of the instep. There had been no
more than that single footprint, but it had pointed
206
THREE GO BACK
southwards, towards a range of hills. He had set out
to reach that range.
The range had been gained as the darkness was
falling, and with no further sign of Clair, nor sound of
her or answer to his shouts. He had hunted the range
all the night, and with the coming of morning had
gained the top of it and considered the situation, deciding
correctly that if Clair lost were still Clair alive she must
have determined to make the southwards mountains in
the hope of intercepting the trek of the Cro-Magnards.
So he himself had set out in the direction of the name¬
less Alps and—then he had heard her hail him.
She said : “We’ve always been cut apart and strangers
in some way, Keith. Why did you do it ?—all this
tremendous search for me ?”
He had made the moccasins by then and was fitting
them to his feet with gut as string. He looked across
the savannah to the mountains.
“Any of the hunters would have done it. iErte is
probably searching for you still.”
“Yes, I know. But we are different. So why ?”
He said in a very still, strained voice : “It’s because
I love you, I suppose. And there isn’t any supposing
about it. It’s just that.”
She stared into the fire. “And I love you also. I
think I always loved you. From that day I saw you on
the gallery of the Magellan. Remember it—twenty-five
thousand years ago. Oh, Keith !”
He dropped the moccasins and came towards her,
grey-headed, his eyes alight. She shook her head. She
spoke in a whisper. “But there’s still Airte—my lover
for the dark days.”
“Eh ?”
“There’s still him. We’ve still got to find the hunters
again, and there’s still JErte. He’s as remote and
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
207
impossible as a boy in a fairy-tale. But Fm his and he’s
mine for the dark days at least. ... I thought you
were dSrte last night. I could have sworn you were.”
He sat down again. He said: “It’s damned
nonsense.”
“I know.”
“^Erte will make no claim on you if you come to me.”
“No, he won’t. But that’s the point, Keith. Oh,
my dear, don’t you see ? It’s for you and your sake
and the sake of your dream that I must keep by iErte.
Unless you’ve given that up ? Are we to look for the
hunters again ?”
He nodded south towards the mountains. His face
had the savage sulkiness of repressed wrath she remem¬
bered from the days of crossing the upland plateau.
“We’ll go on and wait their coming there. Even if they
don’t go further than this stretch of country we’ll be
able to see them and return to them.”
“But you want them to go further. You’re going
to lead them south of the mountains and find a river
and plant corn and teach them to build houses and
cast metals ? Remember ? You and I are going to
change the course of history there, somewhere beyond
these Alps. Do you think we can do it without keeping
faith in every detail with the hunters ? They’d laugh
and say nothing and only pity iErte a little, but they’d
never take counsel from you again.”
Sinclair sat down and completed the binding of his
footwear. Clair laughed, a little shakily.
“It’s me or the future of history, Keith ! . . . And
don t leave it to me now, else I’ll forget that other lover
of mine who died on the wire in France, and I’ll forget
all the black oppressions done in this wild world under
the sun, and think only of you, and the dearness and
adorableness of your dear, sulky head and the queer
208
THREE GO BACK
sweetness of your body and the heart-breaking miracle
of that grey hair of yours and its soft lie on your head,
and the loveliness of that clean, crude, splendid mind
of yours. I’ll remember only these things—and you’ll
never forget the others, though all our lives together
you’d pretend you had forgotten them.”
He said : “1 think you’ve cured me. Bless you. We’ll
go south and await the coming of yErte and the hunters.”
Subchapter Hi
“Oh, that light last night. I forgot to mention it.”
“Eh ?”
They were on the road to the southern mountains,
though no road had ever crossed that wild belt of land.
It was past noon. Here and there the snow still lay in
patches, or shivered and wilted into slush pools under
the heat of the sun. And over all the landscape was a
steaming haze that rose a little, but patched the ground
in great areas to indistinctness. Sinclair strode nude as
when he was born, but for the bearskin moccasins.
Clair, bare-footed, was elsewhere wrapped in the
remnants of the mutilated skin.
They had crossed a good eight or nine miles of
country since leaving the encampment of the night
before. Now the mountains before them changed shape
continually, but visibly grew greater. They towered
as tower the walls of the Colorado Canyon from river¬
bed level. Crowned with snow, the great massif stretched
from horizon to horizon, with in front, leftwards, an
extended arm, a crazy jumble of broken peaklets and
poised glacierettes. It was somewhere in that extended
arm, Clair thought, that she had seen the light.
Sinclair scowled down at her questioningly. “Light ?
What kind of light ?”
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
209
She put her arm through his. “Funny how that
scowl of yours used almost to intimidate me ! . . .
Fun to be alive, isn’t it, Keith ?”
The scowl went from his face. He pinched her
shoulder, absently. Then :
“The light ?”
“Oh, yes. It was like a camp-fire.”
“Couldn’t be. At least, I don’t think so. The
hunters have no story of other groups living so com¬
paratively near.”
Some half-memory vexed her mind. She could not
secure it. “But there might be.”
“I don’t know.” They passed into a winding track¬
way made by beasts, between two stretches of marsh,
and climbed up from that low patch to firmer ground,
a re-beginning of the savannah-land and dotted with
deer and aurochs herds. “There might be, but on the
whole I doubt it. Our hunters are perhaps as yet the
only human beings in Atlantis—perhaps in all the world.”
She found that a breath-taking notion. “But there were
other peoples in pre-history besides the Cro-Magnards.”
“Later, yes. But at this epoch ? Mayn’t the others
have been helped into full humanity by imitation of our
proto-Cro-Magnards ? . . . We can’t say. But all these
things are accidental, dependent on a multitude of
chances that might arise in one district and nowhere
else. Perhaps in the world at the moment there are
only tribes of submen at various levels, and our hunters
constitute the only group that has as yet emerged into
full humanity.”
“Then ”
He smiled down into her grave face, and bit his lips
because he desired her, and there were other things
than desire, but none so warm and immediate as she was.
Clair looked back at the land behind them.
o
210
THREE GO BACK
“Any accident might change the nature of things
for ever. If our Cro-Magnards were suddenly wiped
out ”
“There might never be such a thing as history. At
least—we can never know.”
“Oh, the awful loneliness of men ! They couldn’t
help making gods when they found some shelter and
security in an agricultural society. . . . Pious, rotten
romanticism, Keith—remember what you once told me
I was addicted to ?—but that night I was lost on the
hills back there I began to think that perhaps there
was some God after all. Not just a god. Something.
Someone . . .”
She looked up at him. Thousands and thousands
were yet to look up into the faces of their fellows for
confirmation of that wild hope. . . . He said : “An
honest god’s the noblest work of man. I don’t believe
there’s anything to shield us from the darkness, Clair.
And not even for the sake of poetry do I think we should
carry the idea to our hunters in that world we’re to make
beyond these mountains. ... If we ever get beyond
them.”
“Tremendous things, aren’t they ?”
They were. Somewhere at the foot of their slopes,
however, the Cro-Magnards would arrive in time, and
there was nothing for the two of them but to press
on and await that arrival. Clair said, being dragged out
of a squelchy, boggy place : “The light—we never
settled about that.”
“No.” Sinclair, assisting her to her feet, abruptly
pulled her down again and lay prone himself. “But we
can now, I think.”
Clair, her breath shaken from her, wriggled out of
his grasp and looked in the direction in which he
pointed.
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
211
Subchapter iv
The tapering tip of the northwards spur of the
mountain-range was already a sierraed toweringness to
the left of them. It was not more than three miles away.
The forests climbed its base in green attack, even skir¬
mished remotely up into valleys and ledges of the
heights. That for background, with directly south the
still remoter, more gigantic background of the range
proper, a good six miles away. Here and there, in the
angle so formed, grew clumps of larch and hr and great
stretches of gorse. Amid these fed the herds of aurochs
Clair had noted before. One herd was very close—a
herd that had ceased to feed and stood on the qui vive,
bulls with gigantic tails uplifted, cows and calves
sniffing the air. And the reason for the alarm—a dozen
reasons—became at length obtrusive to Clair’s gaze.
They were less than a quarter of a mile away, but
had remained unperceived by her because of their dull
grey colouring. It seemed to her that it was on all fours
they were creeping from bush to bush, nearer their
quarry, the aurochs. But indeed it was merely that
their arms were so elongated as naturally to reach the
ground. Across cavernous, hair-matted torsos were
strapped crude skin-wrappings. From each pair of
shoulders, on a short, squat neck, a strange, deformed
head, chinless, browless, enormously eye-ridged, pro¬
jected forward so that the Thing could never look
directly upwards. Even at that distance they were
horrible, dreadful and awful caricatures of familiar and
lovely things.
Clair felt sick. “What are they ?” she whispered.
“Neanderthalers,” said Sinclair, also in a whisper.
Chapter III: ALL OUR YESTERDAYS
Subchapter i
NO snow fell that night, but a bitter wind sprang
up with the coming of darkness and blew into the
great triangular space formed by the forest lines and the
bastions of the unknown mountain-ranges. At first
the darkness, for there came neither moon nor star-
rise, was heavy and complete, without even the usual
brooding Atlantean greyness. And then, as if lighted
one by one, there became obvious far in the base of the
triangle and ranging up northwards towards the open
country the glare of great fires. Sinclair and Clair saw
them pringling brightly in the night, from their own
camping-place in the heart of a thicket of broom-plants
and larch. They also had kindled a fire, dangerous
though that procedure might be ; they had kindled it
mid-way the thicket, however, so that there was little
chance of those alien firetenders seeing it. But both,
after they had eaten, went out to the verge of thicket to
watch that bright sentinelling of the mountain-base. Sin¬
clair stood with his arm round Clair, and pulled her back
into the thicket after a moment to still her shivering.
“Then they can make fires—they are men,” she said.
“They are men, but not Man. They are the sub¬
human species that are almost men, and are to be in
occupation of most of Europe when our Cro-Magnards
wander there thousands of years hence. If they do so
wander.”
The fires burned steadily. Clair remembered the
creeping beasts of the afternoon and shuddered with
212
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
213
disgust. Yet perhaps that was unreasonable enough.
Perhaps there was nothing of savagery about them,
any more than among the Cro-Magnards. She saw the
dim shaking of Sinclair’s grey head.
“Their conduct didn’t warrant it. Men—the Cro-
Magnards and the stock that produced ourselves—are
decent, kindly animals of anthropoid blood, like the
chimpanzee and gibbon. But there is another strain—
the gorilla and perhaps these Neanderthalers—the
sullen, individualist beast whose ferocity is perhaps
maladjustment of body and a general odd, black
resentment against life.”
“Like the militarists and the hanging judges and
the gloomy deans of the twentieth century ?”
“Exactly.” But his voice sounded absent. “I wonder.
. . . Look here, go back to the fire. I’m going out to
see what they’re really like.”
“What ?” She was startled enough at that. “Then
I’ll come as well.”
“Can’t. One of us must go, Clair, and must take
the bearskin for covering against this infernal wind.
And it must be me. I’m stronger than you and I can
run faster.”
“But why must ? We needn’t go near them at all.”
“We must because our hunters will be down from
the north in the next day or so, and there’s no telling
what will happen then. If they’re peaceable or cowardly
beasts there’s nothing to fear. If not ”
“But we needn’t lead the Cro-Magnards anywhere
near them. We can take them through the mountains
away over there, somewhere.” She pointed to the
right in the westwards darkness.
“Can we ? I wonder. ... I must go, Clair.”
She said, standing beside the fire and helping him to
tie the bearskin : “Do take care of yourself, my dear.”
214
THREE GO BACK
And thought: ‘As though we were in Kensington and
I was telling him to mind the buses on the way to the
office F
He said, absently still: “I’ll do that.” Then he
picked up his spear, and put his hand on her shoulder
and gave it a little shake, and went off into the darkness.
Clair built up the fire and lay down in the shelter of
the break-wind. She took her own spear beside her
for company and Sinclair’s bow as well, though she
knew nothing of the handling of the thing. It was a
very lonely vigil. The fire fluffed and rose and fell
occasionally in eddies of the wind. But presently that
wind died away almost completely, though the cold
seemed to grow intenser still. Clair thought: T must
not think of Sinclair,’ and put him out of her thoughts
as well as she might, and curled her legs up beneath
her, and remembered some picture of a Tierra del
Fuegan savage she had once seen in that attitude.
She thought, startled : ‘Goodness, I might have sat
as the artist’s model!’
Where were ffikte and the hunters ?
Something bayed close at hand beyond the bushes.
There came a distant scuffling ; more near, the swift
scurry of running paws. The scurry ceased. Then a
pad-pad-padding began in a circle, just beyond the
range of the fire-glow. Clair, with a very dry throat,
stirred the fire and in its increase of radiance saw that
she was surrounded by a pack of wolves—beasts with
long, feathery brushes and brightly erected ears. Each
might have been of the bigness of an Alsatian. Some¬
times they sat and rested, staring at her, at other times
resumed that scurrying encirclement of the fire. It was
difficult to realize that if they overcame fear of the fire
they would eat her, sink those bright teeth into her legs
and throat and stomach, very agonizingly, in a flounder
WHENCE? WHITHER?
215
of hot and stench-laden bodies. . . . Clair got to her
feet once and waved her spear at a great, cadaverous
brute. He stopped in his pacing, head brightly alert,
and cocked his ears. Then, as though grinning sar-
donically, he bared his teeth, growled, and advanced a
step or so. Clair stirred the fire again, and he retreated.
So the night went on. Clair, sitting dozing once,
awoke to find—not the beasts upon her as she had
dreamt, and dreaming had awoken with a startled cry—
but them gone and the fire burned very low, and herself
very cold. She fed the smoulder hurriedly, carefully.
A mammoth trumpeted, southwards, in some glen of
the mountains, the sound eerie and plaintive. The clouds
began to clear and presently, with a faint spraying of
powdery light, the star-rise came. The heavens were
filled with an eastwards sailing of great masses of dark
storm-clouds. Clair sat and warmed herself and got up
and walked about and sat down again. Still Sinclair
did not return.
There came a breath of dawn through the air of the
darkness. The stars grew brighter and then faded.
And through the dawn Sinclair came back. She heard
him calling in the distance : “Clair ! Clair !” and ran
and found him.
He had been lost.
Subchapter ii
“Most infernally lost.” He was splashed with mud
and rimed with frost. His eyebrows and eyelids curled
white with frost. He sat down jerkily by the fire and
started up again, glancing over his shoulder. “Idiotic
to shout, but there was nothing else to be done. I
hadn’t a notion of where you were. Lost my way
2l6
THREE GO BACK
completely coming back—as I might have guessed I’d
do. . . . Old habit of thinking of the lie of a country
in terms of roads and signposts. . . . Wonder if they
heard me shouting ?”
“I’ll go and see,” Clair said.
He pulled her down beside him. “Not that, anyway,”
he said, grimly. “Let’s listen.”
They listened to that austere world of the Third
Interglacial awakening with the coming of the morning
over the Atlantean savannah. Sparrows chirped in the
trees. Somewhere in the depths of the wood a corn¬
crake was sounding its note. Spite the nearing of the
sun, it was still bitterly cold. But there was no crackling
of undergrowth under coming feet.
“What are they like ?” Clair whispered.
“God. . . . Awful.”
He said no more than that about them. Instead, he
shivered. Clair cut meat from their dwindling supply
and grilled it. Sinclair was nodding from lack of sleep.
She asked : “Did you get near them ?”
“I lay above one of their caves : I seemed to lie there
for hours. Limestone spur, that, and its upper tip here
is honeycombed with caves. There must be several
hundreds of them. Ugh.” He had been eating. He was
suddenly sick. “Sorry, Clair.”
She ruffled his grey hair. “Don’t think of them or
speak about them for a bit. Do you think I could use
your bow ?”
“Why ?”
She looked wistfully through the trees towards the
sound of the forest fowls. “I would like chicken for a
change.”
He smiled at her from a face as grey as his hair.
“Try. But don’t go too far. And if you see—any of
them—scream like hell and run back in this direction.”
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
217
She went through the morning-stirred forest, think¬
ing, at first almost in a panic : ‘I had to get away . . .
Keith, my dear, you’ve had the devil of a night. Will it
pass or are you really ill ? . . . Oh, damn this thing.’
She stopped and disentangled the bow from a bush,
and hurried on again because of the coldness. She
came to the edge of a clearing. In the charred forest-
litter two birds fed, perkily, with quick-darting heads.
Partridges. She thought: ‘I’ll never hit them,’ and
stopped, and planted the butt of the bow in the ground,
and fitted the clumsy arrow. One of the birds saw her
and raised its head, regarding her sideways, out of a
bright, questioning eye. Her fingers fumbled frozenly
at the bow-string. The damn bird imagines it’s having
its photograph taken. . . . Now.
The arrow whizzed across the space, an enormous
lance of a projectile. One partridge rose with a flirr !
The other lay impaled wing from wing, and fluttering
wildly. Clair wrung its neck and tried to get out the
arrow, and desisted, lest she snap off the insecure flint;
and went back towards Sinclair and the camp-fire. The
break-wind shelter was deserted. She dropped the bird
and ran through the trees towards the open country
that led to the Neanderthal caves. Sinclair turned about
as he heard her coming.
“Sh. For God’s sake.”
The great triangle was evidently the hunting-ground
of the beast-men. Three separate parties, none of them
near enough for the intimate study of individuals, were
debouching in various directions from that far moun¬
tain-wall—one party apparently heading in the direction
of their shelter. A little over two miles away, Clair
judged it. Sinclair swore, ruffling his bearded chin.
“Are they on my track—or is it just a chance drift
after game ?”
21 8
THREE GO BACK
Clair stared with him. He gave a sigh of relief. “A
chance party, after all. They’re just on the prowl.”
“Are they ? They’re not coming in a straight line,
but they seem to be following something. Didn’t you
lose yourself last night ? Perhaps they’re following
your ”
“By God, they are !”
Subchapter in
All that forenoon they fled westwards and south-
westwards, the grey beasts behind them. Sinclair’s own
running abilities might have out-distanced them with
ease, but Clair needed frequent rests. Once or twice,
reaching the foot of one or other of the rolling inclines
in which the land ebbed and flowed, they would glance
up and see their pursuers at the summit, sometimes less
than a quarter of a mile distant. On flat country that
distance grew greater ; the Neanderthalers were at a
disadvantage on the plain. Once, when a good mile and
a half separated them, Clair, lying panting on the
ground, asked :
“Shouldn’t we strike north ? We’d meet dlrte and
the hunters.”
Sinclair himself lay and breathed in great gasps,
watching that loping, crouched-forward trot of the
beast-men. “We might miss them completely. Perhaps
they’re already much nearer the mountains than we’ve
supposed. Anyhow, they’ll descend further to the
west than this, I think. . . . Rested ?”
“Goodness, no.” She looked at him, white-faced,
and smiled. “If only I’d had training as a charwoman
instead as a novelist!”
“You don’t do badly.” He stood up. A long,
WHENCE? WHITHER? 219
guttural wail came down the air from the beast-men.
“I think they don’t like us.”
“Mean of them.”
Funny how one could push the horror back with a
remark like that. ... But they followed on behind,
doggedly enough, the horrors. Clair, running stripped
and unshod, carried nothing but the light spear she had
brought from the far northern camp of the Cro-
Magnards. Sinclair had tied to his back both the bear¬
skin, now enwrapping the slain partridge, and his bow
and arrows. His feet were still in their moccasins, and
from the bloody tracks left behind by his companion
he could see that without such aids Clair herself was
hardly capable of keeping the pace for long. Running
beside her, he glanced at her face, red-flushed, a very
sweet and kind and comely face even in this desperate
hour. And again he thought, wonderingly and inade¬
quately: ‘Pretty thing !’
Open country they had come to then. But the Nean-
derthalers seemed tireless. Sinclair looked back to see
them not more than half a mile away. Strange—that
tenacity of pursuit. Did they recognize Clair and himself
as kindred animals, to be killed as freaks, or did they
seem just desirable and tirable meat ? God, what an
end to the business !
Messy end, too. For Clair—? Not to be thought of.
But it had to be thought of. He said : “If they
overtake us, Clair, I’ll kill you. That’ll be best. It won’t
hurt much.”
“Oh, don’t be a fool!”
He almost sulked, and grinned wryly at the recur¬
rence of his ancient short temper. Clair flung herself
to the ground again.
“Can’t go further—yet. Sorry I said that, Keith.
But you are a fool to suggest these melodramatics, you
220
THREE GO BACK
know. Here, in Atlantis. Stuff out of Victorian novels.
. . . And I ought to suggest now that you should
leave me and save yourself. Not so silly. Oh, goodness,
my heart. . . . We’ll just fight it out together. They’ll
kill both of us.”
“Will they ?” He stood above her, desperate, look¬
ing backwards. Clair lay flat, breathing (‘like a stranded
lung-fish !’)
“Of course they will. Oh, because I’m a woman ?
I’ll seem just as repulsive to them as they do to us.
. . . How far ?”
“Very near now.”
He had unslung his bow. Clair scrambled to her
knees. The beast-men were quite close, running with
lowered heads and trailing fringes of body-hair, their
knuckles touching the ground at every forward swing of
their bodies, in their hands great shapeless mallets of
stone, mounted on rude wooden hafts. Sinclair knelt
on one knee. The bow-string sang like a plucked
guitar.
A Neanderthaler to the left—not one Sinclair had
aimed at—received the arrow in his chest, almost in
the region of the heart. The brute screamed horribly,
and its companions, swaying and lurching, halted.
They were all males. The beast plucked stupidly at the
arrow, and then bent its head and bit the thing clean
off where the shaft entered its chest. Then it suddenly
crumpled, as though some support had been with¬
drawn. Sinclair loosed his second arrow, glanced after
it not at all, but heard its thud in flesh and the suc¬
ceeding howl; and dragged Clair to her feet.
“Try again.”
They ran hand in hand towards the near belt of
forest. Clair felt her lungs bursting. A red mist played
before her eyes. Twice she tripped, and Sinclair,
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
221
savagely, jerked her to her feet again. Again and again
the earth seemed to rise up towards her. Sinclair’s grasp
on her hand suddenly eased. She heard his voice far off.
“Done all we can. Sit down, my dear.”
She fell rather than sat, and put her hands to throbbing
ear-drums. Sinclair gave a shout.
“Impossible. . . . They’ve turned.”
Clair swung round at that, resting on her elbows
also, looking. The Neanderthalers were in retreat,
carrying the dead body. One of them went with limp¬
swinging arm, blood-dripping. Every now and then
he bent to bite at the arm. Clair stared stupidly.
“They’re . . . going.”
He lay beside her, almost as exhausted as she was.
“Looks like it.”
They had neither the will nor the breath to say more
at the moment. Meantime the Neanderthalers, without
a backward glance, shambled across the savannah,
topped a low rise, and disappeared into the jungle
wilderness in the direction of the northern spur. It was
past noon. Still there was no sunlight and still it blew
as harshly as during the night. Sinclair, with a driving
headache, sat erect.
“Can’t stay here. Die of cold after the heat of that
run. I’ll leave you the bearskin and go and make a fire
over there.”
Clair sat up also. She had the pocked, grey face of a
woman of fifty. “I’ll come. I can manage.”
Somehow they helped each other to the forest-
fringe—great beeches standing with shrill, whistling
boughs. But further in were more larch, and then a
wide grove of stone-oaks. Beyond these : more ever¬
greens, then a wide glade and open country once more.
It was no forest, as they had imagined from the east,
but only a long, straggling plantation of Nature’s
222
THREE GO BACK
planting. Through the glade the open country to the
west showed up as differing in no great degree from
the stretches they had already traversed. They dropped
to earth by a little stream meandering amid the tree-
roots—an indifferent little stream crooning in an
absorbed contentment—and drank ice-cold water which
instantly gave Clair cramp. Sinclair picked her up and
carried her under a larch nearby.
“Stick it. I’ll have a fire in a minute.”
It seemed to Clair an unending minute. Then she
was conscious of warmth and of Sinclair kneeling,
massaging her. He had the fire kindled and crackling.
The greyness had gone from his face, and, incidentally,
from her own.
“Feel better ?”
“Leagues. Goodness—” she looked up at him in
the gay, ironic self-appraisal that survived the Magellan,
clothes, comfort, and seemingly every conceivable
contingency—“and hungry !”
“I know. So’m I. Nothing like a run in the Neander¬
thal Stakes for an appetite. I’m roasting your partridge.”
It smelt savoury enough. Clair sat up and assisted.
They sat side by side, and despite her hunger and her
recovery she still felt weak, and leaned her head com¬
fortably on Sinclair’s shoulder.
“Adam and Eve.”
He smiled at her, his face remarkably un-dour. “Or
the Babes in the Wood.”
She dozed a little. So did Sinclair. Then their heads
knocked together and they started awake. The smell
of singeing partridge filled the air. Clair shook herself.
“Shockingly selfish again. It’s you who’ve a right
to be sleepy. Rest when we’ve had lunch.”
“I will. I’m almost all in.”
They ate nearly all the partridge. It was very good.
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
223
Sinclair, lying down and closing his eyes, nevertheless
did so with a mental reservation. He would keep
awake and get up in a short time and make her take his
place. ... He looked at her from below half-closed
eyelids that each seemed to weigh a ton. God, if the
Neander thalers !
Infernal to die and never see Clair again, never hear
her deep, enjoyable and enjoying laughter; or see
that bright, naive puzzling of hers. Infernal to have
died and never held her in your arms and kissed her
from tip to toe, as she deserves to be kissed. As you
want to kiss her and she wants. . . . Never see the
Cro-Magnards again, perhaps. We’ll go west, far off,
and find a passage through the south mountains together,
and build a house next spring. Together ourselves.
Children we can make them safe enough.
Together . . .
Clair’s voice raised in excitement, her hand shaking
him. “Keith—oh, Keith, our hunters I”
Subchapter iv
He had slept for perhaps a couple of hours, in spite
of his resolution. He sat up with a start and looked
round scowlingly. “The hunters ?”
I m sure they are. Away over there by that cramped
little wood.”
He saw them then. “The hunters right enough.”
His voice was oddly unglad. “Still on the trek, too.”
They had debouched from the wood that Clair
thought of as cramped. They were specks in distance,
but speck-men, not the strange beasts of Neanderthal.
They straggled southwards in happy-go-lucky migration,
moving slowly, proving they had no lack of food at
least at the moment.
THREE GO BACK
224
Sinclair got to his feet, stiffly.
“No more Neanderthalers, anyhow. And you’ll
find y£rte again.”
“I needn’t. We need never find any of them.”
He started : “You’ve thought that ?”
“And you ?”
He nodded. Clair said, slowly :
“We could hide from them and wait till they pass.
We could go south beyond the mountains, and start a
Golden Age of our own. We could be happier than was
ever possible in the world—before or after. . . . And
we’d be ashamed of ourselves all our lives.”
He found a wry jibe: “ ‘Stern daughter of the
voice of God 1’ ”
She laughed, pitifully, looking out at the nearing
Cro-Magnards. Was ever such a fantastic choice before
a man and woman ? Sinclair wondered. And wonder¬
ing, he knew there was no choice, neither for himself
nor for Clair. For she brought out of that dim twentieth
century of three weeks ago the memory of her boy-
lover who had screamed away a night of agony beyond
the parapets of Mametz; and he—he had brought
memories kin enough to hers, dying soldiers and
starving miners, the Morlocks of the pits. . . . Clair
seemed to have read his thoughts.
“We’re both playing, Keith, and we know it.
Let’s go out to them.” She turned away, and then
turned back, resolutely. “But you’d like to kiss me
first 1”
When he had finished with that they went out
across the cold, knee-length grass, laden as they had
arrived. The whole migration of the hunters paused,
in straggling, shimmering lines in the cold, gold light
of the afternoon. And then there came a shout.
They had been recognized.
WHENCE? WHITHER?
22J
Subchapter v
Lying in the arms of Mrtz that night, Clair Stranlay
did not care to move lest she awaken him. But with the
passing of the hours it grew to a veritable agony keep¬
ing the position in which his golden arms held her.
Golden and delicately fringed with gold, as she could
see, for they lay near one of the camp-fires, two of
innumerable such recumbent figures ; and the light
came out and lay on the face and arms of yErte. He
slept in happy security. His lover for the dark days had
returned. She had been lost and she was found, and he
had gone to her and taken her with a simplicity that
had wrung from Clair no protest or repulsion. Only
pity. Sinclair had gone back to his place by the fire of
Aitz-kore, the flint-knapper. Life went on—even life
in a dream in winter-threatened Atlantis.
Life went on. . . . Perhaps she was the first woman
in the world to He in this sleepless unease because of the
arms that held her. No Cro-Magnard woman would,
Clair knew. There were already several who had tired
of their choice in the mating-time, and their hunters
did not go near them. Here there was no hate, no com¬
pulsion in love. These people played no game of
sacrifice, because sacrifice was a stupidity beyond their
understanding. They did not live such a lie as she had
lived a few hours ago, with the bright face of yErte
close to hers, his arms about her. It was the mentahty
of the slave, the bond-woman of all the weary years of
civilization that had allowed those caresses while
Sinclair went away.
All their thousands of grey, suppressed years ! And,
hating and resenting all that tradition of sacrifice and
servitude, she was herself submitting to it. Why ?
p
226
THREE GO BACK
There was someone else who was sleepless. She
saw him pass and repass amid the fires, though she knew
he was not the night’s watcher of the fires. It seemed
colder than ever, spite the bluff under which the camp
was built. Beasts roamed beyond the radiance of the
fires, but timorously, perhaps at sight of that white,
restless figure within the camp.
The why of it all. Keith and his dream. Keith and
y£rte and their dreams 1 To-morrow and to-morrow and
to-morrow-
Chapter IV : NOW SLEEPS THE CRIMSON PETAL
Subchapter i
AND the unaccustomed cold grew ever more
/“X intense.
Day came and brought no lightening of that burden.
Instead, it brought generally sharp showers of hail in
the morning hours, and at noon the scurry of a snow-
blizzard from the north-west. It was weather of a
severity the hunters had never known before in all the
long days of their residence in the painted caves of the
north. Stumbling camp-wards at evening both hunters
and Sinclair’s scouts would come on the bodies of their
fellows lying frozen and naked in places where exhaus¬
tion had overtaken them. Winter had come to Atlantis
—a foretaste of that winter that was gradually creeping
down on all the northern hemisphere, presently to
crystallize into the spreading glaciers and the long
silences of the Fourth Ice Age.
Game grew ever scarcer. The herds went west and
disappeared, and the hunters might have trailed in
pursuit but for the alien presence of Sinclair in their
midst. Hence the scouts that day after day went out
under his direction, puzzled yet friendly, even though
they might never return from such scoutings, any more
than those death-frozen comrades of theirs. Game had
almost vanished, but packs of the raiding and scaveng¬
ing carnivorae hung around the camp, and at night
the fires had to be built to twice the usual height, both
in order to scare the wolves and hyaenodon and to
counteract the bitter frosts.
227
228
THREE GO BACK
On the second day Sinclair himself vanished in early
dawn together with two of the strongest and wiriest
Cro-Magnards. It did not snow all that day, but to
Clair, wandering the camp clad in the bearskin Sinclair
had once brought for her protection, it seemed that
the cold had again increased. They could not long
remain in this place. Indeed, JEtte had gestured to
her that they were to follow the game westwards on
the morrow. He had no understanding of Sinclair’s
hesitations. . . . Doubtlessly, however, like other
hesitants on other occasions, the White Hunter would
follow the main drift of opinion and migration.
Thus yDrte, the while Clair marvelled, chilledly and
once again, at these people of the dawn. There was no
compulsion, just as there was no acceptance of it. They
had grown to know and love Sinclair, perhaps because
of that energetic righteousness of his that was so in
contrast to their own unhesitating and unswerving
kindliness. But he was no magic leader from the void,
no story-book hero such as Clair had read of her fellow-
authors assigning to the leadership of savage tribes in
the pages of many a romance. Here was truer romance.
He was merely one who promised good hunting grounds
and pleasant days beyond the southwards mountains—
better than they would elsewhere find if they took his
advice. Now it was evident that he was mistaken, as
* *
a man might be. West or east they must go. The game
seemed to have gone west. They would follow it.
That night Sinclair came back with one of his
hunters. The other had been lost in a canyon of the
southern mountains, the great black-blue wall that
dominated the horizons of their world. The American
came to Clair while there was still daylight and flung
himself down by the fire deserted but for herself. He
was spattered in mud from head to feet, mud that had
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
229
frozen on him; his arms and legs were scored with
long cicatrices. For a little he lay in silence near Clair.
She put her hand on his shoulder in that caress that
was his own, and he put up his hand to her hand. He
said, as if speaking to himself:
“There’s no road at all through the southwards
mountains. It is an absolutely impassable wall. We’ve
climbed and prospected ever since we reached it an
hour after daybreak. And the other parties that have
gone into the west report the same. It’s a range that
may lie mid-way across Atlantis. And it curves north¬
wards after a bit.”
“North ?” Clair lay on an elbow and reflected ; and
suddenly understood. “Then if the hunters go west
that will take them into a worse winter. It might even
mean ”
“Extinction. These people cannot stick things worse
than they are at present. And it’ll grow worse every
hour. The sinking of the northern plateau has done it,
of course.”
“Then what are we going to do ?”
“I don’t know. God, how I ache !”
He lay so quiet that she thought he was asleep. But
presently he spoke again. “And in the east, beyond
that northwards-making spur, we know there are
leagues and leagues of brackish marsh. Didn’t notice
them ? I did. . . . That would mean, if we turn the
drift east, that we’ll have to go far north again to cir¬
cumvent the marsh, and turn south again. It would
mean that hardly a woman or child could survive.
Perhaps not any of us. . . . Remember my Utopia
beyond the mountains ?” He laughed.
Clair sat and stared at him and the fading of the
daylight. There was still food in the camp. There was
still the calling of greetings and the flaring of fires.
230
THREE GO BACK
there was still the sight and being of unfearing human
life all around them. Southwards : impassable. West¬
wards : impassable. In the north: extinction. And
then a great light seemed to flash on her.
“But they didn’t die, Keith. They went east, some¬
how, some of them, and escaped this winter. We know
it from history, as you’ve often told me. Our hunters
weren’t killed. They reached France thousands of years
after this.”
He was silent for a little, then he said : “That was
in the history we knew, not in the history we hope to
build.”
She put out her hand and shook him again. “Oh,
we’re playing again, Keith. How if the history we knew
is the history we helped to build ? How if when you,
twenty-five thousand years away, learned as a student
that the Cro-Magnards came into Spain at the end of
the Ice Age—how if you were learning about an event
which you yourself had helped to fashion ?”
“Then I’ve come back again and can refuse its
fashioning this second chance—even if I knew how.”
He sat up. “And of course—there is perhaps a way !”
“Which ?”
He pondered, looking at her and not seeing her, as
she knew. “The northwards spur to the east is broken
off from the main mountain-wall. I saw that on the
night I crept out from our camp and went to spy on the
Neanderthalers. There’s a long, hillocky valley lies
between. Perhaps half a mile broad, though it seems to
climb up to a point at the other side . . .”
“Keith, you’ve found the way I”
“By God, I have not! Oh, we’re the stuff of dreams,
but that’s not the dream I’m going to help humanity
to dream. We’d crawl through that pass sometime at
night, so’s not to arouse the Neanderthalers, and gain
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
231
the country in the east. I don’t know how many would
ever gain it, but some at least. Not me among them,
I think. And beyond that pass in the east lies : Your
boy lover dying on the wire in France, Clair, and the
crucified slaves along the Appian Way and the
Pinkertons shooting down the starving strikers of a
Scotch philanthropist. ... Not if I know it! Better
to end it here. Better to make this the end of the
human adventure, or go west with the hunters to¬
morrow and lose ourselves and die in the clean snows
of Atlantis. . . . Here’s your hunter, Clair. Twenty-
five thousand years hence he’ll also be a hunter—of
human heads in New Guinea, with dried human hands
strapped on his chest. Or a gangster in Chicago. Or
a Steel Helmet in Germany. Like it ?”
Airte sat down beside them. He looked from one
to the other with puzzled eyes. Clair smiled at him, this
child who loved her. She said : “I never had a classical
education, but wasn’t there some tag : ‘They make a
desert and they call it peace ?’ ”
Sinclair said nothing, standing up and looking into
the darkening west. She knew she was pleading for some¬
thing immeasurably greater than herself. She could
find no words but seemed trite and pitiable ones.
“There were other people than the head-hunter and
the gangster. . . . There was Karl Liebknecht; there
was Anatole France. There was even yourself in that
age out of which we came. There was I.”
He turned back at that. She saw more than a bitter
denial in his face now. She looked at iLrte and some¬
one other than herself spoke through her lips :
“Do you think they ever quite beat us, Keith—the
beasts of civilization ? Do you think that iErte ever
quite died, away there in those years ? Do you think
he won’t beat them when civilization has passed and
232
THREE GO BACK
finished ? Remember Sir John ?—The hunter will
come again in the world we left! You and I and thous¬
ands of others were fighting up from the fears and
cruelties of civilization to look at the world through his
eyes again. There are later ages than the one we came
from, and JErte.—he’ll walk naked across the world
again, and fearless, but with Orion’s sword in his belt
k and the Milky Way for a plaything. The weeping and
the tears—they’re a darkness yet to fall on our hunters.
But it will pass. I know. You know it will. And it is
for that, though your own dream of changing that
chance must finish, that you are to lead the Cro-
Magnards east to the pass in the mountain-wall.”
She could not see when she stopped speaking. She
thought: ‘Oh ! I ache also, and I’m cold and hungry,
and I’ve been ranting. . . . And I’d like to lie down
and sleep and sleep and forget it all—’ She heard
Sinclair speaking, and looked up and saw that Titan
resentment gone from his face.
“You’ve won again, Clair. There was you, at least,
in that age that is not yet. . . . We’ll go east to¬
morrow.”
Subchapter ii
At dawn the next morning the Cro-Magnards moved
out from their camp and took up the line of march into
the east. In front Sinclair and his surviving scout
vanished beforehand. Clair marched mid-way the
migration in the company of a girl, Lizair, who had
adopted her after the death of Zumarr; it was the
same girl who had refused her first suitor in the time
of the mating for the dark days. Now the boy whom
she had chosen walked beside them, solicitous for
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
z33
Lizair’s baby, and a very prideful and manly boy.
/Erte had gone off with a band of other hunters to
forage northwards for game with which to feed the
migration.
No sun came, but a pale diffusion of saffron light in
the east. The wind had died away again, but beyond the
forest belt to the verge of which the Neanderthalers
had pursued Clair and Sinclair, the Cro-Magnards saw
the rolling savannah country pelted with flying showers
of sleet. Here, also, the snow lay deeper than in the
higher country from which they had descended, and
the trek, a grey trek in a grey country, moved slowly
enough in the direction set by Sinclair the night before.
Children wailed ceaselessly in the piercing chill. Behind,
as Clair could see looking back, there followed pack
on pack of wolves, black hordes of skulking raiders
which grew ever bolder as the day wore on.
Clair tramped half that day like one in a dream. As
in a dream she saw the country close in and open out
before them; she was hazily conscious of the passing
bombardments of sleet; once of a thunderstorm and
a great flare of lightning that played over a wood where
they halted somewhere towards midday and ate cooked
or raw flesh brought with them, for Sinclair had told
them to light no fires. It was there that the girl Lizair
began to cough and cough in ever-increasing spasms,
until she was coughing blood, and in a little while was
dead. They left her there, and others, and the wolves
halted for a little time, and then came on again.
The boy who had been Lizair’s lover insisted, with a
dull obstinacy, in carrying her baby. Clair could not
bear to look at him.
The northwards spur, not more than five miles or
so away, was reddened with the colours of the sunset
when Sinclair and his scout fell back on the main body
234 THREE GO BACK
of the trek. Clair was told of their coming and managed
to urge her half-frozen limbs to carry her to the front
of the march. As she did so the march gradually turned
aside, to the south, making another small wood.
Sinclair had advised a halt.
She found him at last, Aitz-Kore and a group of
other Cro-Magnards about him. They were at the
further verge of the wood in which the trek had halted,
and in the hearing of the long, easy agglutinative roll
of the proto-Basque speech she stood for a while
puzzled and un-noticed. Then she heard her name
mentioned, and saw Sinclair’s face lighten. She went
forward and touched his arm then.
He held her in his arms then, while the hunters with
troubled eyes looked at them. “How are you ?”
She was weak enough to want to sob, but she did
not. “Getting weaker and wiser, as the rabbit said when
the dog was eating it. . . . I’m lasting, but there have
been awful things back there, Keith.
“I’ve heard. It can’t be helped. We must just go
on.”
“Can we ?”
He indicated the open country in front of them. It
was the triangle of the Neanderthalers, and apparently
quite deserted. “The hunter and I have been
watching the place ever since we arrived early this
forenoon. There’s been no one out on it, and no sign
of any of the beast-men stirring, even over by the
spur.”
Clair peered through the intervening distances. She
saw, after a little, lighter patches in the face of the
cliff, and in that clear, generally untainted air, there
was the ghost of a sharp, blue odour.
“Aren’t those their fires ?”
“Yes. But they don’t seem to be moving out of the
WHENCE? WHITHER?
235
caves. Probably they have plenty of food and will
continue to keep inside, as they have done all the day¬
light. We’ll strike south as soon as the darkness comes
and wait in the lee of the mountain-wall for the stars—
if there are any. Can’t move further in pitch blackness.
Then we’ll cross and push up through the valley.”
“If there’s fighting—what will happen ?”
“God knows. Our hunters have never fought any¬
thing but beasts. They can’t conceive a human enemy.
It would all depend if they were to find the Neander-
thalers human or bestial. . . . We won’t have any need
to put it to the test, I think. ... Go and help keep
everyone on the move or interested, Clair. No fires.
... Eh ?”
She gave a little ghost of a laugh. “ ‘While shepherds
watched their flocks by night’—I never thought I’d
play the role. I wish we could sing.”
“What would you sing ?”
“Something comforting.”
“Do, then; but not too loud. It’ll keep the hunters
interested.”
She had never thought of singing to them before.
They had no songs of the European type, with sharp
rhymes and mechanical spacings. But they came round
about, from the greyness of the trees, in some numbers
as she began to sing, her voice a little hoarse, for she
shivered still, but as sweet and sensuous as it had ever
been. Sinclair, standing still watching the Neanderthaler
fires, heard her voice :
“Abide with me
(Clair sang).
Fast falls the eventide.
The darkness deepens.
Ford, with me abide.”
THREE GO BACK
236
Clair’s God beyond the gods . . .
The wind rose again. The last of the daylight ling¬
ered sharply, on pin-points of the strange world in
the beginning of history, and Sinclair’s eyes, in a sudden
passion of knowledge of how little of this world he
had ever made deep acquaintance with, went from
point to point as these rearguards of the day quenched
their lamps and departed. Clair sang on, a new song now,
inexpressibly alien in that wild land :
“Now sleeps the crimson petal, now the white ;
Now waves the cypress in the palace walk ;
Now sinks the goldfish in the porphyry font ;
The firefly wakens : waken thou with me.
Now droops the milk-white peacock like a ghost.
And like a ghost she glimmers unto me.
Now lies the Earth all Danae to the stars.
And all thy heart lies open unto me.”
He looked up at the sky. It was pall-black. He
moved and stamped frozen feet, thinking : Til have
frost-bite soon. And Clair—better not think of her.
Of nothing but the pass. God, if only there will be
starshine !’
“Now folds the lily all her sweetness up.
And slips into the bosom of the lake :
So fold thyself, my dearest, thou, and slip
Into my bosom, and be lost in me.”
He waited while he counted a thousand, and then
moved through the darkness of the trees, speaking to
the hunters and women. They must walk four or five
abreast and follow after him. He heard their pleasant
sing-song of response, though many of their faces he
could not see, and turned about, and called that he was
ready, and held out gingerly southwards on the track
he had mentally plotted while the daylight lasted. He
held his spear extended, and groped the path with it.
WHENCE? WHITHER?
237
He thought: ‘Rotten show if the wolves attack,’
and put that out of his mind also. One thing at a
time ... __
Beyond the wood the wind smote them as with keen-
edged knives. Sinclair gasped, and steadied himself,
and plodded forward. Behind, he heard the scuffle of
the migration, and looking over his shoulder could see
the lighter shadows that were the bodies of the front¬
wards Cro-Magnards. One slipped forward to his side
and kept pace with him. Sinclair said: “Who are
you ?”
“I am vErte.”
“You had better go back to Clair and guard her. I
can lead the way.”
yErte, the Atlantean child-man whom he had never
been able to detest, whom even in bitterest moments
he had never regarded with other than a grey acquies¬
cence, remained at his shoulder. “Clair sent me here.”
So that was that . . .
Once the wolves behind did verily attack, and the
whole column swayed and eddied while the rearward
hunters turned about and fought and stabbed at the
leaping bodies in the darkness. They did it with little
noise, and the beasts drew off again. But they took with
them the bodies of some half-dozen, half-grown children.
Nothing could be done for these, and some hunters also
did not return. The march through the darkness went
on.
Clair carried Lizair’s baby by then, for its boy-father
had handed it to her when he fell back to fight the
wolves; he had not come again from that baying
clamour. It coughed, pitifully, now and then. Presently,
in her forward stumblings, Clair was aware that the mite
within the bearskin had ceased to cough. Not until
the column halted in slow eddyings, and she realized
THREE GO BACK
238
it was a deliberate halt, and sought to use the interval to
ease the position of the child, did she discover that it
was dead. She put her lips to its and her hand over its
heart. There was no movement. A nearing voice called :
“Clair! Clair!”
‘Tm here.”
A lighter form than those she had followed came
out of the darkness. “What’s that you’ve got ?*’
“A baby. Oh, Keith, it’s dead.”
“It’s finished with cold and hunger, Clair. Put it
down.”
“I can’t. . . . Those beasts behind.”
He shook her. “We’re going into something twice
as bad as we’ve had to face in the last hour; and I’ll
want your help. Put it away.”
She did. The American said : “I want you to walk
mid-way the column. Talk to the people round about
you. Explain just what I’m doing, and why they must
make no noise. iErte’s going to do the same at the
rear.”
“But I can’t talk their language !”
“Lord. I’d forgotten that.”
“We’re turning towards the valley, now ?”
“Yes. It’s grown a little lighter.” His fingers touched
hers, awkwardly. “Good luck.”
She would have called him back ; but he had gone.
In another moment, slowly, in a light that gradually
increased with the coming of the star-rise through the
frost, the trek was again in motion. In their changed
direction the wind blew not behind them now, but on
their left. And suddenly, pricking out the bastions of
the northwards mountain-spur, seen as they rose to
the higher ground that led to that spur, there shone
bright and splendid the fires of the Neanderthal caves.
A murmur arose from the Cro-Magnards, but died
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
239
away at the urgings of Sinclair and dErte. Over there
was danger, no food or help. They must still even the
crying of the babies.
The fires seemed to Clair to draw nearer in leaps
and bounds. They were fires remote in caves, how¬
ever ; there were no signs of watchers. Right ahead,
where the column wound into the presumed valley,
was unspotted darkness.
Clair became aware of the fires passing on her left.
They had entered the valley. They stumbled up over
rocky ground. Clair raised her head once and saw the
heavens, unclouded, banded with the glory of the
Milky Way.
And then presently another line of fires gleamed
directly ahead, a strange, wild moaning filled the air,
and above it rose shout on shout—shoutings in
Sinclair’s voice !
The migratory column of the Cro-Magnards was
being attacked at a dozen points by the Neanderthalers
of the unsuspected valley caves.
Subchapter Hi
That had been hours ago.
Morning in the air again. It seemed to Clair, looking
downwards and around, that this was the land of
morning. How many of them had she seen come over
the strange, pale hills ? Would she see this one ?
They were through now, the bulk of the frightened,
amazed, uncomprehending Cro-Magnards and their
women. Or such of them as had survived the attacks.
Or such of them as had not been dragged into those
caves of night. . . . But Clair would not look in that
direction, nor think of those dismembered bodies the
beast-men had dragged there. Here they came again 
240 THREE GO BACK
Like a pelting rush of shadows. But shadows of
sickening substance, with the gleam of low-set eyes in _ ;
the foreheadless heads. They charged again, with their
ululating moan rising to a scream, and the musk odour
of their bodies nauseating. Sinclair’s yell met the
scream, and at sound of it the Cro-Magnards still
unpast the valley point bunched forward uncertainly
to meet the attack. . . . Sinclair himself Clair saw,
dimly, stripped of bearskin cloak and every other
encumberment, in his hand a great club of the beast-
men. . ,
Then the scurry of furred grey bodies was upon the
Cro-Magnard line.
The morning seemed to have heard the impact. It
was coming more quickly out of the wild, unknown
eastern lands. Clair felt its pale fore-radiance in her
face as she darted here and there, heeding to the onward
guiding of the main hunter-stream. Betwixt two rocks
they filed, into the unguessable valley-country beyond.
Clair thought, wearily : ‘Will they never get through .
and heard herself chanting again, foolishly : “Oh—do
please hurry 1”
Sinclair, on the westward slopes, heard that cry.
Then other interests engaged him. A great brute tore
the club from his hands and took him by the throat.
Its breath was fetid in his face. He kicked it, intimately,
with a moccasined foot. It screamed and slipped away
r from him. He found a hunter stabbing methodically on
either side. Not courage but comprehension they
lacked. . . . Breathing space. t . ,
The Neanderthalers were swaying backwards and
downwards again, moaning as they retreated. But, as
throughout the hours since the migration had stumbled
upon the fact that all one valley-wall was inhabited, other
grey beasts were coming at a scrambling, swaying run
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
241
to replace the rout. Tireless, scores on scores of them,
reinforcements from the northwards spur. Rational
animals. Men almost . . .
Lighter and lighter the darkness. It was gloaming.
Sinclair heard Clair, far up the slope :
“Keith ! Keith ! All the women are through !”
He stumbled up through the ring of hunters towards
the ring of her voice. Dawn near. White in the ghostly
radiance. “Unhurt ?”
He breathed sobbingly. “All right. Everyone
through ?”
“Except these dozen with you.”
“I’ll send them up. Hurry on yourself.”
“You’re coming ?”
“I’ll come. In a minute.” He grinned at her, grey¬
faced. “Do please hurry !”
He watched her disappear. He found himself sobbing
again. Now the false dawn illumined the valley.
It rose in a cone, mid-way, and at the cone-tip the
cliffs closed in on either side, allowing barely more than
the passage of two men abreast. The red sandstone
rocks were already a dun rose colour, though no sign
of the actual sun came yet. It was snowing fleecily, but
even as he turned back towards the westwards slopes
that ceased. The rearguard bunched up towards him,
and now in the morning light added to the light of the
cave-fires, he saw the valley alive, like a spider’s nest,
with fresh hordes of the grey-furred beast-men.
They would follow on in hundreds . . .
“Go through ! Go through 1”
Panting, leaning against a rock, he saw them file
past, the last of the hunters. Below, the grey, hirsute
whirlpool beginning to boil again. . . . Two or at
the least one must stay with him; he could not do it
alone. But whom ? Not that old man. Nor this boy.
Q
THREE GO BACK
242
Quick, quick. Whom ? Whom ? Mttc to guard Clair
in the world beyond—ah, God, she had still her hunter !
He heard himself shout with sudden strength :
“Turn south beyond this valley—south if you can !
Keep watch always.”
“But you will be there with us, brother. The last
hunter, scarred and torn, swayed round and waited.
Keith Sinclair cursed him.
“Go on ! Go on !”
He heard the pad of retreating feet.
He found himself alone.
Subchapter iv
He started up, gripping his spear. He peered in the
faces of the two who stood beside him.
Clair said, sitting down with a sigh : “Silly to think
you could hold this place alone, Keith. So /Erte and I
have come back.”
The light grew brighter on the hunter s face.
Sinclair stared at the two of them. Clair leant her chin
in her hands.
“Nightmare, Keith—but a wonderful one. Last
dawn in Atlantis ! . . . And the beasts that follow
Thereat the sunrise, in a great hush that seemed to
hold quiescent even the gathering attack of the Neander-
thalers twenty yards below, sped suddenly up from the
eastern end of the canyon and poured liquid through the
narrow defile. Sitting, Clair’s head nodded on her
shoulders. But she started up at Sinclair s last cry of
entreaty.
“Clair 1”
She stumbled between the two men. Her eyes turned
WHENCE? WHITHER?
243
to the horror below. “I’ll stand behind with my spear*
They’re coming.”
Twice they had come, and twice broken and
shambled downwards in screaming flight. Clair’s spear
was gone, the head embedded in a beast-man’s chest.
Sinclair leant against the canyon wall, his right arm
hanging by a pinch of skin, blood pouring from a dread¬
ful stomach wound. . . . His face a battered mask, all
human likeness had gone from the hunter. But she saw
his eyes turned towards her, glazing eyes lovely and
human still. He staggered to his feet. She felt suddenly
serene and assured.
“Oh, my dears, it isn’t long now ! They are coming
again ”
Chapter the Last : I SHALL ARISE AGAIN
Subchapter i
SHE awoke in a dazzle of sunshine that blinded her
for a moment. She sat up and knuckled her eyes.
She felt very tired—sun-tired, as though she had slept
a long time in this warmth of the earth and sky. There
was a continual drumming splash near at hand, like the
sound of the sea heard far off. She took her hands from
her eyes and looked round.
She was lying on a patch of sand on a low beach
that sloped up to rocky, verdant mountains. The
violent green of the near underbrush waved, languid
and warm, in the ghost of a breeze. Overhead was a
sky deep and blue and touched with a sailing speck-net
of clouds. A score of yards away the sea rumbled
unhurryingly on the beach.
The beast-men of the pass !
“Keith! ^rte !”
A gull whooped past her. Far up the mountain¬
side a sudden roar grew to a grinding clamour, became
a glittering snake in the sunlight, hissed; swept from
view again. A railway train ...
She stared upwards in paralysed affright. Delirium.
Of course it was delirium. For suddenly she had
remembered. She was dead.
Morning Pass—the Neanderthalers—their last charge
—a great malachite club descending—^Erte and Keith
gold and white and red-streaked veinings of foam under
a wave of snarling greyness. She must be still alive
and in delirium—the last alive of the Magellan !
She closed her eyes again, that the horror might
pass, and willed to die also; and the wind touched her
*44
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
245
cheek and her hair came ruffling across her face, tickling
her skin so that her hand went up involuntarily to put
it aside. She opened her eyes on the green, warm day. And
then she saw something lying a few yards off, and, sobbing,
was in a moment kneeling by the side of that something.
It was Keith Sinclair.
He lay unmoving, face downwards in an outpost of
the mountain grass. Kneeling in a blur of tears beside
him, she thought: “I am mad; it is still delirium.”
For his body was unmarked by signs of struggle in
the Pass—that body from which the blood had welled
in great gouts. She shook his shoulder.
“Keith. Oh, Keith, make it real!”
For answer he yawned where he lay, stretched his
arms, stretched his legs, seemed to stretch every muscle
in his body. Then, slowly and casually, he turned
round and sat erect. His eyes seemed to have a grey
film over them. He blinked, knuckling his eyes as she
had knuckled hers. She sat back and watched him.
As she did so there came again, far up the slope,
that muffled roar, the green of the mountain vegetation
stirred ever so slightly, and again that metal toy
monster swept round a curve and vanished with a
loud whistle. Sinclair’s head jerked upwards. He stared
with fallen jaw. Then he looked round him, smiled
dazedly at Clair, and, as she had done, covered his eyes.
“By God,” he said, “we're back !”
Subchapter ii
“We’ll go exploring in a minute. Azores or Madeira
I should think. . . . Oh, I’m real enough and sound
enough. So—and so. Convinced ?”
She said, her voice muffled in his long hair : “Still
a dream for all I know, for you did that often enough
THREE GO BACK
246
in my day-dreams. Oh, my dear ! You’re real and whole.
. . . And ten minutes ago your arm was hanging by a
thread from your shoulder — and that stomach-
wound ”
Sinclair held her close. “But it wasn’t ten minutes
ago. It happened thousands of years ago, else we’d
never see that train.”
His arms about her still, he started suddenly;
laughed.
“What is it ?”
“We were killed, of course—and by some chance
didn’t die. . . . We’re back in the year we left—unless
some other accident has happened. It may be 2000.”
She withdrew her head and looked at the brighten¬
ing day. “Real. You and the world and myself. . . .
And I know it’s the year we left.”
“So do I,” he confessed. And thought aloud : “The
railway trains of 2000 won’t burn coal ”
“Keith, where are we ?”
“Eh ?” He looked round the scene again. Then :
“We’re in Morning Pass still. Look.”
He pointed to the mountain-edge near at hand.
Dimly, a ghostly scene in the sunlight, a remembrance
shaped in Clair’s mind. That boulder, that curve of
rock that swept into the sea where the grey men mus¬
tered for their last attack. . . . But the leftwards wall
of the pass had vanished into a smother of grass that
was presently sand; beyond that also the murmur of
the sea. . . . Ten minutes ago, twenty-five thousand
years ago. . . . She knew him looking at her in quick
understanding.
“We’re back, Clair. Don’t worry about it. Let’s
get up and do that exploring.”
They stood up together, helping each other. And
then it was Sinclair who was seized with an obsessing
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
247
memory. He looked to right and left and broke away
from her, searching. She stared after him. “Keith !”
He halted in his search, looking over his shoulder.
“yErte—he must be here ! He died with us.”
But he turned fully round again, and they looked
at each other white-faced. And then it seemed to Clair
that his face had altered, that she knew at last the mean¬
ing of scores of puzzling resemblances that had torn her
heart now this way, now that. She knew that she might
cry again if she did not speak very quickly. She said :
“Don’t you understand ? I do at last. You are Airte.”
Subchapter Hi
The deserted beach curved northwards round the
shoulder of the mountain. Out to sea a trail of smoke
grew to being across the horizon, became a triune
procession of dots that were funnels, and presently
sank again, leaving that scroll-writing in the sky. But
neither Clair nor Sinclair moved.
— *1
“I am Airte.” He sat with his hands clasped round
his knees. “Just as he was the boy who died at Mametz
and a score of others. Race-type, race-memory, blood
of his blood—who can know ?. . . And there was a
you also in the painted caves. I didn’t know then.
Now—I saw her a dozen times, in a look, a way of
walking. Lizair who died in the last forest—she was you.”
Clair Stranlay stood with the sun in her face, dreaming
also. “Oh, Keith, not only these two ! Zumarr and her
hunter—Aitz-kore—Lizair’s boy-lover who died among
the wolves—the young men who came back at evening
singing ”
“They’re here in the world still, all of them, that
company that went over Sunrise Pass into the morning
we never saw.”
THREE GO BACK
248
“But what happened then—that morning ? They
must have got clear away.”
“Somehow. Perhaps the Neanderthalers never
pursued them after our end. Somehow they went east
and south and found a place safe from the winter. And then
they went east again, into the beginnings of history.”
She stood with troubled, lighted face, far in dreams,
and he looked up at her suddenly with the gaze of the
twentieth century; the custom of weeks fell from his
eyes. Unconscious of herself and the beauty of herself
in the fall of sunshine, her red hair blown on the tanned
gold of her neck, and against the mountain greenery
almost merging the gold of her body into the sunlight.
. . . Back!
She looked down and sighed and sat beside him.
She smiled into those eyes that were not of the caves
of Atlantis.
“Oh, we’ve awakened. . . .” She looked round the
bright weather of the green beach. “We’ve come
back. We’ll be hungry in a little, and have to go round
that hill, and hear people speak and wear clothes
again, and lie in the fug of little rooms and never hear
the midnight cry upon the mountains. That’s finished
and put by. . . . If only it was a pack of hyaenodon
that waited us round that mountain bend !”
It was he who stood up now, with a laugh, and she
also saw him with eyes that had lost the acceptance of
many a day and scene. Keith Sinclair of the Magellan—
never that Keith Sinclair again. . . . He smiled down
at her. He held out his hand.
“Come along. We’ll go and meet the hyaenodon.”
She put her fingers in his. “I suppose we must.
. . . Love me, my dear ?”
“Till the hunters come back to the world again—
and after.”
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
249
She did not stir.
“Then there’s still a moment we’ve never known,
Keith, though we dreamt it in the Golden Age. It’s
still the same sun and earth—for a moment, before we
go back to the world that’s forgotten both.”
Not looking at him, she yet saw his face change
strangely, felt the pressure on her fingers alter, knew
him kneeling beside her. She put her arms round his
neck. He held her away a moment.
“Sure, Clair?”
“Till the hunters walk again.”
She drew down his head very slowly, and kissed
him tremulously, and the moment came out of the
growing day, and waited for them with a quiver of
purple wings, and was theirs for ever.
Subchapter iv
Senhora Leiria regarded her guest with admiration
and uplifted her voice in throaty French.
“But they fit with exactitude !”
The guest raised a flushed, smiling face. “Very
sweet,” she agreed, and thought: cOh, my good God,
and I’ll have to wear the things !’
The thought was appalling. So was the Senhora.
Had she never seen a nude body before ? Why, if she
looked across at the caves there 
But the caves were twenty-five thousand years away.
Clair sat down. “I’ll manage ever so nicely now
I’ve had a bath and you’ve shown me the stuff I can
choose from. I’ll dress and come down in a minute or so.”
The stout Senhora lingered, constitutional languor
and aroused curiosity in combat. “The dreadful hours
you must have spent, Senhora Keith, after the wreck
of your husband’s boat 1”
250
THREE GO BACK
“Shocking.” (‘If she doesn’t go away I’ll ’)
The door closed. Clair dropped the garments
entrusted to her, stumbled to the casement window,
and flung it wide open. Gasped with relief.
“The ghastly, ghastly smell of the place ! Just the
ordinary room smell ? Wonder how Keith s getting
on—or what he’s getting on ? . . . Those must be
the roofs of San Miguel over there.”
San Miguel of the Azores . . .
She began to laugh. That servant whom Keith had
encountered 
Three hours ago. They’d rounded the mountain
bend into view of open, cultivated country, a road half
a mile away alive with automobiles, and, in the fore¬
ground, on a branch of the road and not more than eighty
yards from where they stood, a low and gabled house
with a garden and the white shirt-sleeves of a gardener.
Clair had sunk hastily to the ground. “Don t shock
them too much, Keith.”
He had grinned and set out, long-striding. Almost
immediately there was catastrophe. Avoiding the main
door and turning rightwards through the garden he had
collided with a diminutive female in some kind of
domestic uniform. Her shrieks preceding him, he had
disappeared from Clair’s view for a quarter of an hour,
and, just as she had begun to wonder about his safety,
had emerged from that main door and approached her.
“It’s all right, Clair. Put on this coat of the Senhora’s.
We’re in the Azores. Portuguese. I’ve told them a
few lies to avoid unbelievable explanations.
“Keith—that ulster of yours !” She had struggled
into the coat, half-hysterical. Surveyed herself: And
I look like something saved by some ghastly missionary.
. . . What were the lies ?”
“Coming ? Senhora Leiria is going to look after
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
251
you and get you some clothes. . . . We’re the Keiths,
an English couple, husband and wife. We’ve a craze
for boating. Tried to reach San Miguel from Santarem
in our three-ton yacht ”
“Are there three-ton yachts ?”
“Eh ? No idea. But early this morning we met a
squall and were upset. Stripped and swam. You’re Mrs.
Keith, remember.”
“But we’ll have to tell some of the truth later.”
“We won’t be able to avoid that. But this is the
best meanwhile. I realized just in time that our banks’ll
refuse us a draft, as they’ll believe us lost in the
Magellan. But I keep an alias account—name of Keith,
League of Militant Pacifist purposes—and can always
order on it by a code message. ...” They were under
the garden-wall. “Now ”
Now, with a curious shambling motion, upraised
upon the heels of unaccustomed shoes, Clair Stranlay
crossed the floor of Senhora Leiria’s bedroom and
began to descend the stairs. At the foot of the first
landing was an open door, and beyond  
“Clair ! Hell, what a mess !”
He was tugging to ease an unaccustomed collar.
He had risen from uneasy sprawling in a be-cushioned
chair. He pushed her away from him.
“My God, did you see that crucifix ? And servants
—diseased animals sweating to tend diseased animals !
Why do they ? Why the devil do they ? Pack a room
like this ? All this nonsense of furniture. Pottering in
that damned garden. . . . Flowers : they grow much
better wild; any fool knows it. You can see them
opposite the caves—purple-growing blooms. Sometimes
the firelight reaches across the river to them ”
“Keith 1”
She closed the door behind her. He sat down and
THREE GO BACK
252
buried his face in his hands. He looked up at her with
just such film over his eyes as she had seen on them at
his awakening.
“Sorry. Went crack for a moment. . . . All this—
God, we can never endure it again, Clair ! Beyond this
house there are the towns and the filth and the stench.
London on a wet Sunday afternoon. The shoddy
crowds of the Boul’ Mich’. Newsboys screaming, trains
screaming. ... It would kill us after—after that.”
“What are we going to do, then ?”
“Clear out to the South Seas or some such place.”
“Escape ?”
“Escape.”
“My dear, I’d sooner go down to the sea there and
walk out into it.” She started to cross the room towards
him. Something snapped, intimately. She put her hand
to her thigh. “Those damn things. . . . Let’s open
that window.” She laughed down at him. “Keith,
are we to be beaten by a collar and a brassiere when the
Neanderthalers didn’t beat us ?”
She knelt beside him. “I’m going to do what you
are going to do. Go back to the world we came from.
Tell them we survived the Magellan—and then preach
Atlantis till our dying day 1”
“Tell them what happened? Who’d ever believe
it ? Can’t you hear the bray of the headlines ?—remem¬
ber how they vilified Mitchell Hedges ?”
She smiled the old, gay smile with no irony at all in
it. “Different from that. Upstairs I suddenly knew what _
we would do. We can’t desert the world we ve no
right to. . . . Not while there are still Neanderthalers
alive—in generals’ uniforms. Not while they stilly
can lie about the everlastingness of rich and poor and
innate human ferocity. Not while our hunters are still
in the world—somewhere out there, Keith !—chained
WHENCE ? WHITHER ?
*53
and gagged and brutalized, begging in streets, cheating
in offices, doing dirty little cruelties in prison wards.
. . . Remember that world you planned beyond the
southern mountains ? It’s still a possible world and a
possible civilization.”
“This disease of mine is merely agoraphobia, of
course. It’ll pass.”
“Then ?”
“Of course.” He caught her hand and stood up
with her. He winced at his straining clothes, as she
did. Clair’s laughter had survived Atlantis. He shook
her, very gently. “We could never do anything else, I
suppose—even though we bring a flint spear against a
sixteen-inch gun.”
Subchapter v
They stood together in the sunset. The sea rumbled
again at their feet in the beat of the incoming tide.
And out for miles, hasting into the west, the fading
light leapt from roller to roller of the Atlantic. Remote
above them the culvert belched out another train to
sweep the mountain track down to San Miguel.
Sinclair’s hand fell on Clair’s.
“Time we went back. The Leirias dine early, they
said.”
“I know. But just a minute more. . . . To-morrow’s
so near.”
“Eh ?”
“To-morrow and all the things of which we’ve
talked. You’ll get money and we’ll go into San Miguel
and sail to France, and begin the fight for sanity; and
the world will vex and thwart us and we’ll grow bitter,
and grow old till those four weeks ”
He put his arms round her. “We’re going to work
THREE GO BACK
254
and fight together. We’re going to marry. Children
we’ll have like yourself—keen and lovely as you. We 11
do all the things you said this forenoon when the future
scared me. We’ll light a torch and never let it die.”
She did not move, still staring out to sea. Oh,
Keith, I know. This is only a moment with me also,
and it’ll pass and be forgotten. Do you think I won t
love the fight as well ?—or love loving you and bearing
your babies and taming your temper and and ^seeing
you always have a fresh razor blade? It isn’t that.
Only ” . . ,
It was almost dark. He held her gently, unimpatiently.
“Oh, Keith, say you’ll never forget them!—all those
days ? ’ Remember that first night ? Remember the
golden hunters on the western hill? Remember the
fires ? Remember the laughter and the kindliness of
them ? Remember the road to Sunrise Pass ? ... We 11
forget and forget and the years’ll come tramping over
our lives and memories ”
“But not these memories.” His arms tightened
round her. “They’ll live as long as we do. They’re
things undying. They five though human nature go
into an underground pit for a million years.
She stirred in his arms. She touched his cheek in
shadowy caress. > y>
“The Leirias are lighting their lamps.
But as they passed together out of the noise of the
sea to the lighted night and the waiting world, Clair
caught his hand and turned back a moment to the
rolling waste of waters whereneath lies buried, these
twenty thousand years the mythic land of Atlantis :
“Good-bye, my dears !”
THE END
JL LESLIE MltTCHELL
AN APPRECIATION*
by
JOHN LINDSEY
']f I came across the work of Leslie Mitchell entirely by accident and I
was struck immediately by its authenticity and realness.
His first novel, “Stained Radiance”, was avowedly destructive. An
orgy of destruction ran through the whole book. His characters des¬
troyed one another mercilessly—they destroyed God, society, sex.
And Leslie Mitchell let them do it. They seemed to horrify him as,
perhaps, all mankind had horrified him by its unimaginative lusts and
frightful, unthinking cruelties, and its appalling hypocrisy.
The book wept and raged with pain so that one felt that here was a
man who had indeed been down into the pit, who had seen all the
baseness of which man is capable, the poverty, degradation, the wound¬
ing laughter : man crucifying man. It was the cry of the over-sensitive
artist against the wrongs of the world.
Time and again I wanted to put the book down. I felt that I could
not go on : that the pain it engendered in me was too intense, too
excruciating to be borne. But I did not put it down. I was forced to
continue : even, as it seemed, against my will; because here was some¬
thing real, that compelled my attention.
And somehow, out of all the pain and suffering in the book, there
emerged another thing for which I could find no name for the moment.
It was too small, too flickering a light for hope . . .
“Stained Radiance” had many faults. It was over-written. It was
restless, allowing the reader no respite ; set at too high an emotional
pitch, so that one thought, “This cannot go on ” ; but it did go on,
and something else happened I A new idea or thought had to be brought
in, thrown before the reader for consideration, snatched away only
that another might take its place—another thing that the author was
forced to say 
|]J But in his second novel, “The Thirteenth Disciple”, he has definitely
found that something that flickered in “Stained Radiance”. His new
* Reprinted from The Twentieth Century
characters have found something too : they are in the round, instead of,
as in the first book, appearing as flat drawings. The pain is still there,
but it is not so intense. The rage is still there, only now it is suffused
with pity. The wild anger has gone. There is still anger, but this time
Mr. Mitchell has not set out to destroy only. He wants to construct,
and, in a large measure, he succeeds.
In “Stained Radiance” he is horrified by sex, it has got muddied like
everything else. He hates “strange and disgusting changes in her body.”
In “The Thirteenth Disciple” he is no longer horrified, except in so far
as people make sex cheap and pornographic by clothing it with rose¬
buds and soft-coloured lights.
The form of “The Thirteenth Disciple” is different: a friend writing
the biography of a friend, having had access to certain documents, but,
inevitably, restricted in his knowledge of that friend’s mentality and
emotions. I have read the book through carefully twice. I cannot find
that in any single instance has the author stepped beyond those things
of which he was allowed to know.
Then again, the book is filled with an amazing “sense of place”. To
confine oneself to those chapters dealing with Leekan Valley, one is
struck by the author’s ability to recreate not only the actual scenery of
the place, but the implied scenery : the undercurrent of feeling and
sensitiveness which this bleak country engenders.
The book is sub-titled “Portrait and Saga of Malcom Maudslay in
his Adventure through the Dark Corridor.” And I suppose that the word
Tragedy would be used to describe it. But it is more than Tragedy in
the sense that the book has fulfilment, that Maudslay himself is fulfilled.
Out of the “agony in stony places” something new is born, and the
whole book is illuminated in the light of this fulfilment.
_ In his third book, “The Calends of Cairo”, a story-cycle, he has deserted
•I —only for a holiday, I think—the urgencies of the Western world.
Here is the Modern East: the whole book saturated in a strange, wild
spirit—a spirit of unrest and yet tranquillity in the midst of that unrest;
full of colour and a noble searching after meaning.
_ On these three books alone it seems to me that Leslie Mitchell has
ul justified his inclusion among the very few people—men or women
writing to-day whose work we cannot spare. The work is individual:
perhaps almost annoyingly so. It demands a certain mental adjustment
on the part of the reader. But, granted that adjustment, it is important
work, indicating a certain line of thought that is too seldom treated of:
a certain freedom from preconceived notions of what is right and wrong. And the
explorer along that line of thought is, I am sure, a writer who will have
an influence, and that a very definite one, on the thought and literature
of the twentieth century.
