I
S.72..cfi..\0
National Library of Scotland
Itllllllllll
*B0CX)393375*
NINE AGAINST
THE UNKNOWN
Books on Exploration by the same authors:
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
HANNO, OR THE FUTURE OF EXPLORATION
LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
NIGER I THE LIFE OF MUNGO PARK
the world according to behaim
NINE AGAINST
THE UNKNOWN
A Record
Exploration
by
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
AND
LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks,
The long day wanes; the slow moon climbs; the deep
Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends,
’Tis not too late to seek a newer world.
Push off, and sitting well in order smite
The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds
To sail beyond the sunset and the baths
Of all the western stars, until I die.
It may be that the gulfs will wash us down :
It may be we shall touch the happy isles.
—Ulysses
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34 Paternoster Roto E.C.^
MCMXXXIV
PRINTED IN
GREAT BRITAIN,
AT THE ANCHOR
PRESS, TIPTREB,
:: essex ::
For
IVOR BROWN
CONTENTS
PAGE
I. THE GLAMOUR OF GOLD AND THE GIVERS OF LIFE II
ii. leif Ericsson’s landfall in wineland the
GOOD ______ 20
III. SER MARCO POLO JOURNEYS TO THE ISLANDS BEYOND
CATHAY - - 49
iv. don crist6bal COLON AND THE EARTHLY
PARADISE _ ______ g/
V. CABEZA DE VACA’s QUEST FOR THE CITY OF GOD - 12/
VI. FERNAO DE MAGALH&ES AND THE FORTUNATE ISLES l68
vii. vitus Bering’s search for America and golden
GAMA LAND ______ 199
VIII. MUNGO PARK ATTAINS THE NIGER AND PASSES TIM-
BUCTOO _______ 227
IX. RICHARD BURTON AND THE FORBIDDEN CITIES - 264
X. FRIDTJOF NANSEN SEEKS THE POLE _ _ _ 288
BIBLIOGRAPHY - - - — - - 317
vii
*
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
_ # . rAOAnu rj\.\jc.
Leif Lricsson — — — — — — — — 24
Marco Polo - - - - - - - - 52
Christopher Columbus - - - - - - 88
Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca - - - - - 128
Ferdinand Magellan - - - - - -172
Vitus Bering ------- 200
Mungo Park ------- - 228
Richard Burton ------- 268
Fridtjof Nansen ------- 292
MAPS
The World according to Behaim - - Frontispiece
Leif Ericsson in America ------ 40
Journeys of Marco Polo ------ 64
The Voyages of Columbus - - - - - 104
North American Journey of Cabeza de Vaca - - 136
South American Journeys of Cabeza de Vaca - - 152
Voyage of Magellan - - - - - -184
First Exploration of Vitus Bering - _ _ _ 208
Vitus Bering Discovers America - - - - 216
Explorations of Mungo Park - - _ _ _ 248
Burton’s Journey to Harar _____ 276
Nansen’s Voyage in the Fram ----- 304
ix
Nine Against the Unknown
i
THE GLAMOUR OF GOLD AND THE GIVERS
OF LIFE
§ I
IF Man the Artist and Man the Agriculturist have
lengthy histories and pre-histories, it is certain that Man
the Explorer has an even greater antiquity. His antiquity
extends far back beyond his humanity to the distant wanderings
of the common ape-stock which fathered such divergent
near-humans as the Peking Man of China, Pithecanthropus
of Java, the great-jawed Heidelberg man of Germany.
Exploration is among the most ancient of urges, nor need
we assume that even in the pre-human days of humanity it
was always exploration in search of more pleasant foods and
pleasing shelters. Curiosity was a continual urge, even though
only that spasmodic and uncontinued curiosity that a modern
man may study in the antics of the monkey-cage. Beyond the
next forest, the next line of hills, went a dim reasoning, there
might be something new.
Twenty or thirty thousand years ago the great ice barriers
of the Fourth Glacial Age began to break down all over the
northern half of the Old World. The Ice retreated from
Europe and Asia, leaving the great Russian plains seeping
swamps, breaking down the Central Asian mountain-and-
snow-ring in which it is possible that Man himself had
attained (sheltered in that nook from the glacial rigours)
his humanity. It was the Spring-time of the world, and
different groups of men set out on slow wanderings, millennium
on millennium, to the ultimate homes of racial differentiation.
They were probably medium-sized, browny, indeterminate
beings, those early forerunners who turned their backs on
each other and set out to found the various races of mankind.
ii
12 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Neither the bleached pallor of the White, the curled hair and
flattened face of the Black, the yellowness and eye-folding of
the Mongol were yet in evidence. Climate and mutation were
to play their parts in effecting those changes that are now
so obtrusive to our eyes: Man the Early Explorer in his
explorations was to father all the racial prides and fond
prejudices of Modern Man.
That Early Man appears to have approximated very
closely indeed to the Natural Man of Rousseau and the
Encyclopaedists; indeed, the Natural Man of Rousseau was
no chance imagining of a dreaming sage (as is so often
supposed), but a personification of the qualities of the
last surviving groups of early men discovered by civilized
Europe—the primitives of America. He was cultureless,
houseless, godless; he had no devils, no classes, no agri¬
culture, no clothes, no domestic animals. He was merely
an animal, and not unrare on this planet in that he was also
a tool-using animal. And, to judge by the evidences from the
scarce Primitive groupings which until lately survived in this
and that corner of the world, he was on the whole a happy
and kindly animal, easily amused, a singer and hunter, un¬
oppressed by strange fears, unstirred by strange hopes. The
Golden Age was for long a reality on our planet: the first
explorers who wandered west into Europe, east into China,
south into Africa, were of the very stuff of the wistful
dreamings of poets in the cities of civilization a long twenty
thousand years later.
In Europe Cro-Magnard and Magdalenian man hunted
the horse and the bison through long ages, painted great
pictures, led dangerous and happy lives, generation on
generation, in a great artistic flowering of the human spirit
in a world slowly recovering from the Ice Age rigours. South
and around the Mediterranean were folk of like blood and
quality: their rock-paintings astound the modern traveller
in the nullahs of the Sahara. But gradually a period of
desiccation set in. Slowly the forested, swampy Sahara grew
arid and brittle. Ungulates and carnivores drifted eastwards
along the Mediterranean coasts with that shrinkage of the
verdure of North Africa. With them went the happy-go-lucky
tribes of Early Man, hunters and fishers. So doing, they came
at last to the banks of the lower Nile.
The Nile resisted the desiccation. Year after year, most
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 13
uniquely flowing of rivers, it brought down the warm
equatorial waters to generate the seeds of the plants along
its shores. Wild barley grew along those shores in great
natural fields, sprang to greenness, ripened, fell to the ground
to be revived again, surely and certainly, on a fixed, un¬
wavering day, by the next year’s floods. It was a process
profoundly and plainly impressed on the mind of the Primitive
who had come hunting into that region : in no other region
could the process have been so plainly impressed. He found
the barley easy and succulent food. And at last one of his
number, long afterwards deified as Osiris, the First King-
Irrigator, was moved to assist the processes of the river, to
dig a channel to further stretches of land for the river to
fertilize, to inaugurate the first attempt at basin-agriculture.
So, suddenly, man became an agriculturist, storing the
surplus of the seeds for next year’s flood-sowing, creating
architecture in building sheds for that storage, creating
villages and so towns and so civilization in the necessity to
carry out those operations communally. So classes came into
the world with the differentiation of men into Kings (Chief
Irrigators), Priests (Followers and Tenders and Interpreters
of the Kings)—and Plebs (the Labourers at the Sowing and
Reaping). In a few hundred years there came into being
on our planet—and at the time on no other portion of it than
the Nile basin—civilization : not slowly evolved from bar¬
barism as barbarism was once supposed in its turn to have
sprung from savagery, but a direct transition from the life
of wandering, carefree Natural Man.
Now, godless and devil-less though he had been, Natural
Man like all other animals had always sought to avoid death,
and had reasoned that the cause of death was the loss of blood,
that blood itself, in fact, was Life. Consequently, long before
the coming of civilization, he had in various parts of the world
greatly prized objects and materials the colour of blood—red
carnelian and the like. He had prized the cowrie-shell as an
amulet because of its life-giving shape—its obvious similarities
in shape to the portal of mammalian birth. He had traded
in such objects over wide areas, and valued them greatly.
With the coming of civilization, with the swift rise of gods
and the study of death and decomposure, that search for
life-givers became intensified if also diversified. Green was
now looked upon as a Giver of Life—any object of green—
H NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
because of its likeness to the life-giving corn. Jade and
malachite were searched for and valued accordingly. So was
gold—the colour of the sun which warmed and ripened
the crops—a great Life-Giver. With the surplus of energy
and population that agriculture created the ancient Nilotic
kings sent out their captains and mariners far and near in
quest of those seemingly necessary things.
Exploration of the world was launched again—exploration
not originally for trade or conquest or the seizing of rich
lands; but for amulets against death and misfortune, precious
metals which would ensure the wearer long health and earthly
immortality, residence in a happy eternity of terrestrial
bliss.
§ 2
The urge of this irrational quest for irrational Givers of
Life spread civilization abroad the Old World. The exploring
miners and traders and exploiters of Egypt carried agriculture,
its banes and blessings, to Sumer, to Syria, to Crete. There
the autochthonous primitives, learning practice and theory,
in their turn erected altars to strange gods, upbuilt their
characteristic civilizations, quested like their mentors the
Egyptians out and abroad the unknown lands for gold and
pearls, jade and amber. Sumer carried the seeds of civilization
into India, rearing Mohenjo-Daro and its attendant glories,
into Central Asia and from there engrafting the tree of
Chinese civilization. So with Crete, civilizing the Mediter¬
ranean basin and the Greek lands, penetrating remotely to
Spain, and from there to Britain. Civilization fathered the
first deliberate exploration, exploration in its turn fathered
the great divergent and diverging cultures of the ancient
world.
But gradually the irrational element in the quest died out.
Gold came to be prized not as a magic metal, a mystic Giver
of Life, but (owing to its scarcity) assuming direct and
ascendant values over other commodities as a means of
exchange and therefore of definite social wealth. In a measure
this was mere transmutation of the original idea of gold—a
transmutation which still holds the world in thrall. But it
was of definite consequence. The fantastic element in the
quest lapsed, or, as the poets of the succeeding Greek and
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 15
Roman civilizations saw it, the Silver Age which had succeeded
the Golden Age in its turn departed, to be followed by the
Iron Age of brute exploitation and conquest, the ages which
produced the warring armies of Assyria and the throat-cutting
raids abroad Europe of the early Greeks and Celts. And, just
as the value of gold was transmuted in men’s minds, its direct
and urgently personal-appealing importance to some measure
lapsed. Sargon sought territory rather than the metals within
it: he sought subject peoples and subject cornlands. So
with Alexander the Great, so with most of the great military
conquerors.
Encouraging their merchants to trade afar, the Meso¬
potamian and Mediterranean civilizations had already, by
the close of the last millennium before Christ, fairly definite
knowledge of many countries outside the range of their own
political sway. Pytheas, a Greek trader from Marsala, had
sailed up the coasts of Spain, circumnavigated Britain, and
voyaged to a remote Thule which was perhaps Iceland, more
probably Norway. The Greek Alexander (the trader, not the
king), had coasted Southern Asia remotely to Hanoi. The east
coast of Africa had been definitely explored as far south as
Dar-es-Salaam : perhaps even further, for Herodotus has a
story of an expedition despatched by the Egyptian Pharaoh
Necho which circumnavigated Africa, taking several years to
do so, keeping close to the coasts, landing and planting crops,
awaiting their ripening, and pushing on till finally it came to
the Pillars of Hercules, and so at last the Mediterranean.
Two at least of these three great journeys were journeys in
the interests of trade, colonization, land-seizing.
Necho’s expedition is perhaps the exception. It brings us
to other exceptions which still dwindlingly survived. In 500
b.c. Himilco the Carthaginian visited the West Coast of
Europe, perhaps touched on Ireland, and then penetrated far
out into the Atlantic—attaining the Sargasso Sea, as some
think. He could hardly have done so in quest of definite spoil.
Here and there in the drabness of the records other attempts
erupt into notice—inexplicable attempts upon this and that
point of the compass from the view of the new commercialist
orientation of exploration.
For the explanation of such attempts it is necessary
to glance again at those first beginnings of all civilizations in
the Valley of the Nile. As we have seen, the First God was the
l6 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
deified King-Irrigator. Dying, he yet lived in his successor ;
and also, in the hazy theological metaphysics of those days,
individually and personally, in remote lands of the sun. For
he was a Child of the Sun and his flesh might not put on
corruption.
So arose the idea of immortality, a play and a counter-
play of thought and surmise upon a very prosaic happening.
Assembling for the first time in villages, men no longer, as
did their primitive progenitors, left their dead to decompose
where they fell. They carried the bodies remotely from the
villages to the sandy Western bank of the Nile and thrust
them into holes, kings, commons, priests, heaping the sand
well upon them.
But it was a peculiar burial-place. The hot Egyptian
sands did not, as sands in burial elsewhere, decompose the
body.. Instead, they preserved it uniquely. Astounded
Egyptians carrying their dead there would find that hungry
jackals had been at work and had torn out corpses and partially
devoured them. This was understandable enough, but not
(for hunters accustomed to seeing the decay of death) the
state of the cadavers. The dead Egyptians looked almost as
in life, dead hardly at all, surely in a sleep, surely awaiting the
coming of some fresh life. . . .
To ensure that life yet more fully—that mystic life in
some unnameable land—mummification, tomb-building, was
introduced, and spread everywhere in the tracks of the
Archaic Civilization. With that diffusion—to Europe, to
Asia, remotely into Africa—spread the myths and legends
that went with the practice, legend of a mythic land in the
West (originally the Nile West Bank) where the happy dead
lived a new life, free and immortal,
the island-valley of Avilion,
Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
Nor ever wind blows loudly.
The idea and belief took root in theology, in folklore
as the Garden of the Hesperides, the Fortunate Isles, Valhalla’
Wineland, the Land of Gold. And it was regarded not as a
distant land in the skies, not in exact essence the Heaven or
Hades of the various mythologies, but as a definite terrestrial
paradise. Generally its direction was adscripted to the West.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 17
As geographical knowledge enlarged it receded more quickly
and quickly into the Atlantic. Sometimes, though seldom,
the East found it its home, what with the tales that came to
Europe of the magic Spice Islands—inextricably confused
with the Fortunate Isles though indeed they were but the
East Indies.
So again the irrational element had come into exploration,
the quest for a land of geographical fantasy, a land of Youth
and Fortune and Gold.
§3
Men being of the lowly clay they are, concerned with
food and mating and the begetting of children, drowsing by
chimney corners, yawning in peace in long summer days,
worshipping with benignant incomprehension the incompre¬
hensible Gods, that Quest of the Fortunate Isles was never
in itself in any age a deep and passionate racial urge. At the
most it was the main motif in a number of exploring lives, it
gave hope and fear and a dim uncertainty to the far land
and sea-wanderings of many men in the days before Christ.
A man set out on a new trade route in the hope, as a remote
ambition, of finding the Golden Land of Youth. If he failed
en route he might at least fill his pouch with good terrestrial
treasure by the way.
The origin of the belief and quest, as we have seen, was a
fantastic misapprehension of the action of Nature in a matter
of human burial. But, spreading through the Mediterranean,
throughout all Europe, interweaving with fresh by-products
of religious and theological fancy, it acquired a surer belief
to foundation it. That belief was built on vague race memories
of the world that once had been—that world of Early Man
which those first civilizations (even while they enjoyed the
fruits of civilization) looked back on regretfully as the vanished
Golden Age when good King Cronos reigned in heaven and
Zeus the warlike usurper was still inapparent. Some fragment
of that ancient world, went the poet’s misty dream, might
still survive—far off under the setting of the sun. . . .
The fourth and fifth Christian centuries saw the overthrow
of the Roman Empire. Europe was plunged into political
and cultural anarchy; trade languished as did imagination;
exploration as motif or desire vanished from the European
B
l8 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
scene. Slowly a version of Christianity, garnished with many
an odd notion from the older religions, spread abroad Europe ;
slowly the kingdoms and principalities of the Middle Ages
took more or less permanent shape ; slowly the great trading,
exploring, debating class came into prominence—the middle
class. Men read the ancients in a new-found leisure, speculated
in monasteries and the great guild towns, carried the seeds
of those speculations from the Mediterranean to the Baltic.
Populations grew at considerable pace : in the less kindly
agricultural regions the press of population was the root cause
of the unending moving and raiding and colonizing of the
first Christian millennium. That spread of population was to
father the Crusades, with which this record is unconcerned.
But also it was an urge to find new ways of trade : it begat
anew the desire for geographical exploration : it begat the
long line of earth-conquerors who were to subjugate the
earth.
And in the medley of reasons that have urged European
explorers abroad the planet since that year a.d. iooo—desire
for loot, for fame, for fun—the quest of the Fortunate Isles,
sometimes deliberate, sometimes unapprehended, has moulded
innumerable lives and journeys and voyages. Until the
beginning of the present century one may trace it as a thin
vein of unauthentic gold in all the grey fabric of geographical
adventure. And in the lives of at least Nine of the great
representative Earth-Conquerors its influence was pre¬
dominant ; and with them is this chronicle.
It was a quest curiously mixed and—by the time of the
last of the Nine—transmuted. Yet Leif Ericsson and Fridtjof
Nansen, separated by a space of nine hundred years, both
quested the unattainable same. They did it under different
names and guises: the essence remained. Marco Polo alone
belongs to this record not so much because of the influence
of the quest upon his life as the influence of his life upon the
quest. Columbus and Cabeza de Vaca were seekers of the
Fortunate Isles naked and unashamed in intention ; Magellan’s
search was darker and colder, his Fortunate Isles the isles of
clove and nutmegs, but the urge to their attainment drawn
from Columbus’s; Vitus Bering slowly and unwilling sought
the same fleeting land in the fogs of the North Pacific ;
Mungo Park pursued it inland, with a cold fire, to its abiding
place by the bank of an unknown river, Richard Burton (who
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN IQ
would have laughed the imputation of the quest to scorn)
sought the same Debatable Land in Harar, in Arabia, in
the Lakes that give birth to the Nile ; Nansen quested it,
disguised as “knowledge of a mathematical point” towards
the utmost Pole.
How that quest interwove in their lives and thoughts
and actions, was acknowledged, repudiated, foregone, but
yet was the principal thing in the lives of those Nine ; how
the sought-for Land of Youth sometimes betook itself to
strange shapes, to the likeness of the City of God, to the
likeness of a mental refuge from a half-integrated self, to the
likeness of the realm of icy knowledge : is the theme of this
book.
In all its changings—from a definite Island in a definite
sea to a definite standpoint in human thought—it remained
and remains terra incognita, the Unknown Land; and it
may be said truly that the lives of those Nine, all of whom
were great and successful explorers, are all in a fashion tragic
epics. So in a fashion is all human life. But tragedy itself has
no part in that belief in the happy Fortunate Isles which
dominated the lives of those Nine who were representative
of so many men : it was glamour gloriously unescapable.
Leif at Brattalid, Burton at Aden, Mungo Park in Peebles,
Bering toil-worn on the Yenisei, Magellan glowering eastwards
from Goa:
Whether at feast or fight was he
He heard the noise of a nameless sea
On an undiscovered isle.
II
LEIF ERICSSON’S LANDFALL IN WINELAND
THE GOOD
§ i
BY the tenth Christian century the Northmen of
Scandinavia had definitely established themselves as
the great seafaring folk of Europe. Their longships,
inherited from the shipyards of Egypt and Crete not by way
of the Atlantic but by way of the trans-European rivers, were
stout and strong, capable of long sailings and travaillings,
made of hard woods and well constructed ; their crews were
men from a bitter and infertile land whence it was scarcely
possible in the agricultural techniques of the time to wring
meagre sustenance, far less the luxuries of existence. For the
latter they turned to adventure beyond the creaming surfs
pelting the long Norse coasts.
These Northmen in their narrow fjords, winter-surrounded
through great portions of the year, rearing scant crops of
oats and barley, pasturing lean herds in the uplands in summer,
fishing in turbulent seas, were in essence no remarkable folk.
From the Archaic culture they had passed, as all Europe had
passed, to a civilization compounded of a congeries of small
kings and small gods, the local chief the head of a Thing
or Parliament of free-men, the lowlier tasks relegated to
slaves or bondmen, the Gods the War and Hate and Wonder
Gods of a people bitterly reared on the sharpest edge of the
Iron Age. Their development of seafaring was inevitable,
granted supplies of wood and iron and those initial impulses
to boat-building which had filtered up from the Mediter¬
ranean ; loutish, hungry, and poverty-stricken, they quested
adventure for the sake of loot, not love.
South-east across the North Sea they raided the coasts
of Scotland, the Western Islands, England, France, Spain,
North Africa, Italy: they penetrated even remotely to
Egypt the mother-home of all sea-farers ; they returned with
loot and scalps and chained gangs of thralls, wonder-stories
20
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 21
of half-mythic lands, the virginal insignia of murdered maids,
the skulls of men they had slain—skulls they kept as
drinking cups. They have been much romanticized, those
sea-raiders, as strong and hardy and gallant men, great
drinkers and lovers and fighters, but the picture fades and
dims to unlovelier colours in the light of research. We may
now, unimpassioned, envisage them for what they were—a
race that for long deserved the epithet savage far more than
any race ever known to the earth before or after. Their home
lives were built on the thin dregs of European civilization
seeping north. They had no native literature, no native
culture, no religion, though much brutish superstition ; no
single thought or impulse to stir our later sympathies. Their
sagas tell of a mean and bloody and cowardly life, comrades
throat-cutting on minor matters like the stealing of fish or
firewood, mean squabbes on little roods of land, clownish
cruelties and clownish curiosities in that cruelty. To the
harassed and divided peoples of the lands they raided they
appeared as no superior type—they appeared for what
they were, brutish and implacable bands of pirates.
To clear the picture to a truer vision of their quality is
not to denigrate them or their achievements. Rather the
reverse. They were amongst the most bitterly tortured of
our species in its maladjustments both to climatic con¬
ditions and to the unnatural phenomenon of civilization.
In the throes of those maladjustments they put to sea on
quests for food and rape and loot and blood, and in those
quests, suddenly, unexpectedly, looked again and again on
the face of wonder, pushed back the frontier of the world’s
geographical knowledge, saw strange islands and peaks in running
tides at twilight, and returned to Norway with the tale of
them—tales that drifted south and became one with those
Fortunate Islands that first rose as a dream from the priestly
imaginings on the banks of the primal Nile.
They were amongst the first of the Europeans deliberately
to “put to sea”—to leave the hugging of coasts and steer by
stars, by wind-direction, by the finding of birds, across great
open spaces of water. That is the preliminary and prelude to
their voyagings; that is the essential thing to be apprehended.
Not until the eleventh century at earliest, when Leif of this
record was sleeping his last sleep in Brattalid, did the primitive
lode-stone that foreshadowed the true compass reach to
22 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
navigational knowledge in the fjords of the north. The Pole-
star was their lode-stone by night, the sun and the positioning
of clouds and tides and rains their guides by day. Yet before
the opening of the eleventh century they had voyaged with
only those aids to Iceland, to Greenland, to Spitzbergen, to
Novaya Zemlya—and, as that century broke, to a land even
yet more distant.
About the year a.d. 870 they had reached Iceland—led
there by the accidents of storm and tide, or deliberately
seeking a refuge—the tale is sadly confused. There they
found an older population in uncertain residence—it seems
to have been settled by Christianized Celtic harmosts long
centuries before. Of these Celts we hardly hear again, folk
hardly emerging even in name from one of those many Celtic
twilights that have haunted the West European fringe. No
doubt the Northmen slew them, enslaved them, or gradually
absorbed them into the Norse family-groups, the Norse
language. Name-places of the aliens long haunted the Iceland
scene. By a.d. 900 extensive settlements had been carried
out in Iceland by the newcomers, for Harold Haarfager had
arisen in Norway subduing the little kings to a central power.
Many of them refused that subjection, and instead put to
sea for Iceland, preferring an even harder life on the in¬
hospitable island to the unlikely comforts of Norway ruled by
an autocrat.
They found their preference tested in bitter rigours.
Land was scarce ; and so remote was Iceland out in the
Atlantic wastes that it was impossible to supplement life-
resources as easily as in the old country—by thief-raids on
North Europe. As a consequence there speedily developed
throughout the island, with no definite centralized authority,
such unending anarchic orgy of private claim and counter¬
claim, private murder and retaliation, as clouds the early
sagas with a wearisome steam of blood. A desperate and
intolerable land-hunger drove those men. It gave birth to
an even more mean and desperate courage and ruthlessness.
Among the most warlike and homicidal of the Iceland
farmers in a.d. 980 was that Eirik Raude who was presently
to father on the Icelandic scene the son who was to be dubbed
of all voyageurs The Lucky.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
23
§ 2
Eric (Eirik in his Norse) and his father Jaederen had both
been exiled from Norway for murder about the Christian
year 970. Emigrating to Iceland, they bore with them un¬
tarnished the family penchants. The father died some little
time after the move—possibly and righteously of a slit throat.
Thereon Eric decamped to the south of the island. Here he
speedily quarrelled with the neighbours around Eirikstad ;
finally, he killed several of them, probably very cold-bloodedly
for the local indeterminate Thing, no. squeamish body,
condemned him to banishment from the district.
He and his wife and household of carles—gangster-assistants
—and thralls—slaves captured on sea-raids—then moved to
a farm on a small island off the Iceland coast. But neither
Eric’s nature nor his circumstances seem to have changed
greatly. Soon he was blood-letting again. At the Thing of
980 he and his gangsters were declared outlaws and were
hunted to and fro the Iceland strands.
In this strait Eric, banished from Norway, banished
from Iceland, recalled a remarkable tale. This had been
passed to and fro in the winter gossip of the Iceland kitchens
from the lips of a certain Gunnbjorn who had sailed by
accident and the force of contrary winds far out into the
Western sea and had there glimpsed the snow-peaks of un¬
named lands. Eric resolved to load his boats and seek those
lands himself.
In the brevity of the saga compiled long afterwards we
hear little more than of the resolution and the departure.
But it seems that he and his followers were in considerable
strength, we can vision them strong and sea-skilful men,
living possibly in a kind of communal kindness among them¬
selves, mentally savages, culturally pre-pakeolithic, ignorant
very greatly of even the fears that the world of their time
entertained regarding the limits of that Western Ocean and
the great Gulf of Dread into which all story told the waters
of the earth in some place poured—beyond the Fortunate
Isles.
Their ignorance held them in good stead. The eastern coast
of Greenland, tall and uninhabited, ice-sheathed, was sighted
amidst considerable excitement. But it was rocky and bare,
24 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
and Eric saw that it would be useless to land there. Accordingly,
he sailed south for uncertain days, rounded the point that in
modern geographies is called Cape Farewell, and there made
a ragged fringe of country on which the eternal snows did
not intrude, though they reared up their glacier-points far
northwards, pale blue and unmoving on the skyline. In a
wildered jumble of fjords and nullahs Eric drew in his long-
ships, his men standing and staring at the land and water,
the cattle on board—for there were cattle—lowing at the
whiff of the autumn grasslands, wonder and speculation
stirring in the dull Norse peasant brains. Presently they found
good anchorage and landed.
They were the first Europeans in Greenland. But they
were not the first inhabitants. Sailing up the Western coasts,
black and barren and desolate, they landed and found there
stone traps and bones, metal implements even, tell the sagas ;
and at these they stared in a considerable amaze, and from
them no doubt round about them, gripping their axes,
waiting the sight or sound of trolls who could only be enemies
to the Norse kind. But the place was silent and forsaken,
but for the crying of seabirds and the rustling of the long
Autumn grasses. . . . Eric resumed his explorings.
For three years he explored and quested those coasts
with a surprising diligence that we find hard enough to
account for unless on the supposition that farming bored him
intensely, he preferred the chances of the sea and—who knew ?
coming at last perhaps far up those fjords on some rich city
of the trolls which he could comfortably loot. No city was
found, though much of frostbite and hardship. At Eiriksfjord
down in East Settlement a collection of dwellings of un¬
mortared stone had meantime been reared to shelter men and
cattle ; there were no trees growing anywhere, but up the
Western coast the Northmen (thenceafterwards to be called
the Greenlanders) found a point where drifted wood shored
in great piles.
They made expeditions to this spot, wood-gathering
for fuel and carpentry, whale-hunting, fishing. They endured
the winters and cried at the first sight of the summer sun ;
they pastured their cattle and sowed scant seeds, and through
three long years as they turned in sleep at night heard the
thunder of the southward-going bergs. . . . And amidst
this scene the four children of Eric—sons Leif, Thorwald,
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 25
Thorstein, and Freydis, his illegitimate daughter—grew up
in a hasting adolescence.
Eric seems to have been glad of the passing of those
three years. He was an outlaw; and though that must have
troubled little a heart and a mind without ethic notions of
citizenship or communal kinship, it probably irked him that
he had so few companions to dominate and browbeat and
fight with. He sailed again for Iceland.
His outlawry was up. But he found Iceland little to his
taste. His worst enemy, one Thorgest, promptly challenged
him to combat; and, as the saga briefly relates: “Thorgest
won.” One approves of Thorgest. Eric seems to shrink a little
after that. The indomitable bully, suddenly pricked, his
bellowings at home and against his wife and children had
perhaps thereafter an uneasy note in them. Pricked and
prudent, he resolved to forswear Iceland, but not to sail
back to Greenland without inducing as large a population as
possible to accompany him.
Accordingly, he spread the tale of the land he had found,
dubbing that land by the name it has borne since the day of
Eric’s infamous mis-christening—“because, said he, men would
be more willing to go thither if it had a good name !” By the
year 990 the inhabitants of Greenland were a large number, as
the Northmen reckoned numbers. Over a thousand European
souls had made the great venture from the Eastern to the
Western hemisphere, to rear their stone huts and byres in
Eastern and Western Settlement, to pasture their cattle and
dream of Iceland and set forth for it or even distant Norway
on trading ventures of wild hazard and wilder legend.
Very early it became clear to those Greenlanders how
anomalous was their position, how poverty-stricken this
life to which they had exiled themselves. The ruins of
their habitations are to be seen to this day : the byres are
small and suggest goats and sheep rather than cattle ; the
houses themselves have a terrifying smallness and closeness.
In the howl of the Greenland nights they must have been
draughty and odoriferous and uncomfortable enough, when
the wolves gathered round the Greenland garbage-heaps and
bayed the stars, and the vikings nodded in slumber before
inadequate heaps of driftwood fire, and the dull and squat
and harassed Northwomen went about their household tasks
with so many restrictions upon their housekeeping. They
26
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
limned in a strange and almost unparalleled episode in history,
those folk of that remote venture of European civilization on
the fringes of the American Arctic.
§3
In the year 999, a fine concatenation of numbers, the eldest
son of Eirik Raude, Leif, took out his longship and sailed
for Norway.
There has been little of Leif hitherto in the Saga of Eric
the Red. It is uncertain when or where he was born, though
almost certainly in Iceland. But men grew rapidly to maturity
in that milieu ; we may guess he was a little over twenty
years of age, in outward appearance a typical Norseman, tall
and burly, in blue cloak and sober grey leggings, a personable
youth--uLeif was a large and powerful man, and of a most
imposing bearing, a man of sagacity and a very just man in
all things”—says the Saga.
His mental content was a strange admixture of hunting
and whaling lore, the life-formulae of a land-pressed peasant,
lore of the wielding of arms in the conflicts and squabbles
of the colony, lore of the gods of war and sea ; and a dim geo¬
graphical horizon in which Iceland bulked immensely, Norway
more dimly, and south of that tenebrous Norway a vision
of Europe dim peak on peak fading into lands of legend as
the towering Jokulls back of Eirikstad faced into the Northern
Mists. He called himself a Greenlander without prejudice to
being a Norseman ; and sailed in a young man’s hope of
adventure, loot, lust, and odd pickings by the way.
Probably the direct passage from Greenland to Norway,
without touching Iceland, had been made before ever Leif
put to sea ; but his is the first recorded transatlantic crossing
on record, though his plan to reach Norway direct did not
mature. Gales came on, heavy Spring storms, and the long-
ship was driven out of its course into some island of the
Hebrides. Here they were welcomed and given hospitality
by the islanders, Norse like themselves, and here they sat
down to await a favourable wind to carry them to Norway.
But it was a still and drowsing summer that followed that
Spring. No winds came. The Atlantic slept through the long
hours of daylight, unruffled except by the passing wing of a
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN l")
seagull; night-time it flung up a great radiance of stars back
to the starry skies and the lodestar of the Northmen. To
tack or row into favouring currents in that sea with his single-
sailed ship was apparently beyond Leif’s seamanship. He
awaited a favourable gale, and meanwhile fell in love with
an island woman, Thorgunna, so bringing one of the first
authentic love-stories into saga literature, a whisper of clear
and lovely and tragic happenings in those long records of
land-squabblings and mixed and impatient voyaging.
To fall in love in that time between such two as Leif
and Thorgunna meant to share more than kisses or looks.
So Leif perhaps had his first awakening to wonder and the
strange beauties behind the barren greyness of life in the bed
of the kind and passionate Thorgunna as the summer waned
to autumn and their idyll waxed to fruit. Then at last the
winds came.
When Leif went to part with Thorgunna, she begged that
he take her with him. He seems to have hesitated for a while,
and then perhaps thought of the smoke and glower of the
Norse court where he intended to sojourn. He answered
that he could not take one of her lineage on such seas, in a
boat protected by so few men. Here they must end their
summer months.
Then Thorgunna told him that she was pregnant, and
Leif the father of her child ; but even that did not move
him. Perhaps he had tired of her, perhaps his refusals were for
her sake only. One peers down those caverns of the years to
seek into motives and hopes and repulsions long not even a
flicker in human thought, with Leif and his Thorgunna
bidding farewell. But she swore she would follow him to
Greenland, somehow, in some fashion, though it took all her
life, and bring their son if she should bear one. That he does
not seem to have denied her. Perhaps he thought it merely
the passionate protest of a woman in her state. So he gave her
a “gold ring, a Greenland mantle of frieze, and a belt of
walrus ivory” and parted with her, dourly, and without tears,
as was their kind, putting to sea with a following wind and
reaching Norway without further mishap or goodhap.
Olaf Tryggvason, that strange barbarian who had become
such a queerly fanatic Christian, ruled Norway at the time.
Leif made his way to the court and seems to have been well
received there, albeit he was a heathen savage from the
28 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
uttermost bounds of the Northman king’s domains. Perhaps
he had come on some semi-official mission; perhaps it was a
likeness in mental bent and content and dream that drew
Olaf and Leif together. For it seems that he became a favourite,
that for the king’s sake he listened to the priests. Before
that year 999 was out he had become a Christian.
There were probably priests from the South, from the
Baltic and Germany, with whom he talked in Norway, traders
and missionaries and curious men come to the court of the
savage Christian king. And Leif told much of distant Green¬
land and in return was patient with queries and questions.
Were there other lands out there ? Warm lands, fruitful
lands ? Had he or the Greenlanders yet seen the fair Isle of
St. Brendan rising in the seas beyond Ireland ? Had he seen
the unipeds and the clustering grapes of Wineland, the
Fortunate Isle ?
Out of such strands of gossip and rumour and speculation
we may imagine the mind of young Leif Ericsson, the White
Christ’s new man, fashioning a web of geographical curiosities
far beyond the vision of his father Eirik who had hunted
Western Greenland for things understandable and solid enough
—food and loot and wood. Wineland the Good, the Fortunate
Land. . . .
He wintered with the court at Nidaros, but in the spring
prepared to sail again for Greenland. Then at Olaf’s urging
—or perhaps his own request—he took with him a priest
to convert the Greenland heathen, and parted with Olaf,
and set sail on as straight a route across the Atlantic as had
ever been followed, between the Faroes and the Shetlands,
his design to strike Cape Farewell and no other land before
that.
The design was completely successful. Cape Farewell was
reached and rounded and before the eyes of Leif and his
crew uprose again the ragged, barren lands of Eiriksfjord, with
behind it the great Jokull, the Glacier, rearing up its blue
peaks unchanged. Of the homecoming there is no record ;
the sagas treat with a decent severity such matters. But
however indifferent or surly the greeting of the ageing Eric
himself, Leif’s two brothers, Thorstein and Thorvald, must
have received him with questions enough on what strange
strand he had ever made captive the beings with whom he
was companioned—the shaven priest of the White Christ
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 29
and two thralls presented him byOlaf in Norway—Scots thralls,
the man named Haki and the woman Hekja. What these
three newcomers themselves thought of Brattalid, Eric s
house, goes also unrecorded. The two thralls stared at the
Jokull and set to their toil, unaware their sterner life des¬
tinies in the Fortunate Land of legend.
§4
This was the year 1000 of the Christian era. Before it was
spent there had come changes at Brattalid and up and down
both Eastern and Western Settlements. The missionary’s
efforts met with a singular success—backed probably by the
strong hand or the strong recommendation of Leif. Every¬
where the White Christ was accepted and the ancient feasts
and sacrifices to the Norse gods suppressed. Tjodhild, Leif’s
mother, was one of the first converts and was instrumental in
building the first church in Eastern Settlement. The ancient
gods and the ancient rites were abandoned with a singular
unanimity which suggests very strongly what a feeble hold
the creeds of blood and war had truly upon the Northmen :
they were as willing as most of the rest of humankind when
unbedevilled, to acquire a gentler faith and a saner super¬
stition.
With one exception. The exception was the aged and
scoundrelly Eric the Red himself. He would have none of
the new doctrines, or the shaven hypocrite—the cskaemannin
—who propounded them. He saw in them, no doubt, a weaken¬
ing of his own authority, the uprising of a shadowy moral wall
of disapproval against those acts of blood and rapine that
had enlivened the tediums of his bare existence. And this
was more than fulfilled.
His persistent refusal even to listen to the new creed
brought about an unexpected reaction on the part of his wife
Tjodhild. They might indeed be wedded in the sight of the
heathen gods, between them have brought three sons into
the world : but she was a Christian now and would share
neither bed nor board with a heathen. At this news and the
acts that accompanied it the sagas relate, dryly, that Eric was
“greatly displeased’
In that land beyond Cape Farewell the year passed slowly
3° NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
and eventfully enough, we may suppose, though the changes
and alterations of feeling and belief are a dim tale now.
When the winter came down it brought to Eiriksford a new
sound in those^ sub-arctic wastes—the chanting of the mass,
hymn-singing in lonely wastes where few and alien gods
had come. It needs indeed a sudden urge of vision to realize
the strange and unexpected turns of fortune and fashion
that diffused abroad the ancient world creed and custom
from one remote part to another. In Greenland they wor-
shipped a thousand years after his death a Jewish prophet who
had lived and died in the heat and sunglare of the unknown
Levant. Neither planning nor faith could have won that
result, merely the play and counter-play of the tides of chance
and change.
And presently, as the Spring came to Brattalid and all
the snow-entrenched byres and house-roofs slowly thawed
and the grass put forth its blades in the narrow scaurs, there
came news of how those tides of chance had brought to the
eyes of men sight of a land of wonder and legend in the seas
of the unknown south.
§5
One of the settlers in Greenland was a Heriulf from Ice¬
land. Coming originally to the new country in the west, he
appears to have left some part of his household gear and family
behind. . .. . The story is a faint one, in the faintest outline.
But early in the spring of 1002 a son of this Heriulf, one
Biarni Heriulfsson, set sail from Iceland in his longship, with
intent to visit his father in Eastern Settlement. He appears
to have been a young man of no great distinction or character,
as subsequent events were to prove to his disgusted crew.
bor presently storms arose, driving the ship violently
from its course. With them came raining fogs till presently
the Northmen had completely lost bearings and for “many
days drifted about in the sea”. Then at last the storm subsided,
the fog lifted, and there, close on the western skyline, they
sighted land—where no land should have been.
The sea flung up long breakers along a flat and wooded
shore ; over all raced the clouds of Spring. The Northmen
stared their excitement and wonder and steered the longship
nearer. But now Biarni proved his lack of quality. He refused
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 31
to make a landing. Of this land they had no knowledge, and
he himself no need. It was Greenland he had set out for, and
Greenland he intended to make.
Muttering their resentment, his crew obeyed, and sailed
the longship north. Presently it vanished from sight, the
mysterious land, and the fogs came down again,^ though there
was a good following wind that drove the ship north-east.
Once again, days later, that fog lifted, and they saw land again
on the port—flat, inhospitable land. And once again Biarni
refused a landing.
At last Cape Farewell was sighted, the great sail of the
longship lowered, and the much and strangely travelled
Northmen rowed into Eiriksfjord. They were the first of their
kind to sight the American Continent.
§6
The story fired Leif Ericsson. Perhaps he had never for¬
gotten those tales of western wonderlands he had heard in
Nidaros when he heard also for the first time of the new
faith. And they were more than tales—Biarni could have
proved them more than tales, had he had the courage and
energy. Biarni, indeed, must have led an ungay life in Green¬
land, scoffed at and jeered at for his failure to land on the
new shores. All through that summer and the following
autumn and winter talk and controvery on that glimpsed
land went on in Eiriksfjord. At last, his plans complete, Leif
took them beyond talk. His own longship no longer sea¬
worthy, he went to Biarni and offered to purchase his.
Biarni seems to have acceded without any regrets. As
long as he himself owned a longship, .so long .would it be
expected that he would some day man it and sail south-west
in quest of that infernal shore that ill-luck had allowed him to
glimpse. Instead, as he now gathered, here was Leif Ericsson
bent on that mission without any pressing at all.
It was summer when Leif mustered his crew to the long¬
ship, thirty-five men in all and one woman. That woman was
the Scotswoman slave Hekja. Among the men was her lover
or husband Haki. Leif himself apart, all the others are name¬
less except Leif’s foster-father, a German named Tyrker,
which is possibly a corruption of the Norse word for a German
32 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
—Tysker. Tyrker was small and swart and given to jolly living
and shrewd planning, and was greatly devoted to Leif. His
devotion to yet other things was to prove the name for the
unknown land. Neither Thorstein nor Thorvald, Leif’s
brothers, appear to have been invited on the expedition.
Eric himself, however, was so invited, and at first refused.
But he was accounted lucky in his findings, and still remem¬
bered as a great explorer. Under pressure from his son—he
appears to have had considerable affection for Leif in spite of
the fact that the latter had inflicted Christianity upon the
Settlements—he at last agreed to accompany the ship. Fare¬
wells were said at Brattalid on a summer morning and the
shipmen set out for the strand where the longship lay. Eric
rode on a pony, and had gone but a little way when an accident
occurred—he fell from the horse and broke his ribs and hurt
his shoulder. His only comment on the accident, tells his
Saga, was “Ah, Yes!”
The expedition does not seem to have delayed. It embarked
and hoisted the great square sail and slowly took the wind
and held out from Eiriksfjord. Here a good south-westerning
wind was found and the Greenland coasts vanished in the
summer haze from the Jokull.
For two or perhaps three days they ran before that wind,
caught in the great coasting current that sweeps down towards
Labrador. Then at last there appeared hull down a long stretch
of coastland, towering in the sky great icy mountains. The
Northmen, resolved to have done with such cravenness as
Biarni’s, shortened sail and put into shore.
It was no Fortunate Island. The shore was covered with
great rounded stones, the land stretched bleak and barren
back to the edge of the unfrequented, snow-tipped hills.
Leif and his companions appear to have regarded it without
enthusiasm but also undespondently. This was not the land
they sought.
They christened it Helluland, glumly, the Land of the
Flat Stones, that portion of modern Labrador, and re¬
embarked and put to sea again. Soon Helluland sank behind ;
next day brought a new country—undoubtedly the country
that Biarni had sighted.
For it was wooded down to the shore, the Nova Scotia
of that day, with a foreshore of white sand such as the Norse¬
men had never seen before and stared at in amaze. Leif and
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 33
his men put ashore in a boat, and found water and wood and
explored a little, and were still unsatisfied. This Markland
appeared a good and hearty land enough to their Northern
mind ; had they been in search of merely another land for
settlement this would have appeared paradise in comparison
with the stiff and unyielding Greenland. But there was some¬
thing else that urged on at least their commander—the
knowledge that somewhere in these seas the happy Fortunate
Islands each morning lifted up their fruit-laden trees to sun¬
rise. He ordered a re-embarkation.
So they re-embarked and put to sea once again, with a
north-east wind behind them. And that wind indeed drove
them through the space of two days’ sail towards a land that
was to seem to Leif the fulfilment of the tales he had heard
afar in Nidaros.
§7
It took them two days’ sail. Then this new land, south¬
west of Markland, hove in sight, with beside it an island where
the grass was spring-green in the summer sunlight. Again
they put in and landed.
And they looked round them in the fair weather and found that
there was dew on the grass, and it happened that they touched the
grass with their hands, and put them in their mouths, and they thought
they had never tasted anything so sweet as it was.
It was probably the modern Nauset Island, the honey-
dew on the grass a minute insectine excrement. Near at hand
rose the great bulk of that alien land, the black point thrusting
far out into the sea and long, low coasts shimmering away
southwards into the rising sun. Undoubtedly the better of
lands lay south. Delaying but a little while on the island,
they sailed south and were presently coasting down the long
shores of Nova Scotia, with its wheeling openings of bays and
broken land, its forests gleaming hot in the dry air, Leif’s
companions, as we may imagine, urging him to put ashore.
Here was rich and good land.
But Leif was possessed of an urge beyond theirs. It was
not yet the great fruitland of the Fortunate Isles. Refusing
a landing, he held south all that day, glimpsed what he
c
34 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
imagined yet another island, and coasted in near the shore
of modern Maine.
Two days thereafter they “sighted land and sailed towards
it. There was a promontory where they first came. They
cruised along the shore, which they kept to starboard. It
was without harbour and there were long strands and stretches
of sand. They went ashore in boats, and found thereon the
promontory of a ship’s keel, and called it cKjalarnes’ (Keel-
ness) ; they also gave the strands a name and called them
Wonderstrands, because it took a long time to sail past them.”
They had attained and rounded Cape Cod. The mystery
of the keel, so casually mentioned in the Saga, remains
unexplained to this day. Had ever a ship been there before ?
It is not improbable ; indeed, it is not improbable that many
ships, in the long first Christian millennium, may have passed
across the Atlantic, by accident or design, and never again
returned. Wrecked ships on the Iceland-Greenland route
may often have strewn their keels by the chance of wind and
wave on some cove about Cape Cod. But there is another
possibility. Cape Cod itself has a keel-like look, and Leif and
his men may have noted the fact. There is less likelihood in
the second supposition. We of later days look on Cape Cod
with a map in our minds. To Leif and the like of his sailings
it must have appeared merely low sand-land stretching grey-
blue into unguessable distances.
Rounding Wonderstrands and passing the site of modern
Chatham, Leif’s ship came in a “land of Bays, and they
steered the ship into a bay”. Perhaps it was Buzzard’s Bay.
Here the Scots thralls were put to use, the man Haki and the
woman Hekja. They were both lightly built and sinewy folk,
still clad in some primitive foreshadowing of kilt plus plaid
that the Norsemen called a ‘kiafal.’ Leif had them rowed
ashore and gave them directions. They were to explore south¬
wards at top speed, examining the country and returning to
report before three sailing-days had elapsed. They quickly
disappeared inland.
Possibly they were despatched to scout both for the fact
of their speedy feet and because, as slaves, liable to mischief
in this unchancy new country, their loss would be no great
strain upon the expedition. Leif cast anchor and waited and
stared at the new country.
The adventures and chances that attended the two antique
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 35
Scots have not come down to us. They were the first true
explorers of the Americas, and their feet trod land busy and
familiar enough now, their eyes looked on hills and rivers
familiar and named to our eyes. What they encountered and
saw and hid from in the way of beast and bird we can only
surmise : it is probable that they set eyes on no human being.
Indeed, in all its Expedition, Leif’s party was to set no eyes
on those alien Skraelingr who were so to vex subsequent
expeditions of the Northmen—finally to vex them from
America.
At the end of the three sailing days the Northmen in the
longship lifted their eyes and saw Haki and Hekja come
running down to the shore, safe and unharmed, much travelled,
bringing wild vines and “self-sown wheat” in their hands.
Leif and Tyrker stared at the former : Vines! What could
this be but the edge of Wineland the Good itself ?
He raised anchor again and “sailed into a certain sound,
between island and cape”, the island surely Martha’s Vine¬
yard itself ; and thenceafter, in the confusion of the Greenland
and Icelandic Sagas from which this account is drawn,
proceeded to actions mistily indeterminate. The Northmen
landed at some place and beached the ship in considerable
haste, for Leif had awakened to the fact that they were short
of provisions, that summer (as he reckoned it) was past, and
that they must put up shelters for the coming of the winter.
It was perhaps in the western tip of Martha’s Vineyard that
they landed, with the Rhode Island shore still in their vision ;
more probably the mainland itself was their early habitation,
and a later flitting made to either Martha’s Vineyard or the
island that is now called No Man’s Land.
Here there were so many birds that one “could hardly
put one’s foot between the eggs” ; and here they found a
river that ran from a central lake, and proceeded to build
there booths of wood and stone against the threatened coming
of the winter.
But they found, building the booths in some haste and
carrying ashore there their hammocks and arms, that they
had been over-hasty. The fine weather went on. The river
swarmed with salmon, and between it and the eggs there was
little chance of starvation. Leif resolved that in this situation
booth-building was not enough; they must erect a permanent
stone house.
36 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
In between whiles of directing these activities he set
about plans for exploring the mainland. Every now and then
parties of the Northmen rowed across to that mainland, some¬
times in Leif’s command, sometimes apparently leaving him
behind to attend to affairs in Leifsfjord. He appears to have
commanded his men with great skill and to have had no
grumblers, recognized, says the Saga, as a kind and just man
—strange enough epithets for the hero of a Saga !
But though it seems they penetrated into the Rhode
Island country, no doubt tramped their way by forest edges
and up the banks of streams for long days, they made little
progress in knowledge of the fact that the great mainland was
truly a mainland. They were a folk accustomed to islands
and the seas, oppressed by the thought of the coming winter,
Leif himself infrequently in their command, in spite of his
haunting vision of Wineland the Good.
Tyrker the German, as later events were to prove, was the
chance discoverer who was to prove Wineland and its name.
In one of the exploring parties ashore he must have strayed
from his fellows, and come on a sight such as they had hitherto
missed or disregarded. At that his German tongue, long un¬
solaced, grew dry in his throat. He took many rowings to the
mainland, after that; always eager to go hunting at Leif’s
command. And in between whiles he would slip away, watched
by the bland Rhode Island sky, about his secret business.
§8
Their preparations for winter had been thrown away.
Little or no winter came. Instead, in this Hollow Land of
the poets and myth and now a strange reality—no frost or
snow came, and the grass did not wither. The sunlight filtered
down through unwithering leaves and warmth was long on
the land. Here was fishing of larger salmon than they had ever
encountered, here the shortening of the days brought none of
the iron winds of winter. ... So the Greenland saga tells,
in words that were once taken as poetic licence, as myth
imported into the adventures of Leif Ericsson. Now we know
it true of the continental fold around Martha’s Vineyard, so
that Leif’s Landfall is now as certain as though he had verily
carved with his own hand that rock on No Man’s Land which
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 37
has aroused so much controversy and dispute and has now
gone from the arena of controversy, shamefacedly—the rock
on which is carved in Runic letters the inscription .
Leif Eriksson
MI
and below it, mutilated,
Vinland.
It is doubtful if Leif or any other in his party could write.
Some of the Runic letters used are such as were scarcely
known to the Norway of his time ; and had there indeed
been a litterateur in the longship of the Northmen, he would
have written the name Leifr Eiriksson, he would not have
used the Roman dating ‘MI\ So modern research discards
the enigmatic rock as a forgery, ingenuous and puzzling.
Puzzling indeed it is how anyone on even a lonely island
these modern days could have carved out that inscription,
undetected, in the splash of sea-water, for nothing but the
remote chance that it might some day be discovered to astound
America. There is surely another explanation—and that
explanation Leif’s foster-father, Tyrker.
Tyrker was a German, a foreigner among the Northmen,
perhaps one who had learned writing in his own land and
Runic later in life, using the latter with a barbarous freedom
that mutilated Norse construction. And, for it was no habit
of the Norse of that time to erect such inscriptions, who
would have carved it in that long summer-winter but Tyrker
himself in pride of the achievement of his foster-son—and
some puzzlement as to the correctness of dating and spelling ?
A possible picture, and a fascinating one, we summon from
nine hundred years of limbo: the flat-faced, fugitive-eyed,
freckled little German, swart and puny, seated on the Rhode
Island rock on a sultry afternoon those centuries ago, carving
out that enigmatic misspelling while he awaited the fruition
of the vines of Vinland.
But a new worry had come on Leif himself. Food unex¬
pectedly began to grow scarce in Martha’s Vineyard as the
Spring came in. The Northmen, seeing and enduring but
little winter, had taken no precaution to smoke|and^dry the
salmon they caught so readily, and now the salmon were
38 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
gone. It seems also that the hunting must have declined on
the mainland ; perhaps there came illness as well. In the midst
of this situation, Tyrker disappeared.
Leif was troubled the first day of his disappearance, and
even more the next. On the third day he organized a search
party and rowed across to the mainland. They searched far
from the beach haunts of their exploration, and finally, deep
in the woods, came on the German sitting on the ground in a
strange condition.
First he spoke for a long time in German, and rolled his eyes in
many ways and twisted his mouth ; but they could not make out what
he said. After a while he said in Norse : I did not go much further, and
yet I have a new discovery to tell of : I have found vines and grapes.
His condition, in fact, was that of intoxication, and it
makes an amusing tableau to the mind, in that silent North
American forest the armed Norsemen surrounding and staring
at the drunken little German babbling of his grapes and the
secret brewing of them which (there can be little doubt) he
must have carried on through many weeks. He kept the secret
no longer, but apparently led Leif and his companions to the
wild vineyard.
Leif seems to have seen the event as the end of his troubles.
Perhaps other food became more plentiful then, but he
resolved to fill the ship with a cargo of pressed grapes both
as a commercial proposition and an earnest to Greenland of
the quality of the land he had found. The ship was sailed
or poled over to the mainland, and the work of loading her
(the grapes no doubt in casks) commenced.
The spring days went by, and at last the ship was full,
as the wild geese honked one night south over the deserted
booths on Martha’s Vineyard. Leif set his plans for sailing
home.
And from there the saga tells nothing more of Wineland
the Good, of how they must have carried gear and arms down
to the strange ‘new fjord’ and hoisted the long-resting sail,
and looked back as they clambered aboard at the great stone-
foundationed hut Leif had reared beside his first booths.
Leif himself may have turned a look on that shore he had
hardly touched, in spite of his diligent explorings—the shore
undoubtedly of the Fortunate Isle, Wineland the Good—
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 39
for did he not carry its vines with him back to Greenland to
tell them if he lied ?
So they sailed up Nantucket Sound, on their left the Wonder-
strands gleaming white, and out into the rolling Spring
waters of the Atlantic, till presently the points of Keelness
were left far behind, and the first expedition of Europeans
to America of which we have any record was homeward
bound laden with the first Argosy of the West.
§9
The longship sailed north for three days. On the third
Leif looked out on the sea and saw a point of land—perhaps
an island, and something that seemed to move thereon. He
called Tyrker to look, and asked what he saw. The German
could see nothing.
But Leif had not been mistaken. It was the shipwrecked
crew of a longship belonging to one Thori, on a voyage from
Iceland to Greenland companioned by his carles and his
wife Gudrid, and driven out of his route. Perhaps this
encounter was off the North Labrador coast, and if so proves
yet again how frequent such discoveries and re-discoveries
of the Americas must have been—only the chance of surviving
manuscripts preserving Leif’s venture for us. His luck was
with him, even in this rescue. Thori and Gudrid and fifteen
men were taken into the longship, and Greenland made in
a short run.
So “Leif came to land in Eiriksfjord, and went home
to Brattalid; there they received him well. ... He was
then called Leif the Lucky.”
Thus, briefly, the Saga ; but adds with a laconic humour
that Eric himself commented that he saw little luck in this
son of his who had brought the hypocrite monk to Brattalid
and dispossessed a good man from his bed. ...
Of what became of the cargo from Wineland there is
no tale ; of the story told and retold, we may be sure, around
the fireplaces of Brattalid that winter there survive to us
only the most meagre of details..
But it would seem that with the coming of the next
year Brattalid was deeply engaged in preparations for a
further voyage, and we cannot but suppose but that Leif
4° NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
himself intended to captain it and question the further
mysteries beyond the Rhode Island swamps.
11^? *nsurmoun.takle obstacle arose. Eric died that Spring
ull of years and sin, and Leif was left in command of Eastern
Settlement; himself to settle down and rule and deal with
disputes, and measure crops and plan the shearing of sheep,
the collecting of driftwood, the rearing of churches—all the
hfe of a ruler in a bleak little Norse community, instead of
sailing the sounding seas free and unhampered in quest of
the wonderlands whose Wonderstrands he had barely-
touched. ... J
Such we may imagine to have been his feelings that
next year as .Thorfinn Karlsevne, a trader from Iceland
arrived at Ericsford and declared his intention of raising a
great expedition of many boats, loaded with cattle, and
setting out to colonize the land that The Lucky One had
discovered.
§ 10
^r^sevne presumed Leif’s exploring days over, and asked
the Greenlander to give him the house he had built in
Wineland. Leif answered shortly that “he could only lend
lt. • Rmsevne, unsnubbed, accepted the offer, and went on
With Ins preparations—including marriage. Thori had died
and his widow Gudnd was a comely and healthy-looking
woman, t mother for a race of colonists. She would accompany
Jvarlsevne. r ]
Karlsevne sailed with a hundred and sixty (some tell
a hundred and forty) men on his ships, Gudrid, Leif’s brother
liiorvald his second in command, and Eric’s illegitimate
daughter Freydis one of the party. Three days sail brought
em to Bear Island, perhaps in Baffin Land, and thence two
days further sail, with a following wind, to Helluland. Down
t ose dim coasts they cruised without much incident, touching
at Keelness, as Leif had done, and rounded the point, “and
reached Leif’s booths, and unloaded the ships and established
themselves there. They had with them all kinds of cattle
and sought to make use of the land. . . . They did nothing
else but search out the land.”
. repeated throughout the winter, in fact, Leif’s
mistake and Spring found them short of food, perhaps killing
the cattle they had brought. It seems that they had not
LEIF ERICSSON IN AMERICA.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 41
settled on Martha’s Vineyard, or No Man’s Land, but on the
mainland, “for they prayed for food . . . and rowed out
to the island, expecting that there they might find some
fishing”. But there was nothing to be found until one of them,
a heathen, went apart and prayed to the Old Gods. Next
day a whale was washed ashore, and all were violently ill in
consequence of eating of this heathen provender.
Soon afterwards conditions improved, however, with
hunting on the mainland and good fishing grounds discovered.
The first European to be born in America, Snorri Thorfinnsson,
the child of Gudrid and Karlsevne, added his voice to the
other sounds about Leif’s booths. The settlement of Rhode
Island was well under weigh.
But dissensions broke out among the colonists. Karlsevne,
a restless man, determined to seek better land yet further
south. Nine of the colonists refused this new expedition, and
sailed for home. Undaunted, Karlsevne re-embarked his
remaining followers and coasted south.
After sailing “for a long time” they came to the mouth of
a great river. Perhaps it was the Hudson. Here every beck
was full of fish, and there was good hunting in the surrounding
forests. The Northmen disembarked and took their cattle
ashore to graze. They erected fresh booths and appear to have
determined on a permanent settlement.
All went well for the first fortnight. But one morning
they looked out on the sea and saw nine hide boats approach¬
ing, laden with small squat men, “very ugly”. These gestured
towards them in an indeterminate way, and then turned
about their flotilla and disappeared behind a headland.
This was the first encounter with the American natives.
It appears that these Skraelingr were Eskimos, not Red
Indians, as has sometimes been supposed. The Amerindian
was as yet inapparent upon the coasts of North America ;
a great tribal movement had drawn the Eskimo from Greenland
—where they had left their implements and ancient camp
sites to the inquiring gaze of Eric a score of years before—
down to the fresh lands and good hunting of North America.
Mysteriously they were later to retrace the steps of that
migration and at last wipe out and destroy the Norse settle¬
ments in Greenland itself. Possibly, here on the Hudson, they
stared an astonishment at the Norse even greater than the
latter, troll-believers, albeit Christians, stared on them.
42 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
However, Karlsevne decided to go on with his house¬
building. The Northmen stayed the winter there, and found
it pass easily, though not with the lack of frosts that had
characterized the shoreland by Martha’s Vineyard. The
cattle grazed and grew fat, and were doubtless milked and
the milk turned to butter and cheese in the Norse fashion.
They may even have prepared the land for crops, though that
on the whole is unlikely. With the coming of Spring, un¬
expectedly, the Skraelingr returned as well—in a flotilla of
hide boats that seemed to cover the bay.
For a time relations were amicable enough : the Norse
set up a market, trading cloth with the Eskimo who swarmed
ashore. These newcomers gave signs that they also wanted
to purchase swords and shields, but Karlsevne prudently
forbade the trade. This thriving mart was going on apace
until a ludicrous accident occurred :
An ox, which Karlsevne had, ran out of the wood and began to
bellow. The Skraelingr were scared and ran to their boats and rowed
south along the shore. After that they did not see them for three weeks.
But when that time was past, they saw a great multitude of Skraelingr
boats coming from the south, as though driven on by a stream. Then
all the wooden poles were waved against the sun (wither-shins), and
all the Skraelings howled loudly. Then Karlsevne and his men took
red shields and bore them towards them. The Skraelings leapt from
their boats and then they made towards each other and fought; there
was a hot exchange of missiles. The Skraelings also had catapults.
Karlsevne and his men saw that the Skraelings hoisted up on a pole
a great ball about as large as a sheep’s paunch, and seeming blue in
colour, and slung it from the pole up on to the land over Karlsevne’s
people, and it made an ugly noise when it came down. At this great
terror smote Karlsevne and his people, so that they had no thought
but of getting away and up the river, for it seemed to them that the
Skraelings were assailing them on all sides; and they did not halt until
they had reached certain crags. There they made a stout resistance.
Freydis came out and saw that they were giving way. She cried out:
“Wherefore do ye run away from such wretches, ye gallant men ? I
thought it likely that ye could slaughter them like cattle, and had I
but arms I believe I should fight better than any of you.” None heeded
what she said. Freydis tried to go with them, but she fell behind, for
she was with child. She nevertheless followed them into the wood, but
the Skraelings came after her. She found before her a dead man,
Thorbrand Snorrasson, and a flat stone was fixed in the head of him.
His sword lay unsheathed by him, and she took it up to defend herself
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 43
with it. Then the Skraelings came at her. She takes her breasts out of
her sark and whets the sword on them. At that the Skraelings are afraid
and run away back to their boats, and go off. Karlsevne and his men
meet her and praise her happy device. Two men of Karlsevne’s fell,
and four of the Skraelings ; but nevertheless Karlsevne had suffered
defeat. They now go to their houses, bind up their wounds, and consider
what swarm of people it was that came against them from the land.
It seemed to them now that there could have been no more than those
who came from the boats, and that the other people must have been
glamour. The Skraelings also found a dead man, and an axe lay beside
him ; one of them took up the axe and struck at a tree, and so one after
another, and it seemed to delight them that it bit so well. Then one
took and smote a stone with it; but when the axe broke, he thought it
was of no use, if it did not stand against stone, and he cast it from him.
Karlsevne and his men now thought they could see that although
the land was fertile, they would always have trouble and disquiet
with the people who dwelt there before. Then they prepared to set out,
and intended to go to their own country. They sailed northward and
found five Skraelings sleeping in fur jerkins. . . . They thought they
could understand they were outlaws, and killed them.
They reached Martha’s Vineyard again in safety, and
stayed there another year, but apparently uneasily, exploring
the country far and near. On one of these expeditions Thorvald,
Leif’s brother, was killed at a place called Crossness by a
creature who, the Saga solemnly informs us, was a Uniped,
a one-footed man. Him they did not catch.
On the fourth summer they cruised north—apparently
the entire colony—to Markland, and captured two young
Skraelingr there. These new thralls, learning Norse, enter¬
tained them with a variety of tales of Eskimo life, some of
which ring true enough, others fantastically improbable.
They told that a land of white men was indeed near, “where
white-clad priests marched down to the shore with a great
shouting.” This the Christian Norse knew must be Great
Ireland, Huitramanna-Land. Was it perhaps some rumour
or reminiscence of the Toltec civilization then nearing its
end in distant Mexico, some knowledge or legend of the
Mound Builders of the Mississippi ?
Of that we shall never know for certain. Karlsevne had
sickened of the adventure. It was a fat land, but ill to settle
in with the pressing attentions of the Skraelingr. He resolved
to sail for Greenland. The expedition was one with him in the
resolution.
44
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
So presumably such cattle as survived were reloaded on
the longship, Gudrid and Snorri, Freydis and her husband
Thorvard and all the rest of the men re-embarked and the
second and unfortunate European attempt to explore and
colonize North America abandoned. Karlsevne reached
Greenland in safety, and was welcomed there by the lucky
voyager, Leif, eager for news of his Wineland, again deserted.
There was to be yet another attempt upon it.
§ n
It is now to be added, that Freydis, Eric’s daughter, set out from her
home at Gardar, and waited upon the brothers Helgi and Finnbogi
[adventurers who had meantime arrived from Norway] and invited
them to sail with their vessel to Vinland, and to share with her equally
all the good things which they might succeed in obtaining there. To
this they, agreed, and she departed thence to visit her brother, Leif,
and ask him to give her the house which he had caused to be erected in
Vinland, but he made her the same answer (as that which he had
given Karlsevne), saying, that he would lend the house, but not give
it. It was stipulated between Karlsevne and Freydis, that each should
have on ship-board thirty able-bodied men, besides the women ; but
Freydis immediately violated this compact, by concealing five men
more and this the brothers did not discover before they arrived in
Vinland. They now put out to sea, having agreed beforehand, that they
would sail in company, if possible, and although they were not far
apart from.each other, the brothers arrived somewhat in advance, and
carried their belongings up to Leif’s house.
Now when Freydis arrived, her ship was discharged, and the baggage
carried up to the house, whereupon Freydis exclaimed : “Why did
you carry your baggage in here ?” “Since we believed,” said they,
“that all promises made to us would be kept.” “It was to me that Leif
loaned the house,” says she, “and not to you.” Whereupon Helgi
exclaimed : “We brothers cannot hope to rival thee in wrong-dealing.”
They thereupon carried their baggage forth, and built a hut, above the
sea, on the bank of the lake, and put all in order about it; while Freydis
caused wood to be felled, with which to load her ship. The winter now
set in, and the brothers suggested that they should amuse themselves
by playing games. This they did for a time, until the folk began to
disagree, when dissensions arose between them, and the games came
to an end, and the visits between the houses ceased ; and thus it con¬
tinued far into the winter.
One morning early, Freydis arose from her bed, and dressed herself,
but did not put on her shoes and stockings. A heavy dew had fallen, and
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 45
she took her husband’s cloak, and wrapped it about her, and then
walked to the brothers’ house, and up to the door, which had been
only partly closed by one of the men, who had gone out a short time
before. She pushed the door open, and stood, silently, in the doorway
for a time. Finnbogi, who was lying on the innermost side of the room,
was awake, and said : “What dost thou wish here, Freydis ?” She
answers, “I wish thee to rise, and go out with me, for I would speak to
thee.” He did so, and they walked to a tree, which lay close by the wall
of the house, and seated themselves upon it. “How are thou pleased
here ?” says she. He answers : “I am well pleased with the fruitfulness
of the land, but I am ill-content with the breach which has come
between us, for, methinks, there has been no cause for it.” “It is even
as thou sayest,” says she, “and so it seems to me : but my errand to thee
is, that I wish to exchange ships with you brothers, for that ye have a
larger ship than I, and I wish to depart from here.” “To this I must
accede,” says he, “if it is thy pleasure.”
Therewith they parted, and she returned home, and Finnbogi to
his bed. She climbed up into bed, and awakened Thorvard with her
cold feet, and he asked her why she was so cold and wet. She answered,
with great passion : “I have been to the brothers,” says she, “to try
to buy their ship, for I wished to have a larger vessel, but they received
my overtures so ill, that they struck me, and handled me very roughly ;
what time thou, poor wretch, wilt neither avenge my shame nor thy
own, and I find, perforce, that I am no longer in Greenland ; moreover
I shall part from thee unless thou wreakest vengeance for this.”
And now he could stand her taunts no longer, and ordered the men
to rise at once, and take their weapons, and this they did, and then
proceeded directly to the house of the brothers, and entered it, while
the folk were asleep, and seized and bound them, and led each one out,
when he was bound ; and as they came out, Freydis caused each one to
be slain. In this wise all the men were put to death, and only the women
were left, and these no one would kill. At this Freydis exclaimed :
“Hand me an axe !” This was done, and she fell upon the five women,
and left them dead. They returned home, after this dreadful deed,
and it was very evident that Freydis was well content with her work.
She addressed her companions, saying : “If it be ordained for us, to
come again to Greenland, I shall contrive the death of any man who
shall speak of these events. We must give it out, that we left them living
here, when we came away.” Early in the spring, they equipped the ship,
which had belonged to the brothers, and freighted it with all of the
products of the land, which they could obtain, and which the ship
would carry. Then they put out to sea, and, after a prosperous voyage,
arrived with their ship in Fricsfirth early in the summer. . . .
Freydis now went to her home, since it had remained unharmed
during her absence. She bestowed liberal gifts upon all of her com¬
panions, for she was anxious to screen her guilt. She now established
46 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
herself at her home; but her companions were not all so close-mouthed,
concerning their misdeeds and wickedness, that rumours did not get
abroad at last. These finally reached her brother, Leif, and he thought
it a most shameful story. He thereupon took three of the men, who
had been of Freydis’ party, and their stories entirely agreed. “I have
no heart,” says Leif, “to punish my sister, Freydis, as she deserves,
but this I predict of them, that there is little prosperity in store for
their offspring.” Hence it came to pass, that no one from that time
forward thought them worthy of aught but evil.
§ 12
It is the last note in the explorer’s life of Leif. Speedily,
with the tale of Freydis’s bloody venture, there spread
throughout the hamlets of Greenland and Iceland the
conviction that Wineland was a haunted and evil place, too
distant for hope of succour, terrestrial or celestial, did
misfortune come, over-swarmed year on year ever more
thickly by the hostile Skraelingr—a fat country, but not to
be enjoyed.
It is unlikely that such considerations would have stayed
a further venture on the part of America’s first European
discoverer—that just and large and visioning man who followed
Biarni’s accidental glimpse and attained (as he believed)
the fabled country of Wineland ; who gave up much for the
care and comfort of others but refused to surrender that
Wineland house he had built for his habitation against the
day when he would come to it again and watch the strange
forests climbing saffron into the dawns of Straumoy. . . .
But that further adventure remained a wistful dream, time,
labour and the press of the days forbade the search.
He died at Brattalid in the year 1025, and, though there
is no record of him marrying, a son succeeded him—no other
son than Thorgils, child of that Thorgunna of the Hebrides
with whom he had lived a summer long before while he
waited a wind for Norway. Thorgils crossed the seas to
Greenland and sought out his father ; it is even told that
Thorgunna herself, by then as age went in those days an old
woman, set out in her son’s sea-tracks to reach her lost lover
in Brattalid. But she died at Iceland on the way there (and
was buried “wearing a gold ring and clad in a mantle of
Greenland frieze”) and Leif never saw her again.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 47
They are one with dust and snow now, seeker and sought,
legendary shades perhaps in some eternal Hebridean summer
untroubled by the cry of mysterious seas running west to the
shores of the Fortunate Isles.
§ 13
The tale of the Wineland discoveries was carried abroad
to Iceland by Karlsevne and his wife, the much married
Gudrid, and that son Snorri, the first European born in
America. From there it spread to Norway, and so, we may
believe, to the Europe of the time. When Karlsevne died
Gudrid girded up her widow’s gown and journeyed south
on pilgrimage”—to Rome, it is told, and on the journey no
doubt told much of wild lands in the mythic west. Legend
and fable intermingled itself with the true story of the
explorings and colonizings, but sufficient reached the Mediter¬
ranean to confirm the tales of antiquity, to reinforce the
dreamings of the imaginative cosmographers, to sway very
profoundly indeed the thought of such later earth-conquerors
as Columbus and that Marco Polo whom this record awaits
to set on their travels again.
But the colonizing urge had died out in Greenland itself.
The Northmen there were presently too bitterly engaged
in fresh encounters with the Skraelingr at their own doors
to seek them afar in Wineland. For the Eskimos, the Red
Indian migrations of the Archaic Culture pressing behind
them, trekked up into Greenland again and presently came
in contact with the Norse Western Settlement. Years of trade
and seasonal bickering went on till finally, long after Leif s
bones were set in their mound, the Skraelingr descended on
the Norse settlements in a great raid and despoiled and
destroyed them, carrying captives away into the mists of
Northern Greenland. # .
Before that, indeed, a Greenland Bishop, Bishop Eric
Uppsi, had sailed in search of Wineland in 1121 and never
returned. A long three and a half centuries after Leif a
Greenland ship went down to Markland, and loaded a cargo
of timber, and came back in safety. . . . And the Land-
namabok has a tale of one Are Marsson who set out on yet
another expedition and penetrated far to Great Ireland a
48 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
templed place where white priests with banners “went to
sacrifice with a great noise”. Some have thought this stray
Norseman may have reached Mexico of the time, or perhaps
the Maya New Empire in Yucatan. But these were ventures
and adventures beyond even the half-lights of pseudo-history
that follow the ships of Leif.
Ill
SER MARCO POLO JOURNEYS TO THE
ISLANDS BEYOND CATHAY
§ i
BEYOND the frontiers of Europe of the early thirteenth
century the continent of Asia loomed as a strange
confusion of lands—the harbourage of colourful
myths and terrible beasts and dreadful tribes. Prester John
had his Christian kingdom there ; there lived the roc and the
unicorn and worshippers of idols ; there was gold in great
quantities and spices of great pungency in the rumoured
Spice Lands, the Fortunate Isles; there was wonder and
heathenism, inextricably blended.
That Asia had always had this seeming in European
eyes was by no means the case. The Mediterranean world of
classical times had adventured in Asia and traded with Asia,
consciously and deliberately, through long centuries. India
and Ceylon knew the Roman ships and the galleys of Tyre ;
beyond India itself, as Ptolemy knew, was the dim but certain
geographical land of Seres (which was China) where silk and
the silkworm flourished. At one time and one point the
outposts of the Roman and Chinese Empires had touched
in south-central Asia. Men stared a mistily hostile greeting
one upon the other, the immemorial East and the immemorial
West as the romantic mind would visualize this meeting,
eternally coexistent, eternally different. Alexander’s great
raid into Asia had led to an ebb and flow of cultural custom
and sculptural motif between the southern halves of the two
continents : myth and ritual and philosophical system had
changed and interchanged by land and sea-routes for several
hundred years, Asia and Europe discovering each to the other
for the first time in history, it has been said.
But this second popular belief is as little warranted as
the belief set in the jingle on the eternal differentiation of
East and West. The civilization of the two continents—indeed,
49 D
£0 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
of all continents, of a West much more westernly than Europe,
of an East much more in the sunrise than even Cipangu—had
a common origin. From neither of the two continents had
that civilization originated, but from Africa, the shallow
valley of the Nile. From there, east and west and north,
though but slowly south, that first and earliest civilization
sent far afield those groups of surveyors and colonists who
reared the megalithic circles and devil stones and chambered
barrows around and encircling the world from Spain to the
Yenisei, from the Shetlands to Alaska. These colonists reared
the great civilizations of Crete and the Mesopotamian valleys,
the wonders of Sumer and palaced Knossos. From Sumer it
was that pre-Semite colonists had crossed the roof of the
world into India, in one direction, into the land that was not
yet China, in another, bearing with them the seeds of
agricultural practice and king-worship, religion and class
organization, slavery and culture. From those seeds rose the
great Dravidian states, the kingdoms of the Chinese rivers.
Through long millennia after that first _ bursting oi
civilization upon the pristine world of the primitive, Asiatic,
European, African, an ebb and flow of cultural custom and
trade and treasure flowed to and fro between the sister-
continents. But to a great measure it seems to have passed
anonymously and unnamed. Porcelain and silk and jade came
to the Mediterranean : but out of dim lands that sheltered
behind the name of Asia. And to Asia, as there is now ample
evidence to prove, Europe transmitted not only new motifs
in sculpture and art and weapon-making, but important
intellectual elements of culture which resulted in two of the
world’s great religions.
By 540 b.c., when Thales of Miletus died, a new thing
had come into the world—the envisagement of the world and
all the terrors of life and death and time through individual
eyes and independent reasoning, that development that its
world called philosophy. It was the beginning oi the first
breakdown in the bonds of the ancient fertility religions
which had enslaved the minds of men since the rise of the
first civilization in Egypt. Thales was at first little more
than a single blasphemer, a lonely antagonist of the irrational
gods, the Givers of Life who had dominated humankind for
a long three thousand years. Yet, within the space of a century,
remote from Ionia, and remote one from the other at the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 51
thither side of Asia, two codes or creeds of non-religious
ethic, very similar to Thales’, were abroad in the minds of
men. These were Confucianism and Buddhism, separated
by the great mountain-chain of the Himalayas and the
stretching deserts of China. The seeds of Thales’s rationalism
had been diffused by nameless traders and travellers far from
the Mediterranean into new lands of strange speech and
custom, and earthed and grew and bloomed the strange
flowers and fruits of the philosophies of K’ung-fu-tze and
Sakya Muni.
With the downfall of the Roman Empire, Europe’s
knowledge of Asia had been to a great extent lost or cretinized
under the influence of Christian myth and Christian bar¬
barism. Religious intolerance raised a . febrific barrier of
intellectualist superstition against Asia if it left the trade
routes still open. Yet presently these also were severed with
the coming of Islam, thrusting a new wall of^ arrogance and
mislike across Asia Minor and Syria, shutting in Europe
from her ancient (and still unquenched) curiosities on the
lands beyond the Tigris. Merchants no longer journeyed
freely within the verges of those debatable tracts. The ancient
sea-route to India was lost and forgotten.
But, early in the thirteenth century, there rose out of that
dim Asia, long lost to European knowledge, the rumble
and cry of a great and inexplicable storm. This was the rise
of the Tartar tribes: speedily the coming of the Tartar
invaders.
The great nomadic tribes roaming the fringes of civilization
in Central and Northern Asia had awakened under one of
the world’s great military leaders, Jenghis Khan, and set out
on the conquest of the earth for themselves. Almost they
succeeded. The flimsy Mohammedan states of near Asia
were swept away : the Tartar armies poured across Russia
into Europe. For a little it seemed, in that breathless year a.d.
1242, as though Europe and Asia would be welded together
for all time, fused by the Tartar-Mongol blood and iron into
some magic, impossible world-state. But the centre of the
new Mongol power was remote in Karakorum, on the borders
of China ; it was a military dominance, entirely lacking a
civil service 5 road and route-connections, as we shall have
occasion to note, were fantastically bad over that great stretch
of Central Asia ; and presently Jenghis Khan died. The
52 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Tartars were recalled from Asia, and Europe sighed its relief,
still staring eastward at that world glimpsed for a tantalizing
moment when the blanket of the dark which divided the two
continents had been thrust aside under the impetus of the
Mongol spear.
§ 2
The veil closed down on the rumbling retreat of the
Tartar baggage-waggons. Relieved Europe thought of another
possibility : the horrendous invaders had been merely pagans.
It was a well-known fact that they were indifferent to their
own gods, they were horse-riding rationalists and sceptics,
cheerfully throat-cutting in mosque and church alike. Might
it not be possible to win them to the Christian faith, to win
them as political allies against the Mohammedanism of
Egypt and Saracen Spain ?
So it came that, forerunners of the great Traveller with
whom this record is concerned, two men were despatched
beyond the fringes of that veil into remote Asia in the track
of the Tartars. Commissioned by the Pope to interview the
Great Khan on his sentiments in the matter, the Franciscan
John de Plano Carpini set out on April the 16th, 1245. He
reached Kiev in February of the following year and then
crossed into Siberia. He was in a new land, the Steppe :
In certain places thereof are small store of trees growing but other¬
wise it is altogether destitute of woods. Therefore all warm themselves
and dress their meat with fires made of dung. The air also in that country
is very intemperate. For in the midst of summer there be great thunders
and lightnings, and at the same time there falleth great abundance of
snow . . . there is oftentimes great store of haile also. Likewise in the
summer season there is on the sudden extreme heat and suddenly
again intolerable cold.
He noted of the Mongols:
Their inhabitations be round and cunningly made with wickers
and staves in the manner of a tent. But in the midst of the top thereof
they have a window open to convey; the light in and the smoke out.
For their fire is always in the midst. Their walls be covered with felt.
Their doors are made of felt also. Some of these tabernacles may
quickly be taken asunder, and set together again, and are carried upon
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 53
beasts’ backs. Others some cannot be taken in sunder, but are stowed
upon carts. And whithersoever they go, be it either to war or to any
other place, they transport their tabernacles with them. . . . And
they think they have more horses and mares than all the world beside.
He crossed the Aral-Caspian depression to the basin of
the Syr Darya, thence by the western prolongation of the
Tian Shan mountains through a land
full of mountaines, and in some other places plains and smoothe ground,
but everywhere sandie and barren, neither is the hundredth part thereof
fruiteful. . . . Whereupon they have neither villages nor cities among
them except one which is called Cracurim and is said to be a proper
towne.
But he himself never penetrated to the “proper towne”
of Karakorum. He was halted at Syra Orda for three months,
given the Khan’s reply to the Pope’s letter—a singularly neat
and astounding reply, asking penetratingly discourteous
questions on the warlike behaviour of Christians, the supposed
followers of the prince of peace—and set out again for Europe.
He reached it by almost the same route as he had taken in
his outward passage, and arrived in Kiev on June the 9th,
1247, a little over two years after first setting forth on his
mission.
He is a cold and cool and dispassionate traveller, albeit
his chronicle is filled with personal details of halt and trek
completely missing from those of his great follower. He
penetrated beyond the veil and returned with the report,
and the news of it vanished into obscurity for two hundred
years after his death. He lacked supremely that gift that the
explorer must have in good measure : ardent curiosity. He
brought out of the mysterious lands of Asia a dispassionate
report that the world refused for its very dispassion.
The next of these forerunners was an envoy, despatched
to the same Great Khan in 1252, of Louis IX of France,
engaged at the moment on the Sixth Crusade. This was
William of Rubrick, another ecclesiastic, of a more genial and
ardent disposition than his predecessor of Carpini. Reaching
Sudak in the Crimea from Acre, he engaged carts for the
journey to Karakorum at the thither side of Asia. It was a
doubly rugged journey in consequence. His trail was almost
that of Archbishop John’s, and the sights and sounds of that
54 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
great desolate stretch of Asia were borne to his eyes and ears
in much the same images as to his predecessors. Penetrating
across the country on this northernmost route, these two
travellers indeed missed all that means for us Asia—Persia
and India and China and the rich lands between. But William
especially was a keen and acute traveller : if in Asia he saw
little that added to the information gathered by Johannes,
on the borders of the continent he finally determined that the
Caspian was indeed an inland sea, no branch of the Euxine,
as the geographers of the time held. Also, reaching Karakorum
and interviewing the Great Khan in December of 1253?
he heard rumours of a country still further to the east—
“Great Cathaya, the inhabitants whereof (as I suppose) were
of old time called Seres. For from them are brought most
excellent stuffs of silke.”
So William of Rubrick rediscovered that vanished people
known to the Greeks and the voyageurs of the Roman Empire.
As he turned to ride lurchingly and perspiringly the years-
long journey back to Europe, young Marco Polo, far away
in Venice, was greeting his first glimpse of this world of
wonder and terror with the birth-cry common to all human¬
kind.
§ 3
Two great sea-republics dominated the coasts of Italy
by the middle of the thirteenth century. These two republics
were Venice and Genoa, republican only in that they were
kingless, oligarchies or corporative states as we might call them
in the jargon of our own era. By 1250 Venice was outstripping
her rival in enterprise and wealth alike : she was fast becoming
the strongest and most ruthless power in all the eastern
Mediterranean. She was the great Moloch of Trade, wealth
her aim, her being and her justification. She hired great fleets
and armies to protect her gains or to attack her rivals and
unfriends. Amidst her labyrinthine, walled sea-streets and
towering walls she crouched in the warm, malarial hazes of sum¬
mer and the thin, bright air of her frostless winter, looking
west with cruel, cool eyes at the prizes of the Levant. . . .
Some such picture earlier writers, and of as great an
honesty, found representational enough of the great city
where Marco Polo came into this world of travel and travail
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 55
from the first of all travails. Nor, though we may doubt much
of the personification and personation, is it perhaps a picture
completely false. Venetians were of the common stock of men,
no doubt, kindly and cruel and wayward and homely, no two
alike, patriots and traitors, revolutionists and reactionaries.
Only the shoddy symbolism of nationalism would foist a
definite personification upon those life-warring, life-wandering
multitudes. Yet it seems to have been an especially greedy,
cruel, cowardly, and yet queerly courageous class which
ruled in that mid-century Venice, and, indeed, for long
centuries thereafter. Art was for it gaudy architecture an
floriferous sculpture ; religion was a Name, a fast, a gesture, a
supplication, a horrifying Fear or a comforting Hope : never
a fine distillation of exultant altruism or passionate pity ;
science was bright and young, with the wind of the Mediter¬
ranean in its hair : young, but a moron youth, unchanging
and unprogressing beyond the days of the Ptolemies.
Philosophy was the Medieval synthesis. Men of this class
(and no doubt the subordinate classes of the republic m
lesser measure) turned all their energies to the pursuit of
wealth, to lust after and long for, suffering dreadfully in the
pursuit thereof and causing suffering with complete callous¬
ness to others—because there was nothing dse for them to do.
On the mainland of Europe and Asia of that day
bored among the governing classes turned to war. The
Venetian, with a stable and unmalcontent plebs, turned to
trade. In Venice the patrician was a trader in excelsis m
consequence of being a patrician—not a patrician-plutocrat
in consequence of being a trader. And among those lordly
seekers after the most ancient Giver of Life was one, Andrea
Polo, Nobilis Vir, of the Parish of S. Felice.
This Andrea is a shadowy figure ; indeed, the Polos, as
if foreseeing the undue and unwarrantable curiosities of
later generations, all cultivated the shade. In that state of
obscurity, however, Andrea had fathered three sons, Marco
Nicolo and Maffeo. Marco and Maffeo were old family names :
they had occurred before, and, somewhat confusingly, they
were to occur again. . . ,
Growing up, the three sons appear to have entered with
considerable zest on the common pursuit of their r^c^- ■^iey
traded. They traded up and down the Levant, and beyond,
into the Black Sea, the Ancient Euxine with its turbulent
56 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
tides and its half-known tribes of coast-folk. Marco established
himself as depot-chief in Constantinople—a Constantinople
not yet Turkish but seat of the decadent Byzantines—and
made of himself in the tripartite partnership the static if
not the sleeping partner. His kind go richly robed and bearded
in the Italian pictures of only a little later day : one may
visualize him flat-capped, with a jewelled hand and grave mien
and a notary’s mind as he checked his ledgers and his bonds
and warehouses, and stroked that indubitable beard, gazing
out at night across the Hellespont, his thoughts, uneasy, far
in Asia with those two brothers of his who had vanished into
the unknown wastes of the north-east.
Commercial travellers of their era, Nicolo and Maffeo
had apparently plied their pursuits within fairly normal ranges
until the year 1255. Two years or so before that, Nicolo Polo
was certainly in Venice, lending that minor male assistance
in gestation that was minor even for a Venetian merchant
prince. As a result, and somewhere, it seems, in the year 1254,
his eldest son Marco, destined for so much of wandering and
adventuring, so much of obloquy and so much of praise, was
born. It is said that Marco’s mother died at his birth in the
Ca’ Polo, the dark family house in the Subbiataco above the
Venetian canals. Obstetrics of the time were crude and
pitiless: perhaps when Nicolo looked on his dead wife the
emptiness within him cried for wider wanderings than those
ventures in Near Asia. Perhaps, like many another helpless
male in such circumstances, he looked on the unlucky new¬
comer with no great gratitude, consigned him to the care of
relatives, and returned to Constantinople and a ready enthu¬
siasm for the extended market-plans of his elder brother Marco.
Their latest venture carried them far up the Euxine
to the Crimean Peninsula. Here, in trade in furs and amber
and the like products, they seem to have prospered greatly.
They penetrated a considerable distance inland to the east.
This was Tartar country, under the dominion of governors
left after the withdrawal of the great hordes which had
followed Jenghis Khan.
Suddenly a minor war of considerable intensity broke out
between their base and the country leading back to the Black
Sea. They were cut off from Constantinople. With feelings
that are left unrecorded, they decided that it was hopeless
to make the attempt, and came to an astonishing conclusion :
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 57
to push forward into Asia itself, and carry on trading operations
there.
Their inwards route in that year 1255 must have paralleled
closely the outwards route of William of Rubrick, pantingly
joggled in his cart from distant Karakorum. Perhaps they
actually encountered and exchanged confidences and notes
on routes—a meeting that would account for the later readi¬
ness of the Polo brothers to seek the court of the Great Khan.
Meantime, and with unrecorded travails and difficulties, they
reached the ancient city of Bokhara and took up residence
there. Perhaps they were already trading in jewels. If so,
they found the trade profitable : Bokhara housed them for a
full, if incredible, three years.
The war which disturbed the Black Sea country was long
over, as we know from other histories. But they were either
unaware of the fact, or indifferent to it. The East had them
in thrall—presumably its wealth-getting, not its glamour.
Yet there is good reason to believe they would have speedily
returned to Constantinople but for the arrival of a remarkable
embassy in the city of Bokhara.
This embassy had been despatched by Hulagu, the Tartar
conqueror of Persia and Baghdad, on a mission to his
brother Kublai in far Karakorum. The great Jenghis Khan,
the first overlord of those Mongol hordes which had overrun
all northern Asia, had left five sons, Mangu, Batu, Hulagu,
Kublai, and the indefinite Artigbuga. Mangu had succeeded
to the title of Grand Khan and had despatched Hulagu to the
conquest of Persia and the Moslem kingdoms, Kublai to the
conquest of China. Mangu himself led a part of the Mongol
host against China. In 1258 he died at the siege of Ho-cheu,
in Sechuen, while Kublai was south warring against the
emperor of Song. Now a remarkable event took place. Hulagu,
the brutish conqueror of Baghdad, appears to have been next
in succession—he was an older son than Kublai. But (so the
Chinese historians tell) he despatched an embassy across Asia
to his brother in China, urging Kublai to accept the over¬
lordship of the Mongols. In this unwonted charity and for¬
bearance Hulagu rendered his only service to civilization : he
allowed the ascent to the throne of an incomparably greater
ruler than himself ; and he allowed the passage of the first
European traders to the court of Karakorum.
For Hulagu’s ambassador, encountering the Polo brothers,
58 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
“was gratified in a high degree at meeting and conversing
with these brothers, who had now become proficient in the
Tartar language ; and, after associating with them for several
daps, he proposed to them that they should accompany
him to the presence of the Grand Khan, who would be pleased
by their appearance at his court, which had not hitherto
been visited by any person from their country; adding
assurances that they would be honourably received and
recompensed with many gifts. Convinced as they were that
their endeavours to return homeward would expose them to
the most imminent risks, they agreed to this proposal, and,
recommending themselves to the protection of the Almighty,
they set out on their journey in the suite of the Ambassador,
attended by several Christian servants whom they had brought
with them from Venice. The course they took at first was
between the north-east and north, and an entire year was
consumed before they were enabled to reach the imperial
residence in consequence of the extraordinary delays occasioned
by the snows and the swelling of the rivers, which obliged
them to halt until the former had melted and the latter
had subsided. Many things worthy of admiration were
observed by them in the progress of their journey, but which
are here omitted, as they will be described by Marco Polo
in the sequel of the book.”
§4
In April of the year 1269 the Papal Legate in Acre,
on the coast of Palestine, one M. Tebaldo de’ Vesconti di
Piacenza, received word that two merchants desired an
audience with him. He seems to have been a gracious and
worldly and courteous man, and possibly stared only a mild
surprise at the appearance of the merchants. They were clad
in half-Tartar robes, their faces were browned with alien
suns, their Italian was a slow and halting speech. They gave
their names as Nicolo and Maffeo Polo, and told him how it
was fourteen years since they had set foot in a Christian
town.
Of those fourteen years there have come down to our time
only the tiniest scraps of record. They had reached the court
of the Grand Khan in the company of Hulagu’s ambassador,
and Kublai (as we know from other sources) had then had
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 59
himself crowned emperor, and in some stretch of the subse¬
quent ten years had granted several audiences to the Venetians.
With his character the son of Nicolo will deal: but the
Chinese annals describe him as inquisitive and restless, mentally
as physically. He had never before seen those strange fauna,
the Europeans, but he had a considerable interest in them.
He questioned the Polos closely on their kings and countries,
their methods of war and their habits in peace, and finally
came to a decision: he would send an embassy to the
Pope in Rome, asking for a hundred Christian missionaries to
come and expound to his people the Christian faith.
This conduct was to be emulated by a later emperor
of China, who welcomed impartially Nestorians and Buddhists
and Moslems. It is probable that Kublai had only a mild and
passing interest in the subject. But while the whim was
upon him, he pursued it with energy. He appointed a Tartar
envoy, Khogatal, to accompany the Polo brothers to Rome
and despatched them across the wilds of Asia, protected by
his Grand Seal.
So protected, bearded like the pard, with perhaps little
gain in wealth from their eleven or twelve years’ absence in
Asia, the Polo brothers had taken the long road back to Europe.
On that road Khogatal had fallen ill and had been left behind,
and thereafter, indeed, vanished from the tale. The two
brothers had pushed on through long months of the usual
difficulties: swollen rivers and impassable swamps and deserts
where the tracks were lost and their feet failed them. So
journeying through an incredibly tedious three years, they
had at length reached a seaport in Lesser Armenia, and from
thence had made their way here, to the audience of the Papal
Legate.
The Pope ?
But the Pope in Rome, Clement IV, had died six months
before their arrival in Acre. The Acre Legate considered the
matter, and gave them his advice. The best thing they could
do was to see to their own affairs, awaiting meanwhile the
election of a new pope by the council of cardinals.
Nicolo and Maffeo took ship to Negropont and thence
to Venice. Of their reception there there is no record, nor
of the fortunes of the elder Marco, abandoned all these years
in Constantinople. But they found Nicolo’s son, young
Marco, a “young gallant”—which may mean much or little.
60 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Boys matured rapidly in that age and city. No doubt there
was much feasting and rejoicing, and, within the family-circle
at least, much story-telling. They had ample time in which
to indulge in these refreshments. The election of a new
Pope delayed scandalously : there were plots, intrigues, and
cabals innumerable in the Sacred College—a state of affairs
which might have greatly interested Kublai remote in China
awaiting his hundred Christian missionaries. Nicolo and
Maffeo grew impatient and apprehensive : The Grand Khan
might suspect they had no intention of returning, and all
their hopes of ultimately winning out of Asia a great treasure
would be lost for ever. Minus the hundred missionaries,
but with a gift of oil from the lamp which burned eternally
in the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, they determined to
depart for China without further delay—they had already
delayed two years—taking young Marco with them.
In such fashion was Marco Polo launched on the quest
that was to be his life—the quest of the Golden Ruler,
Kublai Khan : a quest successful, fulfilled, and yet never
ended.
It was 1271. They set out from Venice for Acre, journeyed
up to Jerusalem, obtained a gift of the Holy Oil, and set
sail for the port of Laiassus in the Black Sea—a port in the
kingdom of Armenia. There, while they waited to equip
a caravan, a message reached them from their friend Tebaldo
of Piacenza in Acre. He himself had been elected Pope :
they were to return at once to Acre and receive from his
hands despatches for the Grand Khan of the Tartars in
distant Cathay.
§5
Towards the end of the year 1271 or the beginning of
1272 the three Polos, much-harried from pillar to post,
recommenced their journey from Acre. They carried with
them the Papal letters and “several handsome crystalline
vases” as presents to the Grand Khan ; companioning them
went, instead of the hundred Christian missionaries requested,
two friars of the Order of Preachers to whom had been given
authority to ordain priests and consecrate bishops. Probably
they had various servants and retainers with them as well,
but note of them is omitted from the tale of the youngerMarco.
6i
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
For it is now his tale. Before his journeying we have done
no more than peer through a vague mist at those distant
lands |that haunted !the fringe of the consciousness of
Europe. Now, eschewing personal memoir except where it
was essential, Marco seems to have set about recording on
the tablets of his mind everything of importance or startling
appearance or rumour in the lands through which they passed.
They came again to the port of Laiassus in Armenia—•
in Armenia Minor. It was ruled by a Christian prince, given
to the “administering of strict justice”, but unfortunately
greatly harried by the heathen. The heathen in question
were the Moslem under Bibars, the Mameluke Sultan of
Egypt. As the three Polos and the two friars reached Laiassus
rumours of the raiding depredations of the “Babylonians”
filled the air, and the friars who had set out to consecrate
bishops and ordain priests in far Cathay took fright at this
very portal to their journey. They handed over the Papal
letters to the Polos, wished them God-speed, and placed
themselves under the protection of a band of Knight Templars
in Layas. The Polos were probably staggered enough at this
conduct. But, having come so far themselves in other years
through situations far worse than the present, they determined
to hold on their journey un-friar’ed.
They held through the Armenia which we call Anatolia,
a land of “degenerate gentry” and busy ports, till they
emerged into the northwards region of Turcomania. This
had been conquered and partly settled by a southwards
overflow of the Tartars, “a rude people, and dull of intellect ’
who had become Mohammedans. Pushing onwards, past
Casaria and Sivas, they reached the city of Arzingan in
Greater Armenia. No Armenians ruled here. The country
was under the domination of the Tartars. Here it was that
the Polos discerned Ararat’s cloudy summits, on which the
Ark had rested. They were suitably impressed at sight of
this mythic mountain made visible. On the summit of it,
according to Marco, the snows never melted, but went on
“increasing by each successive fall”. At what rate of progress
the summit would finally vanish entirely into the heavens
he did not stop to calculate. Instead, he noted “near Zorzania”
a great oil fountain which discharged unceasingly an oil good
as both an unguent and for purposes of burning. This is
geography’s first mention of the oil-wells of Baku.
62 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
But it is improbable that they penetrated up into Georgia,
though they heard many tales of that land. They turned,
unaccountably, to the south-east, following the course of
the Tigris to Bandas, through the province of Mosul, which
they found in that age inhabited by a medley of races and
faiths, noting particularly the Christian Nestorian sect. The
Nestorians, says Marco, even sent missionaries as far afield
as India. En route, they heard also of the Kurds, then, as
now, an “unprincipled race, whose occupation is to rob the
merchants”. This variation upon the custom of taking in one
another’s washing lingered in Marco’s mind.
They came to Baghdad, and perhaps halted there for
a while, savouring the best of possible routes to take in their
journey to the Grand Khan’s court. Here Marco heard
the tale of the miserable end of the last of the Abbasite
khalifs at the hands of Hulagu twelve years or so before.
The khalif had been an oppressor of the Christians, and Marco
solemnly ascribed his horrible death to the instigation of
“Our Lord Jesus Christ”.
The Polos seemed to have decided here to journey down
to Ormuz in the Persian Gulf and from there take ship to
distant China. They held south-east through Persian Irak,
halting at Tabriz, which manufactured sloth of gold and
traded in precious stones and pearls. Marco gathered no good
opinions of the Mohammedan section of the population, but
an excellent opinion of their Tartar overlords, who restrained
the common Mohammedan desire to hamstring the straying
Christian. Passing onwards, down through Persia proper,
they heard of the city of Saba, from which the Three Wise
Men journeyed to Bethlehem at the birth of Christ. The tale
had become inextricably mixed with lingering doctrines of
Zoroastrianism: there were cities where the Parsees still
pursued their ancient faith. Persia bred excellent horses, as
Marco noted and afterwards specified in detail, as well as
asses which sold at even higher prices than horses. The roads
were unsafe, the “savage inhabitants making a common
practice of wounding and murdering each other”. This genial
custom Marco notes (gratefully) had been strongly restrained
by the Tartars. We may suppose that large parts of the country
were overrun by bands of hopeless and desperate men whom
the Tartar invasion had ruined. Marco had no sympathy
for them, they impeded his road to Cathay.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 63
Mohammedans, he found, evaded the prohibition against
wine in an ingenious manner. They boiled the wine, and then
regarded it as forbidden no longer. For it had a different
taste, a different appearance, and therefore could not be
wine ! Southwards, through a land of date-palms and wild
asses, the travellers came to Kerman, where turquoises were
found, and much fine needlework made. In the mountains
they bred the “best falcons that anywhere take wing”.
They went southwards through the mountains, making
the Persian Gulf, and suffering greatly from the cold, against
which young Marco found it difficult to defend himself
even with the aid of “many pelisses”. No doubt the thinner
blood of his father and uncle suffered even worse.
But beyond the mountains, in the plain, they found
themselves in the granary of Persia, a rich land of wheat and
rice and fruits, the air a-whirr with pheasants and francolins.
Here Marco saw his first humped cattle and heavy-tailed sheep.
It was a land vexed by robbers and with tales of the greatest
of them all, a Mongol Nikodar Khan who had raised a great
army of desperate men and descended on India, conquering
Delhi. Settled there, Nikodar and his companions had inter¬
married with the dark-skinned Indians with great speed and
fecundity, producing in a generation (if the real historical
facts, unknown to Marco, had been to hand, it would have
shown as in about a third of a generation !) a race of browny
half-breeds, the Karaunas. These Karaunas, robbers like their
fathers, spread back into Persia in wandering bands, and,
by means of diabolic arts acquired in India, “could produce
darkness and obscure the light of day”. This is the first mention
of gas-warfare : no doubt the hooves of the raiders’ horses
at sunrise or sunset were the dei ex machina.
They were nearing Ormuz. But the Karaunas were
active, slave-raiding and cattle-stealing on the plains beyond
the city where the Ormuz merchants grazed their mounts.
The three Polos found themselves in the midst of a raid—
they would seem to have been travelling in company with
other pilgrims. Various of their companions were killed
and others dragged off as slaves. Marco and his father and
uncle escaped to a near-by fortress. Perhaps some of the
Venetian servants perished here : perhaps this was Marco’s
introduction to terror and war. But, youth though he was,
he seems to have been little disturbed.
64 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Through a dangerous road where robbers still swarmed,
they descended for two days’ journey till they came to the
ancient port of Ormuz itself. They were in the East of fable
and fact, in that hot, dusty town on the shores of the Persian
Gulf—a port “frequented by traders from all parts of India,
who bring spices and drugs, precious stones, pearls, gold
tissues, elephants’ teeth, and various other articles of
merchandise. These they dispose of to different sets of
traders by whom they are dispersed throughout the world.”
Here Marco heard of the sirocco which blew with such dread
effects on respiration and trade in the summer months the
inhabitants, he tells us, would make for the water when the
sirocco came, immersing themselves to the chin, and
“continuing in that situation until it ceases to blow . It was
an altogether dreadful wind : it blew while the Polos them¬
selves were in Ormuz. The richer inhabitants retreated to the
mainland, seeking coolness there. Meantime, the ruler of
Ormuz had neglected to pay his annual tribute to his overlord
in Kerman. Kerman despatched an expeditionary force. It
slept a night on the verge of a grove of trees verging these
hellish lowlands, and recommenced its march in the morning
in ignorance that this was the sirocco’s hour. The entire army
was suffocated by the sand-wind. Marco himself, it seems,
went out and inspected the dried-up, desiccated bodies, a
tale of wonder and horror, a second Sennacherib’s army that
had perished in the breath of God.
§6
Inspecting the ships at Ormuz, the Polos found them
of deplorable quality, “exposing the merchants and others
who make use of them to great risks”. They were built without
nails and had no anchors. Despite the rigours of their previous
overland journeyings, Nicolo and Maffeo agreed that the
land-route would be better than to entrust themselves and
their “young gallant” to these unchancy craft.
They turned north again, reaching Kerman by a different
route and holding towards the borders of the land that we
now call Afghanistan. It was a land of plenty again, on this
new route to Kerman. But beyond Kerman was a great
desert, where the springs met with in the first three days
VENICE
JOURNEYS OF MARCO POLO
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 65
journeying were unbearably brackish. They were worse:
“Should even a drop of this water be swallowed, frequent
calls of nature will be occasioned.” They won beyond these
inhospitable tracts, travelling at great haste on horseback, and
reached the town of Khubeis, beyond the Lut Desert. They
were expert metal-workers in Khubeis, Marco notes, ere
belting himself for a further stretch of desert, north-north¬
eastward through Khorassan. Here was another desert of
eight days’ journey : beyond it, they came to the region
of Damaghan, the ancient Hecatompylos, where Alexander
had pursued the flying Persian king fifteen hundred years
before.
There were still rumours of that flight and battle among
the inhabitants, Marco tells. Relation of that rumour and a
description of a marvellous plane-tree in that region which
modern botany has failed to segregate complete his account
of Damaghan, except that he found its men handsome and
its women, in his opinion, “the most beautiful in the world”.
The speculative historian wonders, pondering that strictly
impersonal chronicle, what this phrase covers. Was Marco as
objective as usual, or did the “young gallant” lose his heart
in Damaghan ?
He seems to have occupied himself but a short time in
the process, if at all. Recounting the tale of that Satanic
malcontent, the Old Man of the Mountains who had proved
so antipathetic to Moslem and Mongol alike, he and his father
and uncle appear to have held by an almost eastwards course,
through Jan-Jerm and Nishapur towards Balkh, in what is
now northern Afghanistan. In this region of Khorassan they
came upon a fresh desert, fortunately of no great extent:
beyond it, and refreshingly, the country was a notable one
in the production of large and succulent melons. Marco
noted them with care and impressiveness in his mental tablets,
and probably sampled them in like manner in a physical
way.
So, at last, to Balkh, the ancient Bactria Regia of classical
times. But it had lost its glories only a few years previously
at the hands of Jenghis Khan, who in 1221 had ordered its
inhabitants to be massacred and its walls to be razed.
Probably there were no more than a few families of squatters
in that “most ancient town in the world”.
The surrounding country swarmed with bandits and broken
E
66 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
soldiery. There were great lions in the hills to the north of
the city. Pushing eastwards through a starving country, the
Polos carried provisions to see them beyond the range of hills,
and in two days reached the “castle” of Taikan. It was a
great corn-market, a town embowered in salt hills. The
inhabitants of Taikan Marco found bloodthirsty and
treacherous wild men, clad in the skins of wild animals,
forerunners of the modern Afghan. Beyond Taikan came a
land of scattered forts and waste plains where Marco tells
that the porcupines—beasts of peculiar size and ferocity—had
the habit, when hunters set their dogs at them, of “with
great fury shooting out the quills or spines with which their
skins are furnished, wounding both men and dogs”. Probably
the Polos themselves made no researches into these artillery
practices. They came to a new tundra-waste, overshadowed by
the Pamirs. Three days travelling through it brought them
to the land of Badakshan.
In Badakshan, remote in the heart of Asia, Marco found
a king who claimed descent from Alexander the Great. He
had even the title zuVKarnein (the horned one)—the title
which the Eastern folk had bestowed on Alexander fifteen
hundred years before on account of the horns of Ammon
displayed on the Macedonian’s coins. The hills were reputed
to be filled with precious stones; the valleys bred good horses ;
the men were fine sportsmen ; the air on the mountain-tops
pure and salubrious.
Marco approved of this genial land. The Polos seem
to have made some little halt here. The young gallant was
suitably intrigued by the dress worn by the women of the
upper class—trousers made as wide as possible in order to
exaggerate the actual size of the hips. Decorative steatopygy
was something new to the young Venetian.
Here, in Badakshan, Marco heard of various states and
towns southwards, in India, across the Hindu Kush—of
Peshawur, where the inhabitants were of evil disposition,
worshipped idols, ate rice, and in other ways misconducted
themselves ; Kashmir, also filled with devil-worshippers and
magicians. Most of these accounts were gathered from the
prejudiced mountaineers of Badakshan, Mohammedans to
a man. But the account of Buddhist monks we know to be
substantially true, as is the record of the food and drink and
dress of those distant Indian communities.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 67
How long the three travellers and their retainers halted
in Badakhshan it is impossible to sap. Perhaps they waited for
the melting of the snows in the upland passes of the Pamirs.
Perhaps it was on this occasion that Marco fell ill and was
nursed to health again in those salubrious upland slopes.
But that incident seems to belong to his future.
They set out at length, north-eastward through the
passes of Pamir, “ascending mountain after mountain”. On
the high plateau of the Roof of the World they saw no birds
and Marco noted how on these heights fires gave less heat and
water took long to boil. There were no inhabitants to be
met with for great distances in a land of snow and skyey
crags. The Polos went laden with great quantities of provisions
and doubtlessly wrapped warmly in winter robes purchased
in Badakshan. Even so, it must have been a more than trying
journey for those folk from the genial Mediterranean.
But at length, crossing the Kisil Mart, they reached
the great city of Kashgar and a genial climate again. They
passed through great cotton-fields in this land, flourishing
plantations of flax and hemp. As usual, only man was vile—
the Kashgari a “covetous, sordid race”. Samarcand lay
remotely in the west and Marco, either now or on a later
journey actually visiting it, stops to give details of that great
emporium of the East. They are scanty enough, being mostly
devoted to the fable that Zagatai, one of the sons of Jenghis
Khan, had there embraced Christianity, and, to prove his
new and meek spirit, no doubt, robbed a Mohammedan
mosque for a column with which to build a Christian church.
Marco greatly approved of Zagatai.
Probably the travellers held some debate as to what
route they would now take to reach the court of the Grand
Khan in China. At length they turned south-eastwards,
towards Khotan, and appear to have reached that city and
halted there, in the midst of a prosperous and fertile land
“where the inhabitants were not good soldiers”, awaiting
the gathering of a caravan to cross the Takla Makan desert,
in pursuit of the still-distant court of Kublai.
§7
North-eastwards from Khotan lay two great desert
stretches to be traversed ere the travellers could reach Peking :
68 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
the nearer and smaller, that of the Takla Makan, the further,
that of Gobi. It is unlikely that it will ever be settled what
exact route they took, or whether the description applied by
Marco to the desert of Lop should mean the small Takla
Maran or the Great Shamo itself. The description of the
desert crossing is itself vivid enough. A month was required
for crossing this great waste, travelling from brackish water-
hole to water-hole. Neither beasts nor birds were met with,
“because there is no kind of food for them”. It was an abode
of evil spirits, prone to amuse travellers to their destruction.
The Polos appear, nevertheless, to have crossed it without
mishap. Perhaps at Khotan they had been met by envoys of
the Grand Khan, sent to help them on their journey—for
news of their approach throughout the last three years appears
to have travelled far to China.
They reached Su-cheu, where abominable burial customs
were observed, and probably halted there, refreshing them¬
selves with food and water after their desert crossing, and
also with gossip on the life and customs of the surrounding
provinces. In Khamil the hospitable host, Marco heard, was
in the habit of handing over his womenfolk to the entertain¬
ment of the casual stranger ; in Chen-chen they mined an
astounding substance “of the nature of the salamander, for
when woven into cloth, and thrown into the fire, it remains
incombustible”. This is one of the earliest European mentions
of asbestos; of the district of “Tanguth” (now impossible to
identify with any certainty) “where the most excellent kind
of rhubarb is produced” ; of Kan-cheu, with its gigantic
statues to the Buddha.
Reaching Kan-cheu, Marco and his father and uncle
were detained there the space of a full year. In that narrative
filled with great time-periods, with journeys of three and
four years’ duration, with casual visits which developed into
stays of fourteen years or so, with voyages lasting an unhasting
twenty-four months, this is one of the most remarkable
entries. But Marco dismisses it as being on account of the
fact that “the state of their concerns rendered it necessary”.
Possibly they were detained while news of their coming
was forwarded to Kublai and his instructions awaited. If so,
it appears to have been the only spot in the whole of the
gigantic Mongol Empire in which their passage was stayed
by authority.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 69
Thereafter the route followed by the travellers till they
did verily arrive at the Grand Khan’s court at Peking is
extremely doubtful. Marco’s record is filled with details of
the life and customs of the people of China and Mongolia,
but that he then adventured up into those northern regions
is unthinkable. It seems most probable that the three
Venetians turned south-east again, crossed the Hoang-ho,
and arrived at the city of Si-ning, whence they took the great
Tibet-Peking road. It was a land of gigantic wild cattle, the
yak of Thibet, and Marco was so impressed with the quality
of the hair of those beasts that he purchased some of it, and,
long years afterwards, carried it home to Venice. The
inhabitants of Shen-si were in a mixed proportion “idolaters”
(Buddhists or Confucians), Mohammedans and Christians—
strayed Christians of strayed Nestorian sects. In the north
there still lingered the tradition of Prester John, that Christian
Emperor of bloated fantasy and attenuated fact. Marco and
his companions appear to have actually passed through a great
stretch of Christian territory over-ruled by a direct descendant
of Prester John.
Now at length they were drawing near Kublai’s residence
—apparently not Peking, but the city of Chang-tou, where
the Grand Khan had recently erected a handsome palace.
Messengers came to hasten their approach, and the much
travailled travellers who had crossed half a world at length
attained to the imperial presence. We should like to know
more of this meeting than the scanty notes that Marco has
left on the subject : we should like to know his feelings when
he stared at last at this human fulfilment of a dream.
Upon their arrival they were honourably and graciously received
by the Grand Khan, in a full assembly of his principal officers. When
they drew nigh to his person they paid their respects by prostrating
themselves on the floor. He immediately commanded them to rise,
and relate to him the circumstances of their travels, with all that had
taken place in their negotiation with his holiness the Pope. To their
narrative, which they gave in the regular order of events, and delivered
in perspicuous language, he listened with attentive silence. The letters
and presents from Pope Gregory were then laid before him, and,
upon hearing the former read, he bestowed much commendation on
the fidelity, the zeal, and the diligence of his ambassadors; and,
receiving with due reverence the oil from the holy sepulchre, he gave
directions that it should be preserved with religious care. Upon his
70 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
observing Marco Polo, and inquiring who he was, Nicolo made answer,
“This is your servant and my son” ; upon which the Grand Khan
replied, “He is welcome, and it pleases me much,” and he caused him
to be enrolled amongst his attendants of honour. And on account of
their return he made a great feast and rejoicing ; and as long as the
said brothers and Marco remained in the court of the Grand Khan,
they were honoured even above his own courtiers.
§8
That stay was of sufficient duration. Four thousand miles
from Europe, every Spring the winds came down from
Mongolia blowing fresh the sap in the young tree-shoots
around Peking ; Summers brought their intense heats upon
the crowded Chinese lands, Autumns their harvesting and the
great desert winds, Winters their shivering snows against the
damascened palace walls. And for seventeen years, journeying
hither and yon, on this and that mission of the Grand Khan’s,
the young Venetian Marco lived a life such as no European
had ever thought possible. Sometimes, it is plain, all thought
of ever returning to the familiar sight and smell of Christian
countries faded from his mind. They were no more than a
dream fringing the horizons of his nights—his nights when
he lay down to rest from his toil on this and that business of
his master.
With insatiable curiosity he gathered details of all that
life surrounding him and the places into which he travelled,
reconstructing, faultlessly enough in general, that medieval
life of China and Indo-China. Often he himself did not
visit the lands he described, and they lie outside the scope of
this record.
But he himself, with unwearying feet, seems to traverse
the greater part of Further Asia.
A favourite of Kublai’s from the beginning he early
learned (so his chronicle relates) “the manners of the Tartars,
and acquired a proficiency in four different languages, which
he became qualified to read and write”. It has been greatly
debated whether one of those languages was Chinese—and
that language in particular denied the traveller because of
its almost insuperable difficulties for the foreigner. But there
is little reason to suppose that Marco, himself sent to govern
a Chinese city, did not know the language of those he
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 71
governed. He was in the springtime of his life and athirst for
knowledge of all kinds.
Apparently his courtier-like protestations of willingness
to serve were put to test by Kublai in a drastic fashion within
a year or so of the young Venetian’s arrival in Peking. He was
despatched on a diplomatic mission to a region, Karazan,
which is undoubtedly the Khorassan of modern geographers.
He and his father and uncle had passed through this land in
the course of their toilsome journey east—it ^ lay remotely
away in the west from China, a province of Persia.
If his heart failed him when that order was given, he makes
no record of the fact, nor, indeed, any record at all of his
journey thither. He went uncompanioned by the elder Polos .
they pursued merchants’ activities in and around the capital city.
Six months journey over the routes already traversed
brought him to those Afghan heights where the air was so
salubrious 5 and, here on his mission, Marco s health broke
down and he abode a long year in those upland heights,
recovering from his travels and noting ingenuously and
undiscriminately everything of interest about him and
above him and below him : he gathered tales of far countries
and their peoples and manners, not only it seems for his own
delectation, but for that of the Grand Khan, Kublai, a
wonder-loving man. . . .
Returning from this mission, Marco seems to have joined
with his uncle and father in aiding Kublai in one of his war¬
like enterprises. This was the reduction of the Chinese city of
Siang-yang (in the modern Hu-Kuang) which, after the
conquest of the surrounding country by the Mongols, still
held out obstinately. It held out, Marco tells, for a full
three years, and uwhen the operations were reported to his
majesty, he felt extremely hurt that this place alone should
obstinately hold out, after all the rest of the country had been
reduced to obedience”. The wording is unintentionally
humorous. The Polos appear to have conferred on the matter,
and then approached Kublai and proposed the erection. of
great mangonels with which to bombard the recalcitrant city
“by which the buildings might be destroyed and the in¬
habitants killed”. This remarkable example of Western culture
won the Grand Khan’s instant interest. Nestorian mechanics
laboured under the direction of the Venetians, and in a few
days had the infernal machines completed. They were tried
72 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
out in the presence of the Grand Khan, approved, and shipped
south against Siang-yang. Siang-yang surrendered after the
first bombardment, and the credit of the Polos was raised
accordingly.
Perhaps it was in return for this aid that Kublai appointed
Marco governor of the city of Yang-cheu-fu—a locum tenens
only, though a satisfactory one. In this city of idolaters and
the makers of warlike instruments, Marco appears to have
ruled with considerable discretion and success. But at the
end of two years he was again recalled to Kublai’s court
and employed thereafter as a kind of envoy-at-large to distant
provinces of that great sprawling anomalous thing, the
Mongol Empire. He travelled far up the windings of the
Yang-Tse-Kiang, which he computed the greatest river in
the world. It was filled with shipping and active commerce,
its banks crowded with rich cities. Seawards, in Kiu-Kiang
of Kiang-si, Marco saw not fewer than “fifteen thousand
vessels”—armadas undreamt of in Europe of that far Mediter¬
ranean he might never see again. In the city of Hang-cheu,
diligently note-taking (it is the first time that he mentions his
tablets) he found a second Venice, peopled by Buddhists who
delighted in the arts and “looked upon soldiers and the
profession of arms with a contemptuous disgust”. They were
among the most surprising phenomena observed by the
ingenuous Marco, not excepting the magnificent residence
of the last true Chinese Emperor, over which he was personally
conducted by one of that lost monarch’s servants.
He was not always free from bias nor (outside personal
observations) easily ungullible. He records that the inhabitants
of Fokien were cannibals—a statement of such staggering
audacity as most modern commentators must pass over in
silence, for the inhabitants of Fokien were among the most
highly civilized of the ancient Chinese. His constant assertions
that the people of this, that, and the next province were
“savage and inhuman” becomes wearisome even in the midst
of its naivety : for in a subsequent paragraph or so he will
go on to describe some atrocity of the Mongol troops with
complacent commendation. He was Kublai’s man, a naturalized
Mongol, and Indians, Islanders and Chinese he regarded with
cautious Tartar eyes. He lived before or beyond the days of
democracy and the democratic vision : it was natural for him
to see the peoples of every land as but the playthings, the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 73
chessmen on the boards, for the operations of their kings and
rulers; even so, there is surfeit of Eastern adulation of royalty
and the royal act.
His lengthy descriptions of the court of Kublai have the
fatuous irrelevance and nonsensical admiration-cry of a Mid-
West child in Versailles. The reader misses the Marco of
those earlier years voyaging down through Persia and across
the Pamirs : it is almost, despite the impersonality of the
record, as though we saw the callow and pleasant youth change
slowly before our eyes, in those lush Chinese scenes, into
the typical adventurer of his era—typical in all but his intelli¬
gence and his intense geographical curiosities, his faith in the
Golden Ruler he had attained.
Frequently the mistakes he makes in his narrative suggest
an imperfect acquaintance with the tongue of his particular
informant of the moment. It is doubtful if he ever visited
Amoy. Now, Amoy was noted for its artists, its portrait-
painters. But in Marco’s record these appear as tattooists—
he tells that travellers came by sea from as far afield as India
to have their skins tattooed by the craftsmen of Amoy. They
came, we need hardly doubt, to have their portraits painted.
He was probably present at Kublai’s port when the great
and disastrous Mongol armada was launched against Cipangu
(Japan), under the command of a Chinese and a Mongol
General. The Generals fell out en route to the island, and
much confusion resulted in the invasion. The first city cap¬
tured, says Marco, was put to the sword : decapitation was
the sentence pronounced upon the entire population, and
carried out in all but the case of eight magicians, who had
protected themselves with amulets and whom iron was in¬
capable of either killing or wounding. Discovering this, the
crafty Mongols beat them to death with a heavy wooden
club ! . . . His further account of that invasion is much
mixed with fable, yet tallies with the Japanese records in
agreeing as to the complete failure of the enterprise. The
Mongols were routed and enslaved, their generals escaping
back to China and there being executed by order of the
enraged Kublai. As a result, the young Venetian looked upon
the Japanese with no favour, and records that their diabolical
behaviour was unprintable ; also, as usual, they indulged in
banquets of human flesh. . . .
Year after year went by on this mission and that for the
74 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Grand Khan ; the elder Polos are dim figures in the back¬
ground—ghosts assiduously collecting gold. But for a chance
of marriage and intrigue that presently arose it is probable
that Marco, at least, would never have returned to Europe
to amuse and instruct it with the tales of his golden pages and
his gilded wanderings.
§9
In the last of those wanderings in Kublai’s service, Marco
appears to have been despatched on a voyage “with a few
vessels under his orders”, to some parts of the East Indies.
Probably it was a voyage to Cochin-China and Annam, round
to India, for debate and demand with some misty Hindu
monarchs, and returning by way of the Philippines. He was
probably the first European for fifteen hundred years to
travel those seas that for Europe had neither existence nor
rumour of existence, it is even possible, in some misfortune
of wind and water, that he visited or sighted the Celebes
and Moluccas, island groups unremote from Australia. In
Cambodia, recently become tributary to the Grand Khan,
he gathered that “no young woman could be given in
marriage, until she had been first proved by the king”. This
over-worked monarch, when Marco saw him, had three hun¬
dred and twenty-six children. . . . We may long for news of
other than these amorous activities, the great art and religious
efflorescence of Cambodia at that time, some note of that
civilizing influence that Cambodia sprayed eastwards and
southwards and at last to the coast of the Americas. But
beyond elephants and illegitimates, Marco’s record finds
that “no other circumstance requires particular mention”.
He heard also on this voyage of Java and Borneo, though
he mixed them and their products together, ascribing much
gold to a Java that produces little or nothing of the metal.
Presently, also, he heard the tale of the rich province of
“Locha” which remains still unidentified. It may have been
southern Cambodia—or, strange strayings of distant geogra¬
phical data—it may even have been distant Papua. Most
probable of all, it was the Fortunate Isle.
For, the first of our kind so to adventure, he had reached
a region which trade and legend alike were later to credit
with fantastic wealth and fantastic wisdom, islands of gold
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 75
and spice and glamour, the bournes of all The Life
Givers. He was to come again to those islands ; and strangest
of searchers for the quest of this record, to tell nothing of the
excitement he felt—surely he felt!
However that be, he returned from this mission at a time
when the elder Polos seem to have wearied exceedingly of
their enforced exile in those alien lands. Age was upon them,
and they saw the same on the face and hair of the Grand
Khan Kublai. They saw also, as all the Mongol Empire, watch¬
ing, saw, that with the Grand Khan’s death a wild confusion
would fall upon his empire—a confusion in which his successor
might have little time or inclination for protection of the pale-
faced aliens from Europe. We may even suspect that they
were not greatly loved among the Mongols and Chinese,
those aliens whose sole gifts to China had consisted of
mangonels out-tartaring the Tartar.
Nicolo Polo accordingly took an opportunity one day, when .he
observed the Grand Khan to be more than usually cheerful, of throwing
himself at his feet and soliciting on behalf of himself and his family
to be indulged with his majesty’s gracious permission for their, depar¬
ture. But, far from showing himself disposed to comply with the
request, he appeared hurt at the application, and asked what motive
they could have for wishing to expose themselves to all the incon¬
veniences and hazards of a journey in which they might probably lose
their lives. If gain, he said, was their object, he was ready to give them
the double of whatever they possessed, and to gratify them with
honours to the extent of their desires; but that, .from the regard he
bore to them, he must positively refuse their petition.
Here spoke the typical senile autocrat. That wealth and
honours were barren things for men to expend and enjoy
outside the range of their own country, with those sweetest
of sauces, the applause and amazement of neighbours, was
beyond his understanding. And the Polos seem to have
shirked the explanation—very warrantably, for the Grand
Khan’s favour was a thing uncertain enough : behind that
glitter of palace and court there is throughout Marco’s pages
a perpetual smell of the shambles and the torture-room.. But
fortunately an incident in the policy of Mongol inter¬
marriage was to provide them their release.
Arghun-Khan, the grandson of Hulagu, that excessively
sanguinary Mongol soldier, had newly succeeded to the
throne of Persia. A widower, he desired a wife from the
76 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
family of the Grand Khan and despatched a mission, toil¬
somely, across Asia to China to ask for the hand of a Mongol
princess. Kublai chose one of his innumerable progeny, the
Lady Kutai, handed her over to the envoys, and allowed them
to depart on the long homeward route to Persia. It proved
more than lengthy. Eight months’ slow travelling, princess¬
laden, they found themselves still remote from the borders
of Persia. Transoxiana was in a ferment, warring Mongol
princelet warring on warring Mongol princelet. The envoys
turned about and retraced yet again their weary steps to the
court of Kublai. The Lady Kutai remains a shadowy, if doubt¬
lessly perspiringly travel-worn, figure throughout the history.
The re-arrival of the Persians coincided with Marco’s
return from his voyagings in the East Indies. Marco reported
most of his travels in an open audience to the Grand Khan,
stressing particularly the safety of navigation in those distant
and barbarous seas. The Persian envoys heard and pondered.
Presently they entered on a discreet intrigue with the Polos.
They would petition the Grand Khan to allow them and the
Lady Kutai to proceed to Persia by sea, if the lolos would
accompany them. Then, beyond the immediate jurisdiction
of Kublai, the Polos, having conveyed the Persians to Ormuz,
could proceed to their own homes.
The plot was successful. Kublai consented, albeit reluc¬
tantly, to part with his prized Venetians, whom he probably
regarded with the customary pride of a king of his day in
strange oddities from distant lands. They were almost as
unique as unicorns. They had been seventeen years in his
court’s employ : even so, he would not allow them to depart
until they had sworn to return to China after they had visited
their families. The Polos swore : with what intention in the
oath it is needless to ponder at this late date. Circumstances
were to free them from the necessity of foreswearing them¬
selves, did they contemplate that.
At the same time preparations were made for the equipment of
fourteen ships, each having four masts, and capable of being navigated
with nine sails, the construction and rigging of which would admit
of ample description ; but, to avoid prolixity, it is for the present
omitted. Among these vessels there were at least four or five that had
crews of two hundred and fifty to two hundred and sixty men. On
them were embarked the ambassadors, together with Nicolo, Maffeo
and Marco Polo, when they had first taken their leave of the Grand
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 77
Khan, who presented them with many rubies and other handsome
jewels of great value. He also gave directions that the ships should be
furnished with stores and provisions for two years.
§ 10
The sailing of this remarkable flotilla convoying the bride
of Arghun-Khan is undated in Marco’s record. But it was
probably early in the year 1291. The ships were manned with
a total of two thousand souls—envoys, courtiers, soldiers, sailors,
slaves, women, the Princess, and the three Polos. Possibly
Marco had the position of chief navigator : he may even have
been in chief command of the expedition. They seem to have
sailed with great cautiousness down the South China Seas,
in equable weather though it was. Three months after quitting
Pei-ho, they sighted the Malay Peninsula and Marco appears
to have swung his flotilla round the point where Singapore
now stands, and sailed it up the Malacca Straits. Here, however,
they were halted for four months by contrary winds. The
modern investigator knows those winds for the south-west
monsoon, blowing down the Malacca Straits; he knows
further that the month must have been May, and that the
expedition with its clumsy ships must indeed have had to
anchor until October, when the blowing of the monsoon
changed to the north-east.
They seem to have anchored the ships in some minor bay
in the north coast of Sumatra. They were so far south that the
Pole Star was invisible—even the Plough invisible, tells Marco,
but that is exaggeration. Knowing the time that must elapse
ere they could sail, Marco had the entire party of two thousand
disembark and establish a fortified camp on the shore.
This section of Sumatra was nominally under the Grand
Khan’s rule—great stretches of those eastern seas had heard
of the name and fame of Kublai and sent him presents and
vague promises. But Marco was suspicious of the natives
“who seek for opportunities of seizing stragglers, putting them
to death, and eating them”. Accordingly, he
caused a large and deep ditch to be dug around on the land side, in such
manner that each of its extremities terminated in the port where the
shipping lay. The ditches he strengthened by erecting several block¬
houses or redoubts of wood . . . and, being defended by this kind of
fortification, he kept the party in complete security during the five
months of their residence.
7$ NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
The others secure, it seems that he himself was seized with
his old, wandering restlessness. Sumatra at the time was
divided into eight “kingdoms”, and six of these, Marco tells,
were then visited by him personally. There is no good reason
to believe that it was not on this final expedition that the
visiting was done. The armada lay in its bay, in boredom and
idleness. The Lady Kutai turned soft Chinese eyes in weariness
from the unending rocks of the barren shore. The sailors
carried their sick to places where the wind might cool them to
health. The Persian envoys, sick of strange foods, muttered
and combed at their beards and peered into sunrises for sight
of that never-coming wind. But the young alien, their com¬
mander, appears to have vanished into the interior of the
island, indefatigably exploratory.
The territory on which they had encamped was that of
Perlak—Mohammedans on the shore-lands, cannibals in the
mountains. But the term cannibal in Marco’s pages is little
more than a term of abuse for those who refused clothes or
kow-tow to the Grand Khan. Beyond it, interiorwards, lay
Pase, filled with wild elephants and rhinoceroi—the latter
the unicorns of contemporary European belief. Marco records
a solemn warning that the popular European notion that a
virgin may tame this beast is erroneous. He also unravelled,
in good detective fashion, a remarkable example of fraudulent
commercialism foisted upon the sage. In distant Europe
trade brought to inquiring savants the mummified bodies of
exceedingly miniature pygmies—a race supposed to live at
the thither side of the earth. But the pygmies in question,
Marco discovered, were merely monkeys (the orang or the
gibbon) which the natives would catch, kill, shave, and
embalm, despatching the resultant cadavers to distant ways
of trade and travel in return for a small payment. In Europe
those monstrosities sold for great sums. They took long years
to reach that distant continent from the East Indies—as
remarkable a comment on human folly as ever has been made !
Eastwards in Andraghiri, the natives devoured their
dead according to peculiarly horrible rites which Marco cites
in great detail. The account of this species of ceremonial
cannibalism is much more credible than the almost universal
anthropophagy which the Venetian delighted to foist upon
those living on the fringe of the unknown—they ate their
dead for religious reasons, not hunger.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 79
Far in the south of the island he came to the kingdom of
Jambi, a land of idolaters and agriculturists. Here Marco,
admiring the indigo plant and its uses for the purposes of
dyeing, purchased seeds. Long afterwards, facing the frosty
Venetian weather, those seeds refused to sprout. Jambi had
“men with tails, a span in length, like those of a dog, but not
covered with hair”. Friendly commentators on Marco’s
narrative were wont to excuse this gross libel by suggesting
that he had been deceived in glimpsing certain of the apes
resembling the human species—in particular, the orang-outang.
Unfortunately, the orang is as tailless as Homo Sapiens
himself. . . .
He saw pith being dug from the “interior of a tree” and
a “kind of meal” made therefrom. He tasted it and found
it good. It was, as we now know, sago. He heard innumerable
tales and reports, the Fortunate Isles gleaming unafar. But
at length, we may conclude, October was drawing near. He
retraced his steps to Perlak and embarked the weary armada.
Three or four hundred of that two thousand who had
left the Pei-ho were perhaps already dead—victims to an
unhealthy climate and an unwonted life. But still the Mongol
Princess survived, and neither of the elder Polos appear to
have taken hurt. The expedition launched out across the
north Indian Ocean.
Midway, it seems to have halted at the Nicobar Islands,
where Marco gazed disapprovingly upon the naked inhabitants
—“little removed from the condition of beasts”. Here,
perhaps, he heard from some traders of islands even remoter,
inhabited by dog-headed savages who killed and ate “every
person they could lay their hands on”. Those canine anthro-
pophagists were undoubtedly the gentle Andamanese, stung
into ferocity and madness through several centuries of raiding
and murdering along their coasts carried out by Malays—just
such adventurers as the Venetian’s admired Mongols.
Marco gives with a fair accuracy the distance from the
Andamans to Ceylon, so that it is possible that the squadron
may have actually strayed as far north as the former islands.
However that may have been, Ceylon at last was reached; and
the fleet put in at a port—perhaps Colombo. It anchored
here for some time, while Marco, indefatigably curious,
observed the ways and customs of the Singhalese, their worship
of Sogomon-barchan—a strange corruption of Sakya-Muni-
8o
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
burchan, itself almost meaningless in its admixture of
Hindustani and Mongol—the Divine Sage God. This was
the Buddha. Marco, however, though he tells a twisted version
of the Buddha legend, never heard of the great teacher by
the name of Buddha, though he had encountered the Chinese
variant, Fo. For him the followers of Buddha, as of all the
Indian gods, were merely “idolaters”.
Thereafter the course of the armada is doubtful. Marco
launches on an extensive description of the various Hindu
states—lands of wonder and terror, gigantic idols and gigantic
idolatries. Some passages in the text suggest a slow coasting
to Coromandel and as far northwards as Masulipatam (“where
good oysters are found)”. Sailing south and calling at this
port and that, or trading for provisions on the way, Marco
gathered a considerable amount of information regarding the
Indians. The stories of the Brahmins and the rites of their
religion are greatly distorted—evidently Marco received a
great part of his information from Mohammedans. Possibly,
by the time he turned Cape Comorin, he had engaged Moham¬
medan pilots for braving the dangers of the Arabian Sea.
“Idolaters” apart, he heard, what we now know to be
true, of extensive Christian communities settled in India
even in that early day—followers of that St. Thomas whom
legend related had been martyred at Mailapur, where his tomb
in Marco’s time was still supposed to stand. Miracles were there
performed daily, Marco heard, but he himself does not
appear to have disembarked to investigate. Instead, rounding
Cape Comorin, he remarks on the great monkeys which infested
the land, and how tigers, leopards and lynxes everywhere
abounded.
His pages are suddenly filled with description of interior
states such as Delhi which he could not himself have visited
personally, at least on that return expedition. Perhaps,
however, he had done so while an envoy of the Grand Khan.
Sailing northwards up the Indian coast, he sighted or heard
of a variety of states and cities which have long since vanished
from recognizability—Kambaia, Servanath, Kesmacoran.
Beyond Bombay, the course of the squadron again grows
doubtful, for the record commences a particular description
of Socotro lying remotely across the Arabian Sea at the
mouth of the Gulf of Aden.
It is not impossible that the squadron actually may have
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 8l
coasted across to the Arabian shore, and from there Marco
heard of those wondrous lands of “Great India” which he
described in such detail—Abyssinia, Madagascar, and the like.
In Madagascar he heard with gravity of
an extraordinary kind of bird, which they call a rukh, making its appear¬
ance from the southern region. In form it is said to resemble the eagle,
but is incomparably greater in size; being so large and strong as to seize
an elephant with its talons, and to lift it into the air, from whence it lets
it fall to the ground, in order that when dead it may prey upon the
carcase. Persons who have seen this bird assert that when the wings are
spread they measure sixteen paces in extent, from point to point; and
that the feathers are eight paces in length, and thick in proportion.
Messer Marco Polo, conceiving these creatures might be griffins, such as
are represented in painting, half-birds, half-lions, particularly ques¬
tioned those who reported their having seen them as to this point; but
they maintained that their shape was altogether that of birds, or, as it
might be said, of the eagle.
Could the rukh have been the albatross ?
He heard of Zanzibar with its authentic negroes, “having
wide mouths, thick noses, and large eyes”. “Sed cooperiunt
suam naturam ; et faciunt magnum sensum quando earn cooperiunt,
eo quod habent earn multum magnam et turpem, et horribilem
ad videndum”
It is to be noted here how orthodox was Marco’s conception
of the Indian Ocean—as a kind of great inland lake, its shores
the Indias, Great, Lesser, and Middle. This was a notion
obtained from the classical geographers, but it was the most
serious distortion introduced into the maps apparently con¬
firmed by the tale of the Venetian. Yet, ending his account
of those innumerable lands of Africa which he called Middle
India he had a qualm of hesitation, casting back his mind to
the East Indies and the tales he had heard there of innumerable
other islands, inhabited and uninhabited—“twelve thousand
seven hundred islands”. Was this some rumour or notion of
the vastness of outer Oceania ?
At long last they came within sight of the shores of Persia,
coasting up to the island of Ormuz, where the three Polos
had descended from inner Persia to inspect the quality of the
ships on their outward journey nearly twenty years before.
They had been eighteen months on the journey. Six
hundred of the crew—“and others”—had died since they
left the Pei-ho. But the Lady Kutai was still alive and the
F
82 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Venetians, apparently toughened and hardened to any hard¬
ship, unharmed.
Landing in Ormuz, they heard the news that the pros¬
pective bridegroom, Arghun-Khan, had died some) time
before and that considerable confusion prevailed in Persia
as a consequence, the regency having been assumed by the
dead ruler’s brother, Kai-khatu, to the exclusion of the heir,
Chazan-Khan. In some perplexity they sent messengers to
Kai-khatu, asking how they should dispose of the princess
from Kublai’s court. The answer of the uncle was that he
was sure the nephew would desire the lady. The Polos were
accordingly requested to convey her to Chazan-Khan’s territory
remotely in the north of Persia.
Undaunted, Marco and his father and uncle, and presumably
the rest of the escort, set out through Persia, and at length
reached Chazan’s territory and disposed of the Lady Kutai
there. Of how they were received there is no mention ; of
what subsequently happened to the princess herself we know
nothing ; of what happened to the remains of that great
escort of Mongols that companioned her from China we can
only speculate. The Polos appear to have dropped the matter
from their minds as from their record. They turned west¬
wards, seeking Armenia and Europe.
§ ii
Even yet, this tale of that first great explorer of the
Eastern world does not dwindle to diminuendo. The roads
to the Euxine were troubled and dangerous; at their request
Kai-khatu provided them with passports and troops of horses,
and they appear to have made slow but steady progress up
through the Armenian lands till they reached Trebizond.
From there, first touching at Constantinople and Negropont,
they sailed home to Venice, arriving in that city long lost to
their eyes some time in the year 1295. . . .
With their arrival they pass for a year into a wealth of
fiction and fable.
It is told that they came to the Ca’ Polo bearded and dark,
in half-Tartar clothes, speaking a strange, half-Tartar speech.
And their relatives looked out on the wild men and refused to
recognize them, seeing little to identify them with those
three, the middle-aged men and the gay young gallant, who
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 83
had sailed for the East and there perished twenty years before.
Thereat the three Polos ripped open their shabby garments
and showed the interiors lined with jewels of great price,
and the canny stay-at-home Polos fell upon their necks,
recognized them, and embraced them. ... If the fable be
false, the allegory is true enough.
En route from the court of Kai-khatu, they had heard of
the death of Kublai in remote Cathay. Their oath to return
was foregone now, and we may imagine them (the elder
Polos at least) renouncing wandering and settling to con¬
tentment and fur-lined robes and slow strolls along the Prado,
amid the wheeling of the pigeons, blue, and grave debate and
supper with grave friends. The East, that world beyond the
Blanket of the Dark, had lifted for them for a magical glimpse,
and very quickly and strangely memory of the picture in that
glimpse faded from their minds, the long Chinese roads and
the winding Chinese rivers, the clanging bells of the temples,
the furred shores of the strange islands that looked out on the
great Sea of the East, the beating drums in dark lands of idols
and terrible fires as they camped by the straits of Malacca.
. . Some such picture we may build for ourselves of that
after-life of Nicolo and Maffeo, for thereafter they sink from
the record. They were never, we are aware, explorers in any
sense, they seem to have traded with a single fidelity and
obtuseness for little other purpose than trade. But for the
fact of that nephew and son who travelled with them the
glimpse might never have been recorded for the world to read.
It is doubtful if it would have been recorded at all but for
the events of the year 1296. Venice and Genoa declared war.
Even before the return of the three from Asia the Pplo
gens had been called upon to equip a galley for the coming
sea-fight. Marco appears to have thrown himself into the task
with zest. He was appointed commander of the Polo galley
and perhaps sailed it with musings on tactics of sea-fight seen
at the thither side of the world. Andrea Dandola com¬
manded the Venetians; and the fleet sailed.
It met the Genoese off Curzoia on the 7th of September,
1296, and was routed with great ease. Marco Polo’s galley was
boarded and compelled to surrender, Marco himself being
carried a prisoner to Genoa.
Nothing more fortunate could have happened to him from
our point of view. But at first he must have found imprison-
84 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
ment, after his life of activity and interest, more than madden¬
ing. Apparently he was allowed to write letters to the Polos :
it seems that Maffeo and Nicolo made desperate efforts to
ransom him. But the Genoese were in revengeful mood, and
refused ransom. Marco was left to loiter and brood in the
free and easy captivity of that day, captivity that was yet
exasperating enough for such active soul as his.
Then it appears that his room or cell was shared by a
fellow-prisoner, a Pisan named Rustician. Marco, in boredom,
talked of his travels and exploits. Rustician, a litterateur, was
more than interested. There was food for great romance in
this travel-talk of Messer Polo’s.
Whatever the arrangement, Marco set about dictating
the entire travels to his fellow-prisoner. It is uncertain even
in what language they were dictated—the probability is that
it was Italian, though the French is among the oldest of the
surviving scripts. Marco must have procured from Venice
his tablets, his notebook, or whatever it was in which he had
been wont to jot his memoranda. And with those beside him,
pacing up and down the cell day after day, he wandered forth
again on those unending journeys by river and mountain and
desert plain, up into the heights of Khorassan again, across
the windy Roof of the World, down the highways of China,
the sounding coasts of Cathay. . . . Names and dates had
here and there blurred to an inextinguishable confusion in
his mind. Sometimes his memory or his tablets betrayed him,
so that he foisted upon Central China the habits of remote
Borneo. But in the main, and in a mind that seems to have
been as single-track as his soul, he remembered vividly and
accurately all he had seen and heard.
He was in prison for three years. At the end of that time
the gates opened, and he walked out of Genoa, and thereafter,
so far as we are concerned, walked out of the pages of his
colourful travels into the obscurity of private citizenship in
Venice. He married a wife, Donata, of whom we know little ;
she bore to him three daughters, of whom we know less. He
was wealthy and famous and ridiculous very soon, for the
story of his travels had spread abroad in Venice, he himself,
questioned, was probably the reverse of reticent, and the wits
sneeringly dubbed him II Milione—“the Thousander”—
because of the constant recurrence of that word throughout
his tales in his descriptions of mileage and jewel-splendour.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 85
Copies of his book began to circulate. He sent a copy to
a French noble. . . . And for twenty-five years thereafter
he vanishes from our gaze.
But on January the 9th, 1324, he made his will, leaving
the bulk of his estate to his wife and three daughters. Very
shortly afterwards he died, the much-travelled and ridiculed
and perhaps by then embittered, and was taken from
the Ca’ Polo and buried without the Church of San
Lorenzo in Venice.
§ 12
While he lies and sleeps sound enough, long dust and ashes
under the flagstones of San Lorenzo, we can assess him now
with cooler minds than his contemporaries—whom he
exasperated into derision—or the later centuries’ commen¬
tators—whom he irritated into foolish admirations.
Fundamentally, his was the kinetic, not the poetic mind.
This has been true of most explorers, but especially was it
true of the Venetian. That his record lacks those personal
touches that would make him—in the writer’s phrase—live, is
not apt: all that he writes on mountain and river and country
and king is surface-observation of a limited quality. Ante¬
dating the days of careful measurement and calculation of
route and road, his geographical records naturally had lacks
and lacunae enough: what is more tragic is the essentially
commonplace quality of the mind which viewed not only
those geographical tracts but the peoples that dwelt therein,
the imputations from tide and drift and wind.
It is hardly to be wondered at that until Behaim’s time
the maps remained unaltered despite the issue of his Travels.
They were inconceivable in two senses—the geographical
information was served planlessly, multitudinously, wearyingly
and confusingly ; and the peoples of those distant lands, of
whom he wrote were verily inconceivable peoples, lacking
every one of them both individuality and individuation. There
is little essential difference between a town in northern
Armenia and a town in the Straits of Malacca as Marco Polo
depicts them—they are both filled with shadow-folk, in the
flat, not the round, mechanically pacing a mechanical existence,
whether as Christians or the unescapable “idolaters”.
He spent seventeen years in and around China ; yet he
86
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
never appears to have made any attempt to grasp the philo¬
sophy of those “idolaters” by whom he was surrounded. He
never appears to have heard of Confucius or Lao-Tze. Buddha
was to him the idol of a god. He was incapable of identifying
even the Singhalese Buddha and the Fo of remote Shen-so—
though their similarities are so obvious. His command of
four languages there is little reason to doubt, and their very
possession is the more damning against him : with these as
his tools he might indeed have brought a rich work of
delineation and interpretation out of the East, beyond that
painted veil that covered it from European eyes. But the
soul-quality of the Venetian was unequal to the task.
Even so, his record remains one of the great travel records,
the narrative of one of the earth’s earliest true conquerors—
in a sense indeed that Marco would have been incapable of
apprehending. His book remains still authoritative—confirmed
and re-confirmed as it has been by the modern world from
other native scripts—on the life and being and surface
appearance of that distant East.
Very slowly the ideas in his record spread and were appre¬
hended by other eager and questing minds. Beyond the
confines of Asia Minor was not merely India and a wild and
deserted land, but Empires of wealth and high civilization,
innumerable islands, lands of wonder stretching on and on,
lit by strange suns, into the infinite, as it seemed to those
early minds. . . . Lands innumerable, and of all most fas¬
cinating those Spice Islands of the Venetian’s—surely the
very Fortunate Isles of old.
A century and a half after muffled feet had carried Marco
to his last rest in San Lorenzo, a child of the Italian enemy-
city he had hated would sit long hours above his Travels
and pore over the story of those islands.
IV
don christ6bal colon and the
EARTHLY PARADISE
§ i
SOMEWHERE remote in the Old Stone Age, perhaps ten
thousand years before Christ, the hunting clans of the
Yenisei in Siberia commenced a slow northwards and
north-eastwards drift in pursuit of game or.merely in happy-
go-lucky migration. They were folk of mixed Mongol an
Armenoid stock, tall and lank, perhaps without that gravity
that later became a characteristic of their race ; they were
hunters and trappers, wielding chipped weapons and tools ;
they went naked and unashamed, men of the Golden Age,
without culture or rigorous custom, without religion or
superstition, kingship or classes, social problems or social
convictions. As they moved, north and north-eastward through
hundreds of years they followed a gradual amelioration of the
climate of that time : the earth was recovering from the
rigours of the Fourth Ice Age. By the time they reached the
vicinity of what is now the Bering Straits it is possible that
they found those straits green and verdant, low swampy
lands, sea-washed, stretching remotely into the hazes of
sunrise. They went into that sunhaze and all unwitting their
achievement crossed the landbridges from the Old World
to a New Continent hitherto untrod by the feet of men.
This continent was America. Wandering south slow
millennium on millennium, the hunters passed down the length
and breadth of the Americas, reaching at last the remote
forests of the Amazon and the chilly pampas of Tmtra del
Fuego. They split and differentiated into multitudinous
language-groups, though not into nations, for nationhood was
as unknown as culture or war. They hunted the beasts of this
strange continent and made themselves shelters in caves and
by breakwinds, fished in the seas of the Mexican Gulf, bathed
in the waters of the Pacific, and lived and died in countless
88
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
generations through that hard yet happy life that had been
the life of all their species since first men climbed, by accident
of arm and eye, to mankind’s status.
They were in a continent geographically remote from
the rest of the world, separated by long seas from the wandering
incursions of other tribes of Old Stone Age folk. This till
the accident of the discovery of civilization in the basin of
the Nile led to the greatest revolution in human affairs.
For those kindred groups of the Old World discovered
civilization. They originated agriculture : they spread abroad
Europe and Asia in quest of Givers of Life. They invented
boats, and by 500 b.c. wandering drifts of them, divinely led,
were adventuring out into the waters of the Pacific. Culture
and cruelty and economic security and slavery had come into
the world ; but for long America remained untouched.
Yet, as we know now, beginning somewhere around the
time of the birth of Christ in distant Syria, the first of those
Archaic explorers, Proto-Polynesians or Chinese, reached
the coasts of America in a stretch of a century or so, by half
a dozen different routes. There they explored and settled and
searched for metals and gems ; and wherever their feet trod
some variant of the Archaic culture rose anew—a culture in
America founded on the cultivation of the maize, a culture
with dim gods that speedily became Americanized whatever
their Asiatic ancestry. Then the stream of Polynesian-Chinese
raiding and exploring appears to have dried up for a time.
But about the seventh Christian century there was a great
cultural ferment in India and beyond in Cambodia and all
the East Indies. Mariners of those countries sailed and traded
remotely into the Pacific. They reached America—at Panama,
along the Mexican coast, at Arica in Peru by way of Easter
Island—bringing fresh cultural strains to the lowly Archaic
civilization. From those fresh cultural impetuses grew up to
considerable heights of achievement the notable civilizations
of the Maya, the Nahua, the Inka and Pre-Inka. Then once
again the changes of time and fortune cut adrift those com¬
munications across the Pacific : the Mongols of Kublai Khan
had flung all Eastern Asia in a ferment and the cultural capital
and the cultural leisure of Asia no longer sent forth its
missionaries into that strange country of rumour and legend
of which the Chinese Buddhists told, and which we now know
to have been America.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 89
Remote in the north-east Leif the Lucky, as we have
seen, came exploring in quest of the Fortunate Isles, and
discovered them in the continent of North America. The
tale of that discovery filtered back to Europe, there to mix
inextricably through four centuries with the legend of the
Fortunate Isles themselves, with—more concrete, yet kin—
the story of the great Spice Islands of the East. Towards the
close of the fourteenth century two Venetians, Nicolo and
Antonio Zeno, sailed as far north as the Faroes, and there
(according to a descendant) heard of Iceland and Greenland.
Visiting these lands, they heard yet again of another country
distant in the south, Estotiland, where the Norse were settled,
and of a country, remoter yet, “where the inhabitants had a
knowledge of gold and silver, lived in cities, erected splendid
temples to idols, and sacrificed human victims to them”..
Mythical or otherwise the Zeno’s adventures, conviction
grew stronger, century on century, in each imaginative
European mind, that somewhere out in the dark Atlantic,
did a man but steer far enough, he would come to a land of
wonder, of strange gods and self-sown wheat, the Fortunate
Isles, the Islands of Spice. Those spices, eastward brought,
were authentic enough. And for hundreds of years the Atlantic
European had found drift out of the west, in the accidents of
storm and tide, strange things that confirmed his curiosities.
Carved sticks and the trunks of trees came, the bodies of men
of un-European, un-African race, this and that item of flotsam
to keep wonder kindled. It is even possible—and indeed
probable—that now and again a non-Norse ship in the North
Atlantic, coasting north or south, was driven from its course
across the whole wide stretch of the Atlantic and glimpsed
strange alien shores, and returned with the tale of them, to be
half-believed and disbelieved and remembered for a little and
half-forgotten.
So, long before the publication of Marco Polo’s Travels,
telling of a thousand-islanded sea beyond Asia, there was
belief in an islanded Atlantic. America, untrodden perhaps
by all Europeans but the Norse, was nevertheless a land of
definite and continuous rumour, known through meagre fact
and abounding fantasy. The geographers of the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries dotted the remoter Atlantic with
islands—“Antilia” the most popular—and it was regarded
as a truism that if the sphere were the true form of the earth
90 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
practice and theory might indeed be linked, and, sailing west¬
wards from Europe, a man come in time to those islands of
Brandan and Brazil, of Antilia, the Wineland of the Norseman
—and beyond them to the Spice Islands and the unremote
Cipangu of Marco Polo.
But it was also recognized that it would be a foolhardy
and unprofitable venture because of the immense distances
to be covered, the terrors and uncertainties of weeks at sea
on an uncharted waste of water.
§ 2
The man who was to solve and annotate those puzzlings
and affirmations of the European geographers was born in the
city of Genoa in an uncertain year that was perhaps 1448.
His father was a wool-carder, a cheesemonger and a publican
—and but poorly equipped for all three professions, for he
suffered from frequent bankruptcies. His mother is no more
than a name—Suzanna Fontanarossa—though it may be from
her that the young Columbus acquired his energy, his
faith, his fluency. His mendacity—he was to develop into
one of the world’s great liars—was probably self-sown and
reared and cultivated, shade and shelter for the cloudy
surmisings and vague visionings of that poet’s soul which was
truly his.
He was apprenticed to the more stable of his father’s
trades—wool-carding—at the age of eleven ; he ran errands
about the Genoese streets, he touted cloth samples up and
down the Italian roads . . . and in intervals of the press of
existence read and pondered every one of the scanty books 01
which he could lay his hands. He learned Latin to aid that
reading—the later Christopher of the booming mendacities
was to affirm that he attended Pavia University to do that
learning—and devoured tales innumerable : particularly tales
with a background of geographical speculation. They kept
him alive in the dust of the sweating card-room, the sweat
of the dusty roads, those lands of mystery and imagination.
Sometime, we may imagine him affirming, he himself would
achieve their like—did he ever escape the draggled toil and
poverty of Genoa.
He endured the life of a wool-carder for a long three years
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 9I
and was then shipped to the Levant as tout in the employ¬
ment of the great house of di Negro and Spinola. This was
1475. Next year he was despatched, in a convoy of Spinola
ships, on a trading adventure to England. En route, the convoy
was attacked, sacked, looted and half destroyed by a Gascon
admiral-freebooter. Christopher narrowly escaped with, his
life—his ship was rescued by the Portuguese and sailed into
the safety of Lisbon harbour. Refitting next year, it proceeded
to England. ...
Beyond that are three years of doubt and surmise. He was
to affirm that thereafter he visited Iceland, that he traded
down the Guinea coast, that he entered the employ of King
Rene of Provence as a privateer captain. Mendaciously,
unendingly, confusingly, he poured abroad this biography in
later years that accepted it with a conviction it now fails to
carry. For one who visited Iceland his ideas of the Atlantic
remained singularly archaic: for a privateer captain his
navigation singularly inefficient. Indeed, like Admiral Peary,
there is no proof that he was ever a sailor or understood the
handling of ships. Instead, we have picture throughout those
years of a bookish young chapman dreaming vision on vision
as he raised his eyes from the pages of this and that fantastic
glomeration of fable—visions of the Fortunate Isles, the Earthly
Paradise lying awaiting discovery a few days’ journey west¬
ward there in the Atlantic sunset. . . .
Presently fortune sent him wandering to Lisbon, where
his brother had taken up the trade of map-making.
Lisbon at the time was the centre for all the adventur-
some and skilful pilots of Europe. From Lisbon had been
directed those grandiose explorations of the African coast
which were to give Portugal such remarkable commercial
ascendancy over the rest of Europe through two long cen¬
turies. In Lisbon, on the fringe of all this activity, were hosts
of map-makers, geographers, and the like fauna. In Lisbon
it is possible that the remarkable project to realize his dreams
and sail directly westwards across the Atlantic first seized hold
on the imagination of the youthful Columbus.
But there is excellent reason to believe that the project
was not inspired until some four years later. Columbus settled
to map-making: fantastically bad maps on which he let loose
the products of his imagination in great monster hordes. He
knew little of seamanship, less of the world, but much of the
92 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Earthly Paradise. Had not the Northmen touched it, the Land
of Wine, had not perhaps Marco il Milione glimpsed it in the
islands beyond Cipangu ? Cosmographically muddled, geo¬
graphically out-dated, hampered by a poor education and
lowly social status, Christopher clung to those convictions
with the proud, pathetic tenacity of his unfortunate social
compeers—the self-educated men—in all ages. Presently he
was spreading his beliefs abroad in a social class other than his
own.
Through some accident the map-maker had encountered
the Perestrellos in Lisbon—Perestrello the Governor of Porto
Santo, father of an attractive daughter, Filepa. They were
nobles. A poet was noble as well. Christopher, in the hearing
of astounded brother Bartholomew, invented himself a lineage
on which even the Perestrellos looked with respect. He was
descended from Colonius, the Roman commander who con¬
quered Mithridates ; his first cousins had been nobles and
admirals—the admirals Casenove Coullon of Gascony, Colum¬
bus Pyrata Palasologus of Greece—^witness the kinship of their
names. And the sea was in his blood as well—^witness his
many voyagings.
Of some such fabric was self-woven the legend of Columbus.
Tall, ruddy, ardent, blue-eyed, engaging, he captured the
hearts and minds of his new friends. They liked his piety, his
exploits, and his gentle birth. The first of these at least was
authentic—it was to be the central drive behind the great
quest of his life.
So the far-straying son of the Genoese wool-carder had
presently wedded the gentle Donna Felipa, the daughter
of the Portuguese navigator who had been made the first
governor of Porto Santo. Presently they moved from Lisbon
to Porto Santo itself, Columbus stepped into his father-in-
law’s shoes of property, if not of power, and set to earn himself
a livelihood by the making of maps and charts in the approved
custom of the time. He was on the high-road to the Africas,
and the maps may have sold well to uncertain or doubtful
navigators hastening south slave- and gold-raiding along the
kingdoms of the blacks.
And there, at Madeira, it seems that a remarkable piece of
good fortune was granted him. He encountered a nameless
pilot (nameless to us) who had a strange story to tell. This
man had been blown across the Atlantic in his ship in a great
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 93
storm, and, after the storm had died down, had come on a
litter of islands in that western sea. He had made no attempt
to name or claim or explore them ; instead, had sailed back for
Europe. Nameless and enigmatic, he sails away from
Madeira, leaving to our imagination a kindled young man
staring after him. No mere rumour or theoretical quibble
of the geographers, no mere imagined land of faery, but reality
whatever its reality, Cipangu, India, Antilia, the Earthly
Paradise—there at the thither side of the world, awaiting
discovery and conquest!
So it seems the great inspiration came on him. He made
his first proposals for this deliberate adventure out into the
Atlantic to the State of Genoa. But Genoa appears to have
declined with singular brevity either to finance the expedition
or grant Columbus the honours he adjudged fitting for that
expedition’s commander. He was still to the Genoese, if
recognized at all, only the wool-carder’s son. Nothing daunted,
his vision shod with the solid shoes of fact, he next forwarded
his scheme to King John the Second of Portugal. King John
was engaged in the serious business of warfare but paid the
project some attention. An amusing project. But Columbus’s
claims outrageous. Doubting, the King referred the matter
to a committee of Portuguese geographical experts.
The committee was headed by the Bishop of Ceuta.
Columbus presented himself personally to plead his case.
The Bishop examined it in detail, demolished it with ease.
Cipangu—Antilia distant only a few hundred miles ? Messer
Colombo was perilously antiquated in his cosmographical
notions (the Bishop was entirely in the right). Report to King
John : a hare-brained scheme.
The king was unsatisfied: the project had intrigued
his fancy. It was merely that he had balked from Columbus’s
astounding claims : the title of Grand Admiral, the title and
power of viceroy of all new lands discovered, a ten per cent
share in the trade with all such lands. Thereon the wily
Bishop suggested that it might be a good idea not to send an
expensive expedition out into the Atlantic under the com¬
mand of the excitable young Italian but to despatch a single
caravel to investigate the western seas. King John, somewhat
faithlessly, acceded to the suggestion: a caravel was secretly
despatched.
It returned in the space of a week or so. Frightened on the
94 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
verge of the great cliff of ocean up which, homeward-bound,
their vessel would never be able to climb again, the sailors
had refused the expedition and put back into Lisbon.
§3
It was 1484. Donna Felipa was dead. Columbus, disgusted
at the treatment meted out to him by the Bishop of Ceuta,
resolved to remove himself together with his son Diego
to Spain. Meantime he appears to have made a compact with
brother Bartholomew. The brother was to go to England and
lay before Henry VII the same proposals as Columbus himself
was to carry to the Spanish court.
That court was at Cordova, actively engaged in prepara¬
tions for the last campaign against the Moors in Spain.
Ferdinand and Isabella had other tasks in hand than to pay
overwhelming attention even to the highly vouched-for
proposals of the skilled Genoan pilot, Messer Colombo. For
Messer Colombo, his piety his guerdon, had found friends
very speedily in Spain—lay, noble and ecclesiastic. His poet’s
fiery vision passed readily to imaginative, impractical people
of like calibre to himself. He persisted ; his friends persisted ;
and the king and queen were at length led to summon a junta
of cosmographers at Salamanca in 1487—a junta deputed to
test the claims and pretensions of the Genoese.
Columbus appeared before this junta, but with no more
success than he had appeared before the council in Lisbon.
He was later to represent it as packed with the orthodox
flat-earth fanatics to a man. More probably there was hardly
a member of the junta that did not believe the earth round.
What they balked at was not the planet’s sphericity, but
Columbus’s unsubstantiated statements that India was distant
but a few days’ sail across the Atlantic. Hard though the old
legend dies, it is plain that the junta did not regard the Genoese
as a “round-earth irresponsible” but merely as a romancer
and an incompetent. In both accounts they were as correct
as they were mistaken in dismissing the romancing as incon¬
siderable.
They decided that the project was “vain and impossible,
and that it did not belong to the majesty of such great
princes to determine anything upon such weak grounds of
information”.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
95
Columbus’s counter-arguments are not recorded. It is
probable that indeed they were not very convincing. For of
all things it is plain that the pious young poet was as poor a
theoretician as a seaman—his cosmographical ideas were
medieval, long years behind those of the junta. He seems to
have urged nothing more original than that to the west there
lay great tracts of island and unknown country (the Madeira
pilot had supplied him with proof) ; and perhaps backed up
this statement by invoking the authority of that Marco Polo
who had spoken of the many-islanded Pacific.
However, his persistence won from Ferdinand and Isabella
the statement that they did not definitely reject his proposition.
When the war was ended. . . .
From camp to camp and city to city, as the campaign
progressed, Columbus pursued the court through a long five
years of solicitation. He must have become a wearying figure
in the sight of one at least of their majesties of Spain. Yet they
were impressed: his poetic earnestness and devoutness
impressed, if his cosmographical arguments seemed feeble.
Various sums of money were granted him for his private
expenses, he was billeted near the court as a public functionary.
Ceaselessly he argued and intrigued, attempting to make
influential friends, to obtain introductions here and encourage¬
ment there. Juan Perez de la Marchena, guardian of the
monastery of La Rabida near the little town of Palos, became
a close friend. Perez had once been the confessor of Queen
Isabella. Now he agreed to take young Diego and educate him
while tall, ruddy, mendacious, scoundrelly-poetic Christopher
pursued his two loves—the courtship of the favour of the
Queen, and the seduction, courtship and marriage—in that
order—of the pious, complacent, and poverty-stricken Beatriz
Enriquez de Arana. (Beatriz, wedded and bedded, was there¬
after alternately maltreated and mislaid.)
But at length he left the court in complete despair, and
repaired to Palos to fetch Diego. He had determined to
depart to the French court and try his fortunes there—his
brother had failed with singular completeness to impress the
cautious-minded King of England. Arriving at Palos, he told
of this project to Perez and the chief shipowner of Palos, one
Martin Alonzo Pinzon. For different reasons they were
dismayed—Pinzon also had transatlantic venturings in mind.
Perez wrote to the queen begging her once again to pay
96 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
heed to the suit of Columbus; and once again the kindly
Isabella consented, remitting sufficient money to allow him
to return to the court. Negotiations (as they might now be
termed) were resumed.
They were speedily broken off. The cost of the expedition
was negligible and easily raised: the personal claims of Colum¬
bus were considered outrageous. The dispassionate observer
of later times can hardly fail to agree. Like most visionaries
and poets, Columbus was as mercenary as he was mendacious.
He believed very vividly he might attain the Earthly Paradise
—failing it, Cipangu—by a westwards voyage of a few days’
duration. And for such kingly attainment should there not be
a kingly award ? . . . Tall, ruddy, greying of hair, he would
expound his sureties in the Palos monastery, in the Cordova
Court, and believe them all very truly himself. But now and
again, perhaps in the dead of night—he would wake up and
stare a moment of bewildered fear at his true foundationings
—the affirmations of a strayed sailor foisted upon the book-
learnt visionings of a Genoan cloth-chapman. . . .
He set out a second time for France ; piqued, Queen
Isabella had him again recalled, and again opened negotiations.
Ferdinand, the sardonic Ferdinand, kept apart from the
negotiations. He seems to have had little liking and less respect
for Columbus: he was merely another of Isabella’s hare-brained
paupers. . . . But now the negotiations proceeded apace. An
agreement was drawn up and signed : an agreement which
conceded Columbus all his demands, on the understanding
that he himself was to pay an eighth of the cost of the
expedition.
The total cost of that expedition, on which Columbus
had spent seven years of debate and argument at the Spanish
court, was less than £400. Wool-carder Colombo of Genoa
rode down to Palos Admiral Cristobal Colon.
Palos was ordered to provide two of the vessels, and a
third one was chartered. The enrolling of crews proved a
difficulty. Death by drowning was as little popular in that day
as in this ; and, whatever the imaginings of Isabella, seamen
at least knew the Admiral no sailor. However, a proclamation
of immunity from all civil and criminal processes was issued
for all persons taking part in the expedition. As a result, the
more desperate of the criminals and debtors of Spain flocked
down to Palos. The Pinzon family proved active in providing
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 97
men and materials: those friendly Pinzons whose friendship
was to fail the test of the voyage.
None of the three vessels was of more than a hundred
tons burden. Only one, the Santa £ Maria, in which the
noble Don Cristobal Colon himself took up residence, was
decked throughout. For navigator and captain—he himself
hardly capable of navigation—he chose one Juan de la Cosa.
The other two ships, the Pint a and the Nina, were half-decked
caravels under the commands of Martin Alonzo Pinzon and
Vincente Yanez Pinzon. The total numbering of the expe¬
dition was a hundred and twenty souls, including an Irishman,
William Herries, and an Englishman, Arthur Lake.
On the 4th of August, 1492, the expedition set sail from
the Bar of Saltes, commissioned under the new admiral, not,
as was afterwards told, to reach the coast of Asia, but “to
discover and acquire certain islands and mainland in the
Ocean”.
§4
The Canaries were reached in the course of a few days.
The weather was mild and beneficent. Yet the caravel Pinta
had unshipped her rudder, apparently at the instigation of her
commander, Martin Alonzo Pinzon, who had began to regret
his share in the undertaking. Columbus, fuming, half scared
perhaps already to be actually launched, must halt while the
Pinta was repaired. News was brought him that three Portu¬
guese ships were lying off the Canaries, Government vessels
which intended to intercept the expedition, for Columbus
was venturing out on mare incognita which was under the
dominion of Portugal. The Admiral seems to have been little
perturbed : with chance, tide, and the terror of navigation
to face, what were a few Portuguese ? The convoy again in
order, he sailed from Gomera in the Canaries on the ninth
of September.
Thereafter the tale of the voyage is largely an abridgment
from that doubtful journal which only doubtfully can be
ascribed to Columbus’s own hand. Greatly helped by the
north-east trade winds, he sailed on day after day, almost
due west, into the unknown waters. Such was the speed of the
vessels that Columbus—apparently with the complicity of his
navigator, for he could not have done it alone—commenced
G
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
98
a remarkable deception. This was the keeping of two logs—
one for his own private record, one to deceive the sailors.
In the sailors’ log the distance was falsified and minimized
as much as possible, in order that their unquenched fears of
the Ocean might not overflow. (Such is the story: but what
of the logs of the Pinta and the Nina under the hostile
Pinzons ?)
Still, unhastening but unceasing, the trade wind blew
the three small ships westwards over that untenanted sea of
great waves and dipping stars. September nights came down
cool and quiet and unruffled over the mysterious flow and
glow of the combers. On the evening of the 13th it was found
that the compass needle had declined to the north-west.
On the morning of the 14th the declination was abruptly
to the north-east. It was the first time this variation had been
noted by Europeans. On that 14th also the sailors on the
Nina looked out and saw two great birds hovering in the sky
—tropical birds such as were common to Africa, they thought,
and never seen far from land. Land must be near.
In the evening of the next day a great meteor woke the
twilight of the sky, flashing ensaffroned in the sea ahead.
The sailors’ fears received a stabbing poignancy. Was it a
sign from God of His displeasure ? Columbus paced his deck,
apparently stolid and cool, inwardly probably the prey of
acute fears. What now of his belief in the nearness of Antilia
what if there were no Antiha ? He soothed his crews and the
ships sailed on.
Next day, the 16th, they found themselves on the verge
of a great plain of seaweed, stretching remotely to the
horizons. In the morning light those plains rose and shook
their strange forms, as though alive, and to the sailors it
seemed they had come to a place neither land nor sea, but a
swamp on the verge of the Abyss. All day the three small
ships ploughed steadily westwards, still with the north-easter
behind them, cutting through the clinging weeds of the
Sargasso Sea. Night sank on the great green plains, unended.
Next morning they found themselves still sailing the great
weed-fringed lagoons. This morning they caught a crab,
from which the admiral “inferred that they could not be
more than eighty leagues from land” ! His certainty had
returned : he would lie himself to the ends of the Ocean.
His remarkable inference appears to have calmed his
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
99
companions. Next day many birds were seen in the sky and a
great massing of clouds. Drizzling rains—land rains—came
with nightfall. Land was certainly near.
But still there came no land. Columbus was made privy
to a plot hatched on his own ship—“that it would be the
best plan to throw him quietly into the sea, and say he
unfortunately fell in while he stood absorbed in looking at
the stars”. He guarded himself accordingly, knowing that
his companions’ fears were like to mount into madness because
of that very wind which drove them still steadily westwards.
They had come to the conclusion that there were no winds
on those seas to take them back to Spain.
But a contrary wind arose, calming this fear, and with
lessened speed the three small ships beat forward into it.
Drifting grass patched the sea. Far in the south-west arose
a great shadow on the sky. Columbus altered his course to
make it. Land was near.
But it was no land, only a cloud-shape that altered and
melted as the Santa Maria drew nigh.
On the 3rd of October there were again signs of land,
and the crew would have had Columbus stop and beat about
in search of it. But he had been deceived too often. In later
days he was to ascribe that determination to sail still further
west to his determination to reach the “Indies”. Rather we
may be certain it was merely a confusion of his own un¬
certainties.
But now the crew of the Santa Maria at least was quite
definitely mutinous, and Columbus had to set himself to pacify¬
ing them by as strange a collection of threats and promises and
lies as ever the commander of an expedition addressed to his
followers. What would happen to them in Spain should they
indeed sail back without him—or against his orders ? What
would their women-folk say of them ? Think of the riches of
these lands in the west that awaited their conquest. . . .
Day after day, and hour after hour, between the times of
those nervous pacings of the deck, he argued and soothed the
mutineers. But at last it seems that they refused the direct
westwards course. Martin Alonzo Pinzon came from the
Pinta and headed the mutineers. A compromise was arrived
at. On the 7th of October the course of the vessels was altered
to the south-west.
Four days later, and still the seas were untenanted. Then,
IOO NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
the thirty-third day of sailing from the Canaries, a “table-
board” and a carved wand, the carving apparently wrought
by “some metal instrument” were fished up over the side of
the Santa Maria. (Or did the Admiral drop them over the
side and then fish them up again ?) Sailors in one of the
caravels about the same time saw a drifting branch “with
berries fresh upon it”. Land was certainly near.
§5
And at last, indeed, those fragments of flotsam and jetsam
were justified. The afternoon passed with no sign of land
ahead, but at night, near ten o’clock, while Columbus was
pacing the poop he saw a light low in the west, and called
Pedro Gutierrez to witness it. The two of them stood there
and peered into the still night-smother, and again the light
flashed and winked low down in the waters. . . . They make
a fine and significant picture, those first of deliberate explorers
from the Mediterranean, seeing that first gleam betokening
human habitation in the unknown Americas.
They called the “overlooker” who had been deputed by
the Spanish court to witness all the actions and transactions
of Columbus, and Rodrigo Sanchez came slowly and un¬
willingly and stood between the Admiral and Gutierrez,
and with them looked into the west. Once again the light
flashed, and Columbus in some excitement drew Sanchez’
attention to it. At first the cautious “overlooker” professed
himself unable to see anything. But in a little even he could
not deny the evidence of his eyes. Light it was—“it appeared
like a candle that went up and down, and Don Christopher
did not doubt that it was the true light, and that it was on
land. And so it proved, for it came from people passing with
lights from one hut to another.”
There was no sleep on board the three vessels standing
off with furled sails that night. Of Columbus’s thoughts we
may guess : What was this land—Antilia, Cipangu, Wineland,
or (Mother of God ! he crossed himself in the dark) the
Fortunate Isle, the Earthly Paradise itself. . . . And he,
he, the non-sailor, the cloth-chapman of the Levant, had been
guided by God to its shores. ...
A reward of ten thousand maravedis had been promised
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN IOI
by the Queen to whosoever should first sight land. At two
o’clock in the morning of the twelfth a sailor on the Pinta,
one Rodrigo de Triana, called out that he saw land ahead ;
he was not mistaken. A low shore, tree-clad, was coming up
out of the mists of dawn. The vessels stood in towards it and
cast anchor.
It was the greatest moment in the life of that strange,
ruddy, grey-haired, devout and scoundrelly poet who was
the Admiral. He had the boats manned and himself clad in
full armour and carrying in his hand the royal banner of Spain
was rowed to the shore. The Pinzons, also banner-bearing,
put out from the Pint a and the Nina. The armed crews blew
on the lights of their match-locks and stared over the shoulders
of the rowers at the nearing beach—no deserted beach at all,
but one in the morning light crowded with a throng of men
and women such as no Europeans had ever seen—tall and
naked and staring their surprise in silence upon the newcomers.
Perhaps they gave back a little, those nude primitives,
as the strangers landed. Columbus fell to his knees as soon as
his foot touched the strand of the unknown country, and
offered up thanks to his God for having so preserved him and
justified him. All the rest of the Spaniards knelt as well,
and then pressed round the Admiral, excitably, many of them
in tears, to cry his pardon for their doubts of him and their
threatened mutinies. It was an affecting moment, and no
doubt the simple islanders, standing watching, thought it so
as well. They little realized how prophetic it was—those
tears shed by the first white men who came to their island.
The scene may be best seen through the eyes of the
islanders of Guanahani—that island that is now Watling
Island of the Bahamas. They had lived all their lives on that
island, as their fathers before them through long millennia,
a corner and outpost of the human drift, almost the last men
of the Golden Age that survived in the Central Americas.
They were without tools or weapons, classes or wars, gods or
kings, simple and kindly children of the earth and sea, Natural
Men as once were all our fathers. And up out of the morning
had come sailing those strange beings, so strangely shrouded
and clad, who were yet evidently men like themselves, albeit
overmen as well. They saw the strange beings kneel and cry
aloud in strange, harmful ways, as though in fear or pain,
and drew a little nearer, helpfully. But the incantations were
102 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
no more than the spoken words with which the Admiral was
taking possession of the land in the names of their majesties
the King and Queen of Spain.
The Spaniards saw they had nothing to fear from the
natives who flocked about them in simple friendliness. By
signs Columbus gathered that the name of the island was
Guanahani. Calmly obliterating its name even as he had
annexed its territory, he re-christened it San Salvador. The
sun was shining and the air clear and sweet; and looking over
the heads of the naked islanders he saw all their land behind
them in “the likeness of a great garden”. He looked at the
children of this second Eden, and for perhaps a while saw
them with strange clarity as the innocent and happy souls
they were, paradisal folk whose paradise his coming was to
end for ever. But that moment passed quickly enough :
Because they had much friendship for us, and because I knew they
were people that would deliver themselves better to the Christian faith,
and be converted more through love than by force, I gave to some of
them coloured caps and some strings of beads for their necks, and many
other things of little value, with which they were delighted, and were
so entirely ours that it was a marvel to see. The same afterwards came
swimming to the ship’s boats where we lay, and brought us parrots,
and cotton threads in balls, and darts and many other things. These
they bartered with us for things which we gave them, such as bells and
small glass beads. In fine, they took and gave all of whatever they had
with good will. But it appeared to me they were a people very poor in
everything. They went totally naked, as naked as their mothers brought
them into the world.
They were tall and red-skinned and handsome folk ; they
painted themselves, for amusement, agreeably ; they knew
nothing of arms or warlike practices—one took hold of a
Spanish sword by the blade, and hurt himself. Even their
darts were merely for the chase. “And I believe they would
easily be converted to Christianity, for it appeared to me that
they had no creed.”
Even so, they had also an obvious independence and
wildness that gnawed a little at the edge of this good opinion.
It was the wildness and intractability of the free wild animal.
Satisfied that their island contained nothing of note or worth,
Columbus had the ships weigh anchor. All the surrounding
seas they saw as they coasted slowly down Guanahani in the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN IO3
sun of that day, islanded unendingly. Columbus remembered
back into his early readings. Could these, the islands of the
Madeira pilot, be also the islands of Marco Polo ?
Five leagues from San Salvador, that re-christened
Guanahani, they came to another island, which the Admiral
named Concepcion. Here, even at such close quarters, he
found a slightly different type of life than at Guanahani.
Here the natives were cultivators of the Archaic Culture—
that culture that was slowly seeping though the Americas
from its focal points in Central America and Peru. It had
been carried to the West Indies by the Caribs, who themselves
had acquired it far up in the head-waters of the Amazon,
where that river’s tributaries rise in Peru. Raiders and head¬
hunters, the Caribs had settled here and there amidst the
Golden Age peoples of the islands. Some islands—such as
Guanahani—they had missed entirely ; some—as portions
of that Cuba now undistant from the Santa Maria’s course—
they dominated entirely. Concepcion was in a midway
condition : the state of happy, primal innocence had been
lost, but it was still a benevolent thing, this new culture,
ruled benevolently by its little sun-kings.
And now the Iron Age had come upon its world.
§6
In one of the Islands of Santa Maria de Concepcion
the eyes of the Admiral and his crews feasted on the sight of
some trivial golden ornaments which the natives wore. These
were regarded by the folk of the Archaic civilization (we
know) not as jewels or money, but as mystic Givers of Life.
To Columbus’s Spaniards gold also was a Giver of Life—but
in no mystic sense at all. With eagerness they questioned the
natives : where did the gold come from ? “From Cubanacan”,
was the answer, the natives pointing south.
Incredibly enough, Columbus took this word for a
corruption of Kublai Khan—the great emperor of Marco
Polo’s journey, dead two hundred years. He hastily assembled
his ships and coasted hurriedly southwards to the court of
Cathay.
Island on island confirmed the tidings: southwards
was the land of gold. Sometimes the name Cubanacan was
104 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
varied greatly. But at length they came to the shores of the
veritable El Dorado itself.
It was Cuba.
They coasted along the north-eastern part, questioning
the natives who put out in canoes. Gold ?—gold came from
the interior, from the mines of Ciboa.
The Admiral despatched two discoverers into that interior
—one a Jew who spoke Hebrew, Chaldee and Arabic, and
so would be able to converse with Kublai Khan on the terms
of the utmost familiarity. The “discoverers” came on neither
Mongols or gold ; instead, the first recorded Europeans to
view the practice, they came on tribes which indulged in
tobacco-smoking, an astounding and wizard-like practice.
Everywhere in those clearings of the Archaic folk of the
Americas they were treated with kindness and hospitality.
Meantime, in the vessels, things had gone not so well.
Martin Alonzo Pinzon and the Pinta disappeared. Anchored
off the territory of a chief called Guacanagari, Columbus
had the Santa Maria wrecked in a shore-wind ; he and his
crew decamped to the crowded Nina. Only one vessel was
left with which he might return to Spain, and his crews,
their enthusiasm considerably cooled, were becoming more
and more insistent that he should set about that return. He
resolved to establish a colony on Guacanagari’s land. Still news
of Kublai delayed.
Then the Jew returned : No Kublai, no golden city,
nothing but leagues of bush had been encountered. The
Admiral scolded him bitterly : the poet was fading to a ghost
below the armour of the gold-seeker. . . . And now he might
delay his return no longer.
The timbers of the Santa Maria were salvaged and the
fort of La Navidad built. Forty men—including the English¬
man and the Irishman—were left to garrison it. Then, on the
4th of January, 1493, the Admiral launched the Nina on her
return voyage.
§7
Meantime Pinzon in the Pinta, deliberately separating
himself from the company of the Admiral (whom he appears
to have despised very thoroughly) had set out in search of the
rumoured islands of gold. Several days’ sailing the Cuban
coasts had brought him no fabulous mines or cities, but
THE VOYAGES OF COLUMBUS
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN IO5
southwards, in an unknown bay, he had encountered natives
who possessed the metal in considerable abundance. Probably
they looked a sturdy breed, well able to defend themselves,
not the unarmed and fenceless primitives of Guanahani.
Instead of securing the gold by force Pinzon obtained a
fairly large supply by barter, and turned the prow of the
Pinta homeward.
It is a remote quarrel, that of Columbus and Pinzon,
in which geographers for four hundred years have found it
good to debate. Little sympathy has been given to Pinzon :
he has been portrayed, unendingly, as a mean and evil
personage sabotaging the schemes of the high-minded dreamer
and planner who commanded the expedition. But we may
see the matter with clearer eyes. Pinzon owned the Pinta and
probably the Nina ; it was at Pinzon’s suggestion—or perhaps
command—that the expedition had turned southwards on
October the yth and so come on land at all. Possibly he
considered himself as well qualified as Columbus to claim the
discoveries. And he had certainly more than the shadow of
a case.
Unfortunately, homeward bound on the 6th of January,
in the teeth of a head wind, his look-out sighted the Nina.
Both ships, almost simultaneously, had to put about and
shelter behind a headland, and Pinzon, to his chagrin, dis¬
covered the Admiral was on board the other caravel. He
re-submitted himself with surly apologies to Columbus’s
command, though it does not seem that he shared out the
gold with the second ship. Nor does it seem that Columbus
pressed him hard in the matter. But discovering half a dozen
natives in the Pinta whom Pinzon had abducted from an
island, intending to carry them into slavery across the Atlantic,
Columbus commanded that they be released. He refused, with
a singular clear-eyedness, to disturb that harmony in which
the natives had received them. The Indians who ultimately
accompanied them back to Spain were volunteers.
Ten days later the head-wind abated. Coasting Hayti,
the Admiral reluctantly abandoned further research along
those alluring shores. The wind blew now for Spain.
But presently it died ; they fought back in the teeth
of adverse breezes. The Pinta, with her rudder uncertain as
of old, retarded the passage. On the 12th of February they
encountered the first of the great Atlantic storms. For three
I06 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
days it raged, the caravels scudding before it with bare poles.
On the night of the fourteenth the signal-lights of the Pinta
disappeared, and Columbus’s own crew on the Nina gave up
all hope of their own safety, relapsing into one of those sudden
and easy despairs characteristic of their period and religion.
But the ruddy, grey-haired, mendacious poet who commanded
them lost neither his fortitude nor his faith. He commanded
that they load the empty water-casks with sea-water, the
better to ballast the caravel; and in a prayer swore that as
soon as they sighted land he and his crew would walk barefoot,
in penitential garments, to the first church dedicated to the
Virgin. The Atlantic, soothed by this promise or restrained
by the providential ballast, drove the Nina headlong east¬
wards, but declined to devour it.
Even so, the Admiral appears to have reflected that
there were mischances between both of these powers which
he had called to his aid. Accordingly, he wrote out a brief
account of his voyage and discoveries, enclosed it in wax,
sealed it in a small cask, and consigned it to the deep. Scarcely
had he done so than the greater fury of the storm abated.
The curling green monsters that had hurled them into the
night had tamed by the morning of the 15th of February.
Land was sighted—and almost instantly lost again in the
smother. It was the Azores.
On the night of the seventeenth other islands were sighted,
and the Nina lost an anchor in endeavouring to bring up under
their coasts. But when the next morning came they succeeded
in anchoring off the Portuguese island of St. Mary.
Here, landing in accordance with their vow, half of the
crew, barefoot and clad in their shirts, were making pilgrimage
to the chapel of St. Mary when they were ambushed by the
Portuguese and taken prisoner. Breechless, they appear to
have put up no resistance whatever. The Admiral, left on
the Nina with only three sailors, had the anchor raised and
beat away from St. Mary’s. But presently his ardour and
determination revived. It was impossible that the Portuguese
should flout the royal warrant of Ferdinand and Isabel. He
sailed back and held a parley with the governor of St. Mary’s.
Reluctantly that individual agreed that Spain and Portugal
were at peace and that the seizure of the be-shirted crew had
been unwarranted. They were restored to the Nina ; Columbus
steered for Spain.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN IOJ
More storms intervened to stay the voyage. The coasts
of Europe were strewn with wrecks. But again, as that morning
at Guanahani, it was Columbus’s hour. He rode the Nina
in triumph into the mouth of the Tagus on the 4th of March,
1493, after eight months absence from the shores of Spain.
§8
The Portuguese king proved more than friendly: he claimed
that Columbus had acted as one of his own pilots. For was
not all that stretch of the Ocean under the rule of Portugal ?
The Admiral declined to recognize the plea, and sailed for
Palos.
On the 15 th of March he sailed into the port where the
expedition had been raised and staffed with the criminal
off-scourings of the Spanish prisons. Two Pinzons he brought
back, but the other, together with the rudderless Pinta, had
apparently vanished in the troughs of the Atlantic. Columbus
hastily indited letters to the king and queen, then at Barcelona,
and prepared himself to set out for court.
But meantime Martin Alonzo Pinzon, undrowned, had
succeeded in steering the damaged Pinta into Bayonne. From
there, almost at the same day as Columbus reached Palos,
he despatched letters to Barcelona describing his voyage and
discoveries, and making no mention of Columbus. It seemed
a neck and neck race : never did Columbus’s fortunes hang so
precariously in the balance. But the Court without any
hesitation recognized their duly appointed commander:
Pinzon received an order not to appear at court except in
the train of the Admiral. Coupled with other ills suffered in
steering the Pinta across the wild seas the news was too much
for the Palos shipmaster. He lay dying in Bayonne on the day
when Columbus marched in triumphal procession through
the streets of Barcelona, his six Indians, parrot-laden in his
train, staring their astonishment and disquiet upon this
strange world in the maw of the sunrise.
Ferdinand and Isabella received him as a conquering
prince. He was granted a coat of arms ; the title Don was
bestowed on him and his brothers and descendants for ever
after. He was made a handsome allowance and was served at
table as a grandee.
He was the most honoured man in all Spain, and the
I08 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
most sought after. Sometimes, perhaps, he communed still
at night with the Levantine chapman. Sometimes, drowning
away from his own eyes all glory in his achievement, must have
come memory of his mistreatment of the Pinzons, knowledge
that though he had found new lands by the chances of luck
and mislore he had still no notion what lands they were.
Supposing one were the Earthly Paradise itself cravenly
abandoned by him ? . . . He would turn to prayer and new
resolves for the new expedition.
His title of Viceroy of the new lands was confirmed,
and he was appointed to command the new venture hastily
prepared. For Portugal was laying serious claim to the
discoveries. Ferdinand and Isabella, having finished with and
finished the Moors, were eager to acquire new lands and
convert fresh batches of the heathen. (Columbus’s six natives
were baptized with great enthusiasm, and one of them, dying
shortly afterwards, was solemnly adjudged the “first of his
race to enter Paradise”.)
Seventeen ships were chartered or commandeered for
the new expedition. Mattocks, spades, seeds, and plants were
loaded aboard them for the colonization of the islands. Men
flocked to volunteer for the new expedition—in the end the
squadron sailed with a complement of more than fifteen
hundred men. Among these were twelve priests, sent to
convert the natives—the “Indians”, as they were already
called, for at last it had been decided by the cosmographers
that the Admiral’s discoveries had been in the neighbourhood
of India.
The Admiral himself seems to have been less sure—he
wavered in belief between Cipangu, India, and the outskirts
of the Grand Khan’s dominions. But for the urgings of the
crew of the Nina, he gave it out, he might even have sailed
into the harbours of golden Opir or scriptural Havilah. He
had done no more, he affirmed, than touch on the outermost
and barbarous fringe of a great and wealthy continent, where
there was great treasure to be found and great hosts of souls
to be saved.
In that conviction—and indeed, though in another sense,
it was to be justified by the subsequent adventurings of
his countrymen—he sailed west in command of the new
expedition from the harbour of Cadiz on the 25 th of
September, 1493.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN IO9
§9
They sailed a prosperous passage, untroubled but by
one brief storm. Holding south of the route of the first
expedition, on Sunday the 3rd of November they had their
first sight of the New Lands. The island they came to was
one of the Lesser Antilles, and christened Dominica by the
pious Admiral from the fact of it being discovered on a Sunday.
It was uninhabited. Cuba, with its colony and fort of La
Navidad, he knew lay to the north-west, and cruised slowly
along the Lesser Antilles group in that direction. The
perfection of the weather held and with it the high spirits
of the thousand and a half adventurers aboard. Their eyes
were dazzled with the sheen of brilliant seas and brilliant
vegetation, the colourful sunrises and sunsets of those sleeping
sea-lands that verily seemed “islets of Paradise” to their
ocean-weary eyes.
But landing at a new island, Guadaloupe, they dis¬
covered horror. The inhabitants were no simple primitives,
but cannibal Caribs of a high scale of culture, with well-built
huts and roads, and parcels of dried human flesh hung in those
huts. Guadaloupe’s menfolk were absent on some sea-raid,
and the explorers saw only the women and children. They
embarked after a hasty and horrified search and hastily sailed
north.
Passing clusters of small islands on the way, they came to
one lovely and large and fertile—St. John, as the Admiral
named it, though it was afterwards re-named Porto Rico.
In its loveliness, as in Guadaloupe, only man was vile:
cannibalism was the mainstay of the Carib populace. Originally,
as we of a later day know, this cannibalism had been religious
and ceremonial in origin among the Carib tribes in the valley
of the Amazon. But it had developed beyond that ceremonial
usage. Large animals which could be used for food were
scarce in the Lesser Antilles : anthropophagy, inaugurated
by religious ritual, had become an economic way of salvation.
But the Spaniards knew nothing of these facts. To them
it was a terrifying and disgusting practice, the mark of beasts,
not men. It may be that it was in Porto Rico and in Guadaloupe
that there developed that first savagery towards the West
Indians which led to their ultimate extermination. That
IIO NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
the primitives of the northern islands, the Bahamas, were
neither Caribs nor cannibals mattered little to the Spaniard
in pursuit of gold or slaves. He could salve his conscience and
every murder by thinking of his victims as eaters of men.
The squadron coasted along Cuba and reached La Navidad.
The fort had disappeared : it had been razed to the ground.
The forty who had been left to man it had vanished—all but
a few poor skeletons and rusting fragments of armour. While
the dismayed Spaniards surveyed the ruins of the fort
messengers came to them from Guacanagari with the tale of
La Navidad’s end. The forty whom Columbus had left to
seal the friendship of Europe and America had from the
beginning displayed an amazing insolence and licentiousness.
They had wandered the island, taking what they would,
interfering with the Indians, loud, braggart and boastful.
Finally a neighbouring chief could bear with them no longer.
He had raised an army and marched it against the fort,
destroyed it, and killed the garrison. Guacanagari himself
had been wounded in defence of the white men.
Such was the story. Possibly Guacanagari himself had
played a less innocent part. Even so, it seemed even to the
Admiral, remembering the quality of those he had left behind,
that the chief might have been justified. It was plainly
impossible to think of rebuilding La Navidad. The native
Cubans had soured of the white men and their ways.
But a site and the building of a town were essential,
for the overloaded convoy already groaned with sick and
wearied men who cried for land, sight of the treasures which
had drawn them from their homes in Spain. Columbus
turned the squadron about and coasted down to Hayti.
Ar Cape Haytien he anchored and set about disembarking
stores and men on the jungly beach, there to rear the first
European city of the New World, Isabella.
Isabella progressed but slowly. The men were tired and
sick. But now the Admiral came out in less pleasing colours
than in those days in Spain when he had been the gracious
magnate receiving colleagues in a golden enterprise. He
drew up regulations for labour, and enforced them ruthlessly,
himself the while maintaining all the ceremonial state which
he considered a viceroy’s due. Isabella progressed amidst
quarrels and dissensions. Provisions ran short; medical supplies
gave out, and it was soon obvious to Columbus that the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN III
financial strain of the colony would be very bitterly resented
in Spain. Accordingly, he despatched an envoy to Ferdinand
and Isabella with the proposal that the current expenses might
be paid for by capturing hordes of the cannibal Indians and
shipping them to Spain as slaves. This, he thought, “would
be very good for their souls”. . . .
He was a poet, with the ruthlessness and shiftiness of the
poetic temperament. Like factors conditioned his greed
—there was no strange and abrupt transformation of
Paradise-seeker to slave-trader. He remained sincerely and
righteously both—the slaves an economic necessity both for
the quest of God’s City on Earth and the maintenance in due
state of the seeker God-appointed.
Slave hunting developed rapidly as a commercial activity
among sea-parties despatched from Isabella. Specimens of
the cattle were shipped to Spain. Meantime, the gold mines
of Ciboa had been found and workings there had begun under
the Spaniards, the natives having been violently dispossessed.
Columbus concluded that the new settlement might be left
to its own defences a while ; and in mid-April himself put to
sea in search of the golden land.
For five months he cruised to and fro the Jamaican seas,
discovering Jamaica itself and a host of islets amidst which
his squadron almost foundered. On this voyage it was that
he came to an island off which a strange craft was seen—a
canoe with sails, manned by cotton-clad canoemen. They
gestured that they came from still further to the west, and
the heart of Columbus, seeing their evident degree of civiliza¬
tion, rose high within him. What could they be but natives
of Cathay ?
However, he had no time to pursue investigations in
that still unknown west. Isabella called him back. First
cruising across the Lesser Antilles, he set his men slave-
catching among the cannibals, then turned towards His¬
paniola.
Hispaniola he found in confusion and turmoil. A gang of
malcontents whom he had sent from Isabella to survey
the country had roused all the Indians against them. Every¬
where the enraged natives of the Archaic Civilization were
rising against this new horror that the Iron Civilization had
brought. One of their chiefs with a numerous array was
marching on Isabella itself.
112
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Columbus was down with fever when his squadron put
in at Isabella. But at this news of the natives in arms he
bestirred himself with a pious energy, confident that God
would give the victory to His Christians. Brother Bartholomew
had arrived from Spain. Leaving him in command of Isabella,
the Admiral marched against the Indians.
It was a day of broiling heat and in the still air the corslets
of the Spaniards were stiflingly hot. But they winked with
a dreadful sheen in the eyes of the Indians with their stone-
tipped spears and wicker shields. The natives charged with
great bravery, and the Spaniards opened fire.
In a few minutes the fate of the battle was decided, the
Indians flying in rout, hotly pursued by the Admiral’s
Christian bloodhounds. Four shiploads of slaves were captured,
whipped back along the tracks to Isabella, and then despatched
to Spain. at j
Caonabo, who had destroyed the fort of La Navidad,
was also in arms. The Dons Bartolomeo and Cristobal
Colon marched against him with two hundred men, defeating
him with great carnage. Everywhere the Indians were
vanquished and those captured in arms enslaved. Caonabo
himself was captured by treachery, and despatched to Spain
for judgment as a arebel”. ]VIaliciously; he insisted on dying
during the voyage, thus escaping the wheel or the stake, the
first of the heroic native soldiers of the Americas who were
to resist the invaders. His place is with Mochcovoh the
Mayan, Quatemoc the Aztec, and the great “Stony-Face”
of Peru. . .
Tribute was now imposed on the Indians of Hispaniola,
and a general system of vassalage, land-slavery, implemented
for those unfortunate denizens of the Utmost Americas.
With a pious wish to save their souls and keep in being his
correct number of footmen, the Admiral who four years
before had spoken of the “free and simple folk” of Guanahani,
now instituted a regular and unceasing trade in human flesh
on a scale which would have made the cannibals of Guadaloupe
blanch with horror.
But things in the colony itself went from bad to worse.
They are hardly the concern of the record which deals with
geographical quest not that pitiful tale of insult and blood
and tears that has marched with colonial conquest. But their
effects on the fortunes of the exploring Admiral were profound,
XI3
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
if they left his strangely scoundrelly-idealistic nature un¬
changed.
In consequence of the complaints against Columbus’s
insufferable despotism a commissioner was despatched to
Isabella by the King and Queen. He arrived in October of
1495, heard the evidence preferred against the Admiral, and
drew up a report. There was no lack of evidence. Settlers and
thieves, colonists and Indians, flocked to him with the terrible
tale of the vivid injustices suffered under the rule of the
devout Genoan, whose poetic soul was sorely vexed at the
island’s ingratitude. He resolved to return to Spain and
justify himself before the court.
He boarded the Nina. At that Aquado, fearing lest his
report might be forestalled, boarded another caravel. A
passion for evacuation seized the Spaniards. Loaded caravels
put out one after the other from Isabella, seeking the Atlantic
loaded with misfortune and complaint. Bartholomew was left
to misgovern Hispaniola.
_ Provisions grew scarce as the voyage proceeded. The
ships were loadedwith Indian slaves whom the crews threatened
to kill and devour. It seemed that the Christians had become
infected with anthropophagy as well. Columbus, heedful to
the value of his cargoes, dissuaded them, and the starving
convoy reached the Bay of Cadiz in safety.
Here, with that practical unimaginativeness that stamped
his quality, Columbus decided on marching through the
country in such triumphal procession as had witnessed his
return from the first expedition. He proceeded towards the
court in glittering garments, on horseback, followed by chain-
gangs of Indians. But everywhere he was greeted with
reproaches or derision, for news of these two years’ failures
was well known in Spain. Men shouted insults and women
reproaches. Where were the gold mines of Havilah ? Where
was the Earthly Paradise ? Was that Indian the Grand Khan
—and that other—a Grander Khan ? Where were their
husbands, their sons, lured across the seas by his promises,
hanging roasted and dead in some cannibal hut ? . . .
The reception accorded him by the King and Queen was
courteously polite, no more. He was not placed on trial as
Aguado and Bishop Fonseca would have liked. But his pleas
for money for a further expedition were put aside into a
limbo of innumerable delays.
H
114 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
He was a broken man. Some few of that great flock of
imaginative mendacities he had unloosed upon the world
had come home to roost. Here, to all seeming, ended both
his quests and his discoveries.
§ io
But behind that sanguine mask (that had acquired in
his brief years of success a haughty pride) there was still
indomitable if indefinite will, indomitable faith in his own
fabrications and the romantic readings of the wool-carder
chapman. If the Earthly Paradise sank a little from hope
his cosmographical notions were still medieval. No less so
were his historical notions. He was convinced that beyond
those islands that had brought him little but false hope and
disaster lay the golden lands of Ind or the pearly lands of
Cathay. And it was his duty as a Christian to seek out those
lands and win the inhabitants to the true faith—winning for
himself a due pittance in wealth as reward.
For two years he badgered the court; and at length
began to wear down the resistance of Ferdinand and Isabella,
fundamentally kindly people, a pair who could not forget
the vague glory that the Admiral’s discoveries had attached
to their names. It was true that except as a breeding-ground
for criminals and a spawning-ground for a very ineffective
kind of slave, the Indies as yet had proved of little value.
But what if the Admiral were right in his further assertions—
that as yet they had but touched the fringes of the great
Western lands that might verily be the Eastern lands of
rumour and wealth ?
Indeed, it was now more than rumour that a great
Western mainland existed. Sailing with English ships,
Sebastian Cabot had set eyes on the North American continent
and cruised along a wide section of its shore. Columbus, now
that the king and queen had acceded to his fresh demand,
determined to sail to the south, “well under the equinoctial
line, for I believe that no one has ever traversed this way, and
that this sea is nearly unknown”.
(This sentence shows his uncertainty, his landsman’s
brief unfaiths in the dominant poet-prevaricator. For, as has
been said, even before his first voyage all the western Medi¬
terranean had been filled with rumours of the Atlantic lands.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN II5
And it was no impossibility that some such sailor as that
Madeira pilot had indeed traversed these infra-equinoctial
waters long before.)
With three ships he put out from the Cape Verde Islands
on a voyage and in a spirit singularly reminiscent of that
which characterized his first sailing. The trappings of viceroy
were put by for the time. He was again the simple if inefficient
commander of his ship, pacing the decks, staring at the bright
Atlantic stars, shivering in the chill of a dense fog that fell
on them on the 4th of July, 1498—a fog that “cut as with a
knife”. Presently the ships were again traversing those immense
fields of shining seaweed—though now • on their southern
fringe. The wind died and a glassy calm came on the seas.
The ships moved slowly—as though some under-water
current moved them, for the air was windless. To the Spaniards
the eerie motion was terrifying. The heat grew stronger as
the days went west, slowly, with limping feet, across the
glassy stretches of water. Presently it became so dreadful
that the crew refused to descend into the stench of the
caravel’s interior—even in order to succour their provisions
and water. Men went mad and cried to God for relief from
the burning intensity of the skies—a sky like a great inverted
brazen bowl. Then at last, when it seemed that the expedition
could endure no longer, a faint breeze rose and strengthened.
It sent the scud flying and bellied out the heat-frayed sails
of the ships. It drove them steadily west.
Three days later in the evening of the 22nd of July the
look-outs saw great streaming flocks of birds against the
sunset, homing towards the north-east. Land was again near,
Columbus adjudged, despite the like portents on his first
voyage which had betokened no land. Another week went by,
bird-flights every evening dotting the signature of the
sunset. Once a great albatross with wide-spreading wings came
to rest on the rigging of the Admiral’s own ship. Still there
was no sight of land.
But on Thursday, the 31st of July, Columbus’s outlook,
Alonzo Perez, cast his eyes westwards from the mizzen and
cried out that he saw land—far off, low down in the sea,
three great peaks rising warmly coloured. It was that headland
that later ages were to name Cape Cashepou, verily back¬
grounded by the three great peaks of Trinidad.
Columbus caused the vessels to cruise close in to the shore,
Il6 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
but finding no suitable anchorage held on his course to the
west. The shores of Trinidad unreeled before the staring eyes
of the crews—shores with cultivated fields backgrounded by
well-built huts. The Caribs ran and stared an even greater
amazement than the Spaniards. Then darkness came down
over the slow spread of Trinidad and the squadron kept on
its cautious course still west.
Morning found them still coasting Trinidad. So much
had the ships shrunk in the heat of the mid-Atlantic that
they leaked like sieves and the Admiral scanned the coast
with anxiety in search of a suitable harbourage for careening.
Anchoring and taking in fresh water near Point Alcatraz,
he| obtained his first view of the coasts of the American
continent—a long, low line of land with the running surf of
the Orinoco a bright limning all along it. He took the continent
for an island, and gave it the name of Zeta.
Coasting the richly cultivated and peopled coast, he
entered the Gulf of Paria—entering it involuntarily through
the high-ridged pressures of the Serpent’s Mouth, where
the autumn waters are caught betwixt Trinidad and the
South American coasts and pour forth with impetuosity.
The light ships of the Spaniards danced like corks, to the
consternation of their crews. A canoe-full of Indians had put
out from Trinidad that day to stare at the ship ; the Admiral,
wishing to attract them, and doubtlessly abduct them, had
his men play on a tambourine and dance on the poop.
Recognizing these as indubitably warlike demonstrations, the
Indians loosed a flight of arrows in reply and returned to the
shore.
Inside the Serpent’s Mouth, in the Gulf of Paria, the three
ships cruised slowly up the American coast for several days
finding the shores littered with heavily populated villages.
Coming to the Paria Point, Columbus, repaying the natives
their hospitality, abducted four of their number, and held
on in search of Cipangu. At last they reached the second
opening out of Paria, the Dragon’s Mouth, and passed that
in safety, coming again in the lie of the Lesser Antilles.
Asia and Havilah still delayed, but Margarita showed
up the following day a blur upon the sea and sky. Columbus,
albeit with absent-mindedness, reconnoitred its shores. But
all the sailors, the soldiers, the pilots—and probably the
cabin-boys—on board the three vessels had been confusing
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN llj
his never too-lucid mind from the moment they entered the
Gulf of Paria. Sight of its raging waters—fresh water—had
at first convinced the Admiral that what he had at first taken
for an island was in reality a continent, and that continent
of course Asia. He had proclaimed to the fleet that at last they
had reached the richest land in the World. The fleet had been
more than dubious. Some thought they had sailed round the
shallow rim of the earth and were again near Africa. Some
thought they were remote in the seas that fringe—of all
places—Scotland ....
Columbus’s mathematics collapsed under the strain
of uncertainty. Desperately he resolved to sail at once and
seek for Hispaniola—unless it also had vanished in some
crinkle of the maps.
So Margarita was given but the most cursory of surveys ;
the Admiral fled northwards from his kingdoms of fantasy in
search of recognizable geography.
§ ii
For three years after reaching Hispaniola Columbus
remained in control there. It was three years in which all
that was best in Columbus—the visioning explorer, the
attractive, if mendacious poet, the sincere, if fantastically
romantic religious enthusiast—became obscured in the role
of haughty governor and heaven-ordained viceroy. More
darkly, they became obscured in the slave-trader. On the
least pretext the miserable Indians of Hispaniola and the
surrounding Islands were driven into rebellion, pursued with
horses and bloodhounds, captured in hundreds and shipped
to Spain for sale in the market of Seville.
At last this practice reached such limits that Ferdinand
and Isabella—for their time enlightened rulers unless heretics
were at hand—could bear with it no longer. They forbade
a great sale in Seville and paid more attention to the constant
stream of complaints that were launched against Columbus.
So serious were these and arriving in such volume that
it was decided to despatch an investigator. He had no very
definite orders, the Comendador Francisco de Bobadilla,
but he was a fiery individual, and quite as egotistic as
Columbus himself. Arriving in St. Domingo on the 23rd of
Il8 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
August, 1500, he took possession of the Admiral’s house and
summoned Columbus and his brothers to appear before him
to answer innumerable charges.
_ News of this command flew abroad Hispaniola. The
miserable Spanish colonists flocked to testify against their
oppressor—the Genoan foreigner who had starved and bullied
and beaten them while he himself lived in luxury surrounded
by his brothers and favourites. These were the colonists. But
some of the Catholic priests spoke for the Indians—Indians
who had been left unbaptized in order that they might be
enslaved, Indians on whom Columbus had raided and warred
without cause or pretext till in the course of a short eight
years he had transformed that sleepy garden of the Archaic
Culture into a hell on earth. . . . Bobadilla, cold and
contemptuous, heard the spluttered defence of the greying
Admiral: and then ordered his arrest. His brothers were
arrested at the same time, flung in chains, and shipped aboard
a vessel bound for Spain.
With the chapman’s plebeian theatricalism ousting the
unauthentic aristocrat, Columbus insisted on wearing those
chains even on board the vessel; he insisted that he would
never have them removed except by royal command. The
Spanish settlers crowded to watch him pass to the vessel and
shout their execrations upon him. Flushed and haughty and
tired, he walked through their midst without a glance.
News of the fashion in which he had arrived in Spain
was carried to the court. The King and Queen, shocked at the
arbitrary methods of Bobadilla, ordered him unchained and
sent to the court in all honour.
Ferdinand, never the friend of the plausible, poetic
Genoan, refused to grant him an audience. But Isabella
received him semi-privately, and listened to his defence, and
rep led m words astounding enough in their reasonableness
and humanity :
Common report accuses you of acting with a degree
of severity quite unsuitable for an infant colony, and likely
to excite rebellion there. But the matter as to which I find
it hardest to give you my pardon is your conduct in reducing
to s avery a number of Indians who had done nothing to
eserve such a fate. That was contrary to my express orders.
As your ill fortune willed it, just at the time when I heard of
is reac of my instructions, everybody was complaining
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN II9
against you, and no one spoke a word in your favour. . . .
I cannot promise to reinstate you at once in your government.
People are too much inflamed against you, and must have
time to cool. As to your rank of admiral, I never intended to
deprive you of it. But you must bide your time and trust
in me.”
Bide his time . . . when on the tip of his eager tongue
was a great project to push still further west than the islands,
on a fourth great expedition which would bring him, by way
of a <cstrait” of which he had heard, to those dominions
in Asia which the Portuguese, sailing eastwards, were already
exploiting. . . . The Spanish rulers listened with some doubt
to weary months of pleading, and at last and again surrendered.
That golden tongue riddled every shield of sanity and reason
opposed to it.
On the 9th of May be sailed from Cadiz with five.ships.
He was strictly interdicted from putting in at Hispaniola
or meddling at all in the affairs of the colonies. But was he
not the Admiral ? On the pretext that one of his ships required
repairs he determined to make Isabella En route, he looked
at the skies and saw certain signs of the coming of one of
the great Atlantic storms. Unless he found shelter for his
squadron 
Ovando, the new governor who had superseded Bobadilla,
refused to allow the squadron shelter in the harbour. He
refused, equally, to delay the sailing of a great treasure-
fleet loaded with gold from the mines of Ciboa. On board it
sailed a cloud of the Spanish adventurers including Bobadilla.
Two days out at sea a great tornado smote it. One ship
escaped, having seen her companions whelmed in the great
Atlantic mountains. Columbus had proved a true prophet.
Escaping the worst of that storm himself by sheltering
under an unknown headland, he held on in the course of
his fourth expedition of discovery. Jamaica was reached on
the 14th of July, 1502. Still he held westwards. But.presently
the fleet almost foundered in the maze of cays and islets that
littered those seas—islands flowering a rank green or glimmer¬
ing rocky and inhospitable under the burning summer. The
winds died away.
For over two months the worm-eaten, leaking ships
tacked to and fro amidst those islets, seeking a wind to help
them escape. Scurvy came on the crews, and men sickened
120
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
from drinking the brackish waters of the islets. The summer
was one of exceptional heat. Presently mutiny grew loud-
voiced. Had the Genoese clown brought them here to perish
in company with his idiot self ? . . . Columbus paced the
deck, now white-haired, but vision-rapt and unapproachable
as ever, confident in the guidance of God and the sureties of
his own mendacity.
At last an easterly wind sprang up. The caravels moved
out into the Western Caribbean, hitherto unexplored. In
the course of a day’s steady sailing they sighted a small
island. It was Guanaja, off the coast of Honduras. Columbus,
giving it a cursory survey, for he had already seen the dark
limning of the continental mass in the west, was about to
sail on, turning towards the north but for an accidental
encounter. This was with a boatload of Indians from the main¬
land—cotton-clad Indians, traders in flint arrow-heads and
copper axes.
By signs the Admiral entered into communication with
them. Their leader, an ancient of imposing mien, appeared to
understand perfectly, though Spaniards and Indians had no
word of common vocabulary between them. Columbus by
signs inquired if Cathay and the court of the Grand Khan
lay near ? By equally impressive signs the ancient in command
of the canoe signalled Yes !
Close at hand was the land the strangers sought—a land
much frequented on the further shore by ships like the
Admiral s own and he would guide the Spaniards thither.
§ 12
. Had Columbus steered north-west, as had been his first
intention, he would have made Yucatan where the great
i Slatlc“inspired civilization of the Maya was slowly sinking
into decay. But instead, under the guidance of the volubly
sign-making Indian ancient, he steered southwards along the
coast of Honduras, bright with tamarinds and the ferns of
rocky headlands. This was the coast of the authentic Americas,
but Columbus believed it merely another island, though
one o great extent. Southwards, somewhere, lay the strait
leading to the Grand Khan’s dominions.
For three months, in a confusion 'of place-names that
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 121
have now vanished, he cruised up and down the Panama
neck seeking the strait or the country of gold “frequented by
great ships” of whom the Indian had told him. It is possible
that the Indian had re-told a rumour of trading vessels from
Asia seen on the Pacific side of the Isthmus. As we now know,
Asia traded with America into remote historic times and there
is nothing improbable in rumour of stranger ships in the
Pacific having been noised abroad throughout Honduras.
But that, at the best, had been beyond the reaches of the
impassable Isthmus.
Mosquitos plagued the crews by night, heat by day.
The rotting vessels made slow headway even with favourable
winds. Once, anchored off a creek, Columbus was attacked by
the Indians; once, seated in conclave with them, still querying
the whereabouts of Kublai, he observed the natives indulging
in a soothing pipe, and was somewhat alarmed believing them
magicians making spells against him. In early December came
a great storm, the waves bursting over the leaking vessels
in phosphorescent floods and driving Columbus back to
the shelter of the coast which at last he would have
abandoned.
Born of this minor mischance, however, came gold at
last. They had anchored off the territory of a chief named
Quibia—perhaps a heritor of the degenerate Code culture of
Panama. Gold was everywhere evident. By barter and actual
excavation large quantities of the ore were procured, and
the Spaniards, changeable and as easily enheartened as down¬
cast, were enthusiastic for remaining on those shores. A village
of huts, Bethlehem, was built on the bank of a stream, and
there the Admiral determined to leave a garrison of eighty
men while he returned to Spain for supplies and reinforce¬
ments. Bartholomew was left in charge and the Admiral put
out to sea.
Unfortunately, Quibia, maltreated by the Spaniards,
had gathered his forces and prepared to attack the settlement.
Braves crept forward under the cover of darkness and sank
the few leaky boats left for the use of the colonists. A dozen
Spaniards up the reaches of Bethlehem stream were massacred.
Frightened, the settlers would have communicated with
Columbus still lingering in sight of the shore and awaiting
a favourable wind. But there was no means whereby to
communicate.
122
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
In this strait they were aided by the uneasiness of
Columbus himself, fancying that all was not well in the
settlement. His own boats were incapable of making the three-
mile passage to the shore, but the pilot Ledesma, the solitary
hero of the expedition, leapt overboard and swam through
the shark-infested waters till he reached Bartholomew.
Columbus’s ships were signalled shorewards again, and the
expedition re-embarked.
Before they could sail again, however, a caravel, leaking
too desperately, had to be abandoned to the winds and
tides.
The ill-fated Bethlehem settlement hull down in the
north west, Columbus coasted the Darien Peninsula for a
short while longer; then, abandoning still another caravel,
steered for Cuba towards the end of May. The sieve-like ships
staggered drunkenly through the squalls of the Caribbean.
In the mist of one night the two remaining ships collided
head-on, and for a while were like to sink with all hands.
Indomitably the Admiral had them re-patched. Hunger
assailed the crews; land was lost for days. But at last, weary
and forsaken, they sighted the southern coast of Cuba, where
food was obtained from natives still hospitable enough to
succour the needy, even though these might be the white
devils from the sea.
With that coming to Cuba there ends the tale of Columbus
t e explorer, the seeker of the Earthly Paradise, even as there
begins a long record of him as marooned mariner, cowardly
courageous commander, and—persisting to the end—men¬
dacious egomaniac. Behind him, westwards, the Americas
drowsed in sleep, the war-rent lands of the great Maya
civilizations with their scrolled temples and strange gods, the
sun in its full splendour before sunset on the strange aberrant
splendours of the A.ztec genius in floriferation, the Inka
confederacy dominating Peru and the surrounding lands,
immense and seemingly impregnable ; that, and the league¬
stretching plains of North America, the forested immensities
° Amazonia, the little patches by river and mountain where
xt aSi 1?ah?mas, the ^st of the great groupings of
Natural Man lived that free and happy and animal-like
existence which was soon to end for ever as the tides of a newer
and crueller civilization rolled eastwards in the track of the
Lrenoan s chance discovery.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
123
§ 13
But the shell of the poet-explorer cannot pass beyond our
horizon without a glance of interest. From that southern
anchorage at Cuba, Columbus, despairing of making His¬
paniola, crossed the straits of Jamaica and ran his ships on
shore, embedding them in the sand. Then he sat down and
wrote letters to Ferdinand and the Governor of Hispaniola,
asking for aid and describing the wonders of Panama in the
usual terms of overflowing optimism and exaggeration.
These letters were carried by his lieutenant, Mendez,
after numerous encounters and flights and fights and travails,
to San Domingo. Months went by and no news of relief came
to the two ships stranded off Jamaica. The natives grew less
friendly, suffering from the depredations of a scoundrelly
Spaniard, Porras, who had quarrelled with the Admiral.
Porras finally decided to seize the ships for himself and his
fellow-mutineers. He attacked from the woods and a pitched
battle on the sands was witnessed by the asembled Indians.
Porras was defeated and captured, mainly through the
instrumentality of brother Bartholomew, and on the 28th
of June two caravels arrived from San Domingo to carry the
shipwrecked sailors from Jamaica. Columbus, with a happy
disregard of the actual situation from which he had been
rescued, sailed in apparent confidence that in Hispaniola
Ovando the Governor would give way to the superior authority
of the Viceroy.
Ovando displayed no such inclination. There followed a
month of wrangling, the haughty and ageing Genoese opposed
to the cool and dried Ovando, a typical Spanish Grandee.
Then Columbus took ship from the Indies, and never saw
them again.
Even on this last voyage misfortune dogged him. The
Atlantic was swept with storms and great seas beat on the
deck of his ship. Ill with a fever which came with gout,
Columbus lay in his cabin and listened to the thunder of the
weather and turned a weary head to seek rest again, disillusion¬
ment at last upon him.
Nor was that unwarranted. The court sent no summons
for him to appear. He had wasted the fortunes of the fourth
expedition, he returned with no news of the imagined strait
124
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
or having penetrated to the elusive dominions of that elusive
Kublai who had been sleeping the last sleep in dusty Peking
two hundred years. Columbus was carried to his house in
Seville, to the attentions of that devoted family which held
by family feeling with a strong Italian tenacity. Had he been
able to sink himself in the care of his neglected Beatriz or
the devotion of his sons, Diego and Ferdinand, he might even
then have escaped to life and health.
But such grace and greatness was beyond the Genoese,
unabandoned still by his own febrific fabrications of fantasy.
For him life had become the pursuit, ever westwards, of the
golden kingdoms of myth and imagination. He was incapable
o resting and taking his ease. Presently Diego was despatched
to the court to plead his case. He had little time for effective
pleading. Isabella, the only person likely to listen again to the
Admiral, was dying. With her death on the 26th of November
his last hope of receiving either reinstatement or funds for
a new expedition vanished.
He lingered on two years more, white-haired, pain-racked,
insatiable still of reinstatement. At Vallodolid in early May
it became plain that his time was short. He had a priest sum¬
moned and received the offices of his Church with the same
fervent devoutness as had characterized all his life ; he looked
round at the faces pf the family which encircled him, and
orgot them, staring in spirit still westwards ; then his thoughts
strayed fr°m even that worldly longing. His last whisper was
Into ihy hands, Master, I commend my spirit.”
And when that enigmatic spirit had sailed into the dim
seas to its utmost bourne, surely his Earthly Paradise at last,
ey une the strayed chapman of Genoa in the monastery
oi Las Cuevas of Seville. J
$ 14
consequences which followed the discovery of the
sailing-route across the Atlantic focused on their discoverer
more attention than has been paid to any other of the earth’s
conquerors. He has been viewed through innumerable works
i“erajle eyf’ from lnnumerable viewpoints. He has
been acclaimed as the hero that son Ferdinand saw him; as
has seidomCbSter .r °m p® ,<--asas viewed. But his greatness
has seldom been disputed. His feet may be feet of clay, heavy
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I25
poet’s feet splashed with the blood of human suffering, but
they are planted certainly enough upon that “New World
beyond the wave” which he gave to Castile and Leon.
Yet he was not the first European discoverer of America :
Leif Ericcson, on a similar quest, had preceded him; the
mythic Irish voyagers of the seventh and eight centuries may
have preceded him; and—more seriously—the strayed pilot
whom he met at Madeira had preceded him. His discovery
was not of a New World—which all his life long he strenuously
denied and disbelieved. His discovery was of the sailing route
across the Atlantic.
Even so, it was great enough. It loosed upon the sparsely
inhabited American continent the hungry hordes of over-
populated Europe. It loosed new motifs in art and science
and perhaps religion. It ended for ever those great and strange
experiments in civilization on which the native Americans
were employed. And for all Europe it meant a great lifting
and widening of horizons, cultural and geographical.
It meant the vanishing from the minds of men for ever of
the flat-earth hypothesis, did that hypothesis still lingeringly
endure; it meant the breaking down of a great and elaborate
synthesis of thought regarding the earth’s origins, the origins
of all men, the connection of the facts of ethnology and history
with the Mosaic myths. Nothing has been so fruitful of
discussion and discovery as the question of the origins of the
Red Indians and their various strange cultures. America,
where the last of the great masses of Natural Men—neither
savage, barbarian, nor civilized—were encountered as a
consequence of the establishment of the transatlantic route,
influenced profoundly contemporary and subsequent political
and politico-sociological thought. It may be said, indeed,
with its influence upon Thomas More and Rousseau and the
Encyclopaedists, that Columbus fathered the French Revolu¬
tion and modern humanitarianism. He was (a ruddy, horrified
shade) the godfather of modern Rationalism, the Diffusionist
School of History, the philosophy of Anarchism.
These were no more than undreamed consequences. His
own stature was not great: it was as fantastically puny as his
cosmography was fantastically irrelevant. Europe had des¬
patched to the Far East in the person of Marco Polo a bright
and hard young Venetian merchant-adventurer as its envoy
to the Kingdom of Wonder ; to the west it despatched in
126
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
quest of the haunting Fortunate Isles which Leif had looked
upon a dream-ridden, inefficient Genoese wool-carder who
suffered from an inferiority complex and a congenital inability
to refrain from prevarication. But beyond and above the pitiful
clown with the numerous footmen in Haiti, the theatrical
chains at Seville, there abides very essential and real the
Explorer whose horizons the undiscovered West so vexed :
there is the Columbus of the First Expedition who paced his
decks and saw the falling star and was undaunted as that
strange beacon of. God beckoned him on the Americas, the
light of whose native peoples he quenched.
V
CABEZA DE VACA’S QUEST FOR THE
CITY OF GOD
§ i
BOTH of the great continents of North and South
America had been discovered—or rediscovered—by-
Europeans before the year 1500. Thereafter followed,
century on century, the penetration of those continents by
explorers who seldom enough followed such flag of fantasy
or single-minded faith as would bring them within the pages
of this record. They explored for purposes of plunder and
profit, seldom in the cause of divine perversity.
Even yet the task of exploring the Americas is incomplete :
there are still little lost valleys in the northern crinkles of
Canada on which the aviator gazes astounded ; there are still
great stretches in Brazil into which a Colonel Fawcett may
disappear. But the main limnings of river and mountain and
plain are now known : there remains little to be done but the
filling in of the minor pieces of a giant mosaic.
In that late fifteenth and early sixteenth century it is
curious to note how the main work of apprehending the
geographical contours of the Americas paused and swirled
about the confluences of the two continents for over thirty
years. Central America, with Mexico, was the focus for
European eyes and the background for European adventure.
Only slowly did men strike north and south of the narrow
Neck, into the illimitable plains of the north, into the illimi¬
table forests of the south.
This for the best of reasons: Columbus’s discoveries and
settlements had been in the islands ; at a short distance sail,
westward, lay the Central Americas. And the traditional
route of Atlantic exploration was due west, in search of either
a passage through this mysterious land-mass to Asia, or in the
belief that the land-mass itself was a portion of Asia. That
tradition resulted in the discovery of Yucatan and its north¬
wards coasting by Juan de Grijalva and others; it resulted in
127
128
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
the discovery of the great congeries of Amerindian civilizations
which in the modern mind link together under the name of
Aztec ; and it resulted, finally and completely and disastrously,
in the raiding expedition of the Spaniards against the Aztec
Empire.
Captained by the slaver and planter, Hernando Cortes,
a small force of Spaniards in 1511 landed in the region of the
modern Vera Cruz, marched through an indifferent or hostile
country, tributary to the High Chief of the Aztecs, Moc-
tezhuoma, and reached that Moctezhuoma’s capital, Tenoch-
titlan, with but little resistance offered them. They found
Tenochtitlan a great lacustrine city, “finer than Seville”,
stone-built in great streets, with gigantic pyramidal structures
the design of which had been imported from Cambodia long
before, with gigantic and affrighting idols and religous rites
which represented the driftage and seepage century on century
across the Pacific of all the stray theological notions that had
ever irritated the Asiatic mind. And they found this culture
a golden culture : gold was as plentiful in the reality as it
had been in the dreams of Columbus and his first fellow-
adventurers.
. story of that murder of the Aztec civilization is not
with this record : our conquest is of another kind. The Aztec
Empire fell to pieces before the musket-volleys of the Spaniards
and gold flowed into Spain in dazzling torrents, throwing the
world financial market into such chaos as impoverished Spain
or three long centuries. This was history’s ironic commentary
on the looting of Mexico’s vast treasure-house; the geographical
repercussions were no less ironic.
Spain, almost unchallenged, dominated intercourse with
the New World across the Atlantic ; and to Spain, after the
discovery of Mexico, that New World gradually betook
itse ^oni shores of the Atlantic into the cloudy regions
o myth and legend. Mexico : it was well known that Mexico
was ut a poverty-stricken parish in comparison with the rich
an amazing kingdoms that yet awaited exploitation north
and south of the devastated Empire. Indians had been cap-
ure with the tales of a Seven-Citied Kingdom of Golden-
oors, ndians had been tortured to the story of a king who
ai Y an^ointed himself with gold-dust and nightly and
negligently washed that dust from his person. . . . So/cloud-
capped cities in a strange cloud-cuckooland, Ciboa and
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I29
Manoa cam© to haunt the minds and desires of the poverty-
stricken gentry and commons of Spain. Men sold all their
worldly goods not to follow Christ, but to follow the beckoning
star of wealth, easily achieved, easily looted, in the magic
Americas. The Atlantic bore on every ship a host of greedy
adventurers confident of a return to Spain and an endless life
of wealth and pleasure on the barren home Peninsula, served
on golden platters by the daughters of Amerindian princes.
As a result, the Americas were explored with an intensity
and passion, if a staggering unintelligence, that for the moment
clouds the achievements of our star-following earth-con¬
querors into insignificance. In that lust for gold around and
about the year 1523 Alejo Garcia, a Portuguese marooned
with a few companions on the Rio de la Plata in South America,
gathered a force of Indians and marched north-westwards in
quest of Manoa. Chartless and mapless, they plunged into
land that is still posted on the maps as <cterra incognita”.
They traversed unstayable the wild lands where Fawcett was
to vanish four hundred years later, they crossed the green hell
of the Gran Chaco and actually reached to the foot of the
Andes, and touched there on the Spanish conquests coming
from the Pacific. Somewhere on those desolate western slopes
Garcia and his companions fought a great battle against a
native community rich in silver, looted the community, and
turned about, treasure-laden, to recross South America at its
widest part and gain the Atlantic again. And that stupendous
journey they again accomplished, only at the Paraguay to be
killed and scattered by epidemic or war and all their loot lost.
. . . Compared with the wild Odyssey of those cruel and
competent and vigorous adventurers, the exploits of such star-
followers as Leif and Christopher pale for a little into
seeming insignificance.
But it is little more than seeming. They left few if any
reliable guides to the countries they traversed, those plun¬
dering adventurers; Indians were for them soulless brutes
of no distinct speeches or cultures—the abundance or lack of
tribal gold the only distinction. They confused river and
mountain and plain very thoroughly; their light upon the
unknown scene is the flare of a beacon lighting a countryside
doubtfully and presently quenched in blood. After them came
the ploddings of the merchant-explorers, as they may be called,
the phalanges of the commonplace who are also outside this
I3O NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
record. And amid them is here and there a star-follower or
two who kindles to our touch with authentic glow—of them
all Cabeza de Vaca the most noteworthy.
He was neither the greatest nor the best; but the chances
of his life gave him to a great venture into the wild lands of
the North American Continent, one almost equally great in
the tracks of that expedition of Garcia’s which was whelmed
by the Paraguay River. And on both of these ventures—as
confused as Columbus, his search for the land of gold and his
quest for the City of God inextricably mixed—he trod a
unique track.
§ 2
Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca was born in Jerez in Southern
Spain about the year 1492—the year of the discovery of the
American sailing-route by Columbus, twenty years after the
subjugation of the Canaries by his grandfather, Pedro de
Vera.
His was a noble family, if the nobility in legend had been
endowed it only a short three centuries. That legend led back
to the year 1212 when a shepherd guided a Christian army
across the Sierra Morena by a secret pass he had marked with
the skull of a cow. For this service the Vera of that time
was ennobled, his descendants using indifferently the honorific
“Cowhead” (Cabeza de Vaca) or the family name, de Vera,
with a happy improvidence greatly confusing to the historian
but apparently undisturbing to themselves.
Little or nothing is known of early life of Alvar Nunez.
All Spain was aglow with rumour of great treasure and great
fighting at that time; his grandfather, the conqueror of the
Canaries, no doubt refought his battles over again in the
presence of the young and impressionable lad. One builds up
of him a portrait, modified from that self-painting of later
days, of one cool and watchful—and even then oddly, quietly
doubtful. That indeed was to become his dominating character¬
istic—a quiet, questioning doubt of everything affirmed or
believed of this terrestrial scene. Only the celestial scene itself
he was never to question; he grew to the devoutest of Catholics:
his devoutness was to become of a quality almost comparable
to that of St. Francis of Assisi.
Yet such devoutness was no bar to share in warfare:
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I31
it was indeed, in that society and reach of life into which
Cabeza de Vaca was born, understood to be complementary to
warfare. The brutish adventurers in the West Indies who, in
the days of Cabeza de Vaca s childhood, would crucify a dozen
Indians in a row in imitation of the Twelve Apostles were
doubtlessly aberrant abominations from the true human
norm, conditioned from early years to cruelty and neglect
and ferocious disciplines; but that cruelty was largely religious
in origin. Christ and the saints if they did not openly delight
in blood and torture welcomed an auto-de-fe of erring souls,
sniffing the sweet savour of burning and tortured flesh!
Human cruelty was the incensing of celestial sadism.
In 1511 war began in Italy between the Pope and the
Italian princes ; Cabeza de Vaca sailed as a cadet in a Spanish
contingent loaned to the Pope by Ferdinand of Castile and had
speedy opportunity to put both his skill in arms and his
devoutness to test.
. Tiie Papal Army and its allies marched against the Italian
princes and their French allies. At Ravenna the two armies
met and for a long and bloody day disputed the passage to
Bologna. By nightfall the Papal forces were fleeing in bloody
rout and the French themselves preparing to retreat from
that Pyrrhic encounter. Here, for almost the first time in
European warfare, the enormous destruction achievable by
heavy firearms was obtrusive; a gasp of horror went up from
all Europe. Cabeza de Vaca, a young man shaken and nervous
from the sights of that horrific field, reached Naples with
other sections of the rout, and there apparently succeeded in
recovering his composure. For shortly afterwards we find him
appointed governor of Gaeta near Naples, a considerable city
where he was to remain a long twelve years that is for us a
passing breath, if for him no doubt a flowing current of tribu¬
lation and happiness and dread and careless indifference in
the minute ripplings of the river of life.
In 1513 there is a glimpse of him in the light, before he
vanishes into the clash and glitter of the long years of civil
war waged between the Spanish monarchy and the insurgent
nobles, the Comuneros. Returning from Italy, he took service
with the Duke of Medina Sidonia as a steward for that noble¬
man of Seville. Medina Sidonia was a monarchist; Cabeza
de Vaca followed him into the field against the nobles with
what feelings or beliefs there is no knowing. He seems to have
132 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
acquitted himself with no great distinction : one has already
doubts if his heart was in this business of war.
At the least, when those wars ended, he passes into
obscurity again, to Jerez and a life dull, if happy, a life of
marriage with a woman whose very name we do not know.
But it is fair to assume theirs a happy marriage, for in sub¬
sequent years she was to mortgage all her property on the
ventures of the strange man who had left her side and vanished
into the doubts and forays of the kingdoms beyond the
Atlantic.
But that time came slowly. He seems to have moved to
Seville, perhaps as retainer in some noble house; he seems
to have had little interest in the tales that flooded the streets
and quays of Seville—tales of conquest and discovery and
conquest yet again, Cortes and his subjugation of Mexico,
the voyagings of that Magellan who preceded him in venture
but follows him in our record. It is as possible that he could
have met and talked with Magellan as it is unlikely that he
ever sought the opportunity. They were too fundamentally un-
alike in all passions but one—and that passion still unawakened
in Alvar Nunez.
But in 1526 he fell in with a remarkable visitant from the
New World, one Panfilo de Narvaez, a dull and unscrupulous
man who still laboured under the grievance that but for a
night-sortie on the part of Cortes capturing and dispersing
his rival raid on the Aztec Hegemony he himself might have
attained the glory of the conquest of Tenochtitlan and the
rich kingdoms of Mexico. Narvaez by then lacked an eye;
but he came back to Spain filled with visions. To the north of
Mexico—in the dim lands behind that Florida which Ponce
de Leon had by now discovered—was a great and glorious
kingdom where the streets of the cities were paved with
gold and simple kings awaited conquest. He petitioned the
right to conquer this great territory for Spain and, after long
months of intrigue and question, had the right granted to
him—he himself to equip the expedition and assume all
responsibilities.
His treasurer the records display—astonishingly, con¬
sidering his previous attitude towards such ventures—as
Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
133
§ 3
The expedition sailed from San Lucar de Barrameda on
the 17th of June, 1527. It consisted of five caravels, loaded
with over six hundred men, crossbowmen and men-at-
arms, ennobled adventurers and adventurous nobles. In
their company went five Franciscan monks, deputed to preach
the Gospel to such of the heathen as would survive their
conquest of the northern Americas. Amongst the nobles was
a Mexican cacique, Tetlahuehuetzquittzin, whom the Nar¬
vaez expedition had mercifully rechristened “Don Pedro”
in the interests of brevity or loquacity. Cabeza de Vaca’s
duties included those of provost-marshal as well as treasurer ;
in that turbulent company it is unlikely that the office was a
sinecure. The lash and half-drownings were the customary
disciplinary tools of the time : and it is probable that Alvar
Nunez was a provost-marshal with no great heart in the
work. The ships were overcrowded in the fashion to which
men of the time were accustomed ; to our day they would
have much the same seeming as those loaded slavers that crossed
that sad Atlantic so many times in the centuries to follow.
Early in August Narvaez’ fleet put in to San Domingo,
where over a hundred of the expedition promptly deserted,
seeking native women and Cuban wealth rather than adventure
further afield. Sailing on for Cuba, Narvaez attempted to
recruit to a greater strength, and here it was that most of
the expedition’s horses'were purchased. Cabeza de Vaca and
another were sent south, forage-hunting, each in command
of a vessel. A great storm came on, wrecking the vessels while
the two commanders were ashore, and laying waste most of
the southern half of the island. Terrified at this manifestation
of the winter Atlantic, Narvaez determined to lay up the
ships until the Spring should come. The three surviving
vessels were sailed to the port of Jagua, beached and careened,
and the expedition encamped in boredom and squalor and
riotousness for a long three months of which we know little
or nothing, though we can guess much. By mid-February
Narvaez was convinced that his attempts at recruiting were
fruitless. He sailed to the dimly known coasts of Florida with
four hundred men and eighty horses. Already the expedition
had lost a third of its complement.
134 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Out of the shelter of the islands misfortunes commenced
anew. Storms drove the little ships, loaded with seasick
landsmen, to and fro amidst the drummling seas for nearly
six weeks. Not until the 12th of April was the land of Florida
sighted. But that sight was encouraging, the storms had
cleared away and the low Florida beach glimmered in the
green of its bright vegetation and the translucent sheen of its
grey sands. Sailing cautiously northwards in search of good
anchorage, they finally put in at a spot now known as The
Jungle, and appropriately so known, lying a little north of
the modern St. Petersburg.
Here Narvaez proceeded to disembark and set out on his
conquest of the North American continent.
§4
Near at hand was an Indian village, visible above the
low scrub that mantled the shores. It was strangely silent.
Suspicious of ambush, the Spaniards advanced upon it
cautiously, finding it entirely deserted. The small huts brooded
in complete quietude around the central “long-houses” ;
there was little but domestic rubble to be found in the interiors
as the disgusted Spaniards searched to and fro. Then, fate¬
fully, a soldier found a golden rattle in one of the buildings
a trade-product from Mexico, perhaps, in the days before
the coming of the white men to the American continent. It
was hailed with glee, an obvious sign that the expedition was
on the right track for the golden cities. Men remembered the
poverty-stricken appearance of the coastal villages of Mexico :
so here, inland also, lay the great cities of wealth.
Preparations were at once on hand for a march into the
interior. On Easter Sunday a solemn mass was held on the
beach ; and on this day the first Indians were observed. They
were doubtlessly the villagers who had fled from Gold-Rattle
Village. They stood on the fringe of the jungle and gestured
their aversion to the Spaniards—they gestured “go away”.
Solemnly the Spaniards knelt and disregarded the heathen.
Thereat there followed, in the usual fashion of these
expeditions, weeks of delay and wrangling. There were two
schools of thought among the leaders : one favoured embarking
on a land expedition at once, the other, of which Cabeza
e Vaca was champion, favoured the finding of a suitable
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 135
anchorage for the fleet and a ready supply of food for the
soldiers before betaking themselves on the search for Ciboa
through the bright jungles of Florida. For food began to run
short. Also as usual, an insuflicient quantity had been shipped
from Spain and insufficiently augmented at Cuba. Nor was
there much supply to be encountered in this new land itself.
Raiding northwards, the Spaniards (who in Cabeza de
Vaca’s narrative are consistently, and with unintentional
humour, referred to as “the Christians”) had come on two
native villages surrounded by minor plantations of corn and
squash. These plantations they had duly despoiled, apparently
aided rather than hindered by the inhabitants, mild and peace¬
able people in the same cultural stage as those Archaics whom
the Spaniards had now almost exterminated in the Islands,
in the Old Civilization stage, ruled by minor Children of the
Sun, warfare known but seldom practised, tall and kindly
men and women given over to the tilling of the ground and
the reading of the sky for weather-portents, their lives absorbed
in the worship and life-being of that Giver of Life, their ruler,
their deaths evil things to be averted through the repetition
of those propitiatory ceremonies which had crossed the
Pacific to America fifteen hundred years before.
At length the quarrels of the expedition were ended by
compromise. The ships would sail north questing a good
harbour. The soldiers would also journey northwards, and
at the first great opening in the land turn seawards, meeting
the ships.
Northwards, as they had already gathered from the
Timucua Indians of the neighbourhood, was veritably the
land of gold—Apalachen. In that far day and long anterior
to it it seems that the great Giver of Life had indeed been
mined in some quantity by the Apalachee Indians of Northern
Georgia—mined and exported or hidden away by barbaric,
cultureless miners. But the Spaniards knew nothing of that.
They believed that a second Tenochtitlan was close at hand.
On the 1st of May they marched northwestward into the
interior.
§5
On the map that journey up and across the Suwanee
River to the neighbourhood of the Ochlockonee looks of small
136
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
import, a mere indentation on the familiar American coast¬
line. But to that exploring party it was an Odyssey of far
travail in their gear oi armour and stout leather, inadequate
and poor food, in their crippled, diseased, gold-haunted mental
equipment. Swamps and creeks and the bright shimmer of
still more dripping swamps swam ahead their forward vision
day on day. It was a land as trackless as it seemed uninhabited,
there was no food to be gathered, no gold, nothing but foot-
ache and weariness. Presently their high spirits began to
evaporate very rapidly.
The shore remote and unseen far to the left, they came to
the Withlacoochee, and swam it or ferried over their gear to
the point where an Indian village at last uprose in the jungle.
It was an agricultural settlement and they raided the fields,'
ravenousiy, weeping for gladness at the taste of fresh foods’.
The Amerindians regarded them with a stony wonder. Here
they halted a little while, Cabeza de Vaca tells, while an
expedition was sent down the river to look for the ships at
its mouth. But there was no mouth : merely a long, flat echoing
shoal of beach where no ship sailed, and remote on the horizon
the tumbling waves of the Mexican Gulf playing under a
hot sun.
They took to the trackless forests again, north-westwards,
m search of golden Apalachen. Here and there villages rose
from the forest depth: they were met by Indians of a different
breed from any they had hitherto encountered—tall, cool
men,, musicians and warriors, for here the Archaic Civilization
was m its third state of development: inter-tribal war had
come on the scene with the death or decay of each tribal
bun Child rule They regarded the Spaniards with a bright,
nef interest, fed them, directed them northwards by signs,
and, near the Suwanee, became bored by them, fired a flight
appeared8 ^ dr°Wsing camP one niSht> and then dis-
Six weeks after setting out from the coast the Spaniards
came at last m view of the golden city of Apalachen, guided
thereto by captured, and doubtlessly tortured, Indians. They
attacked the town in a great cavalry charge, Cabeza de Vaca
Pr>ummAnd10fithe ®tol-ming~party. No resistance was offered.
Golden Apalachen had neither walls nor castellated points,
lonkW YT8 n°r ^m^attlements- Instead, it was an ordinary¬
looking Indian agricultural village, deserted at the moment
NORTH AMERICAN JOURNEY OF CABEZA DE VACA
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I37
the while its braves were on the warpath northwards. The
disgusted and heartsick Spaniards looted and plunged
amidst the huts and drove out the women and children : no
gold, no treasure, yet they gathered that this was veritably
Apalachen.
It was a lacustrine “city”, Cabeza deVaca tells: probably
the lake was Lake Miccosukee in modern Jefferson County,
in thickly wooded country that swarmed with wolves and
bears and similar unkindly fauna, deer also, and that pouched
animal, the humble oppossum, on which Cabeza de Vaca
and Europe gazed astounded for the first time. But there was
little peace for deer-hunting or the enjoyment of rest after
the rigours of the march. The Indians were up.
Probably they were the returned braves of Apalachen
itself. They laid a strange and effective siege to the town,
pouring in volleys of arrows at dusk or dawn, harassing small
parties of the disheartened Christians. The bow had come to
this section of the Americas, a great, strong weapon wielded
now with deadly effect. In a little it was to prove even more
effective.
For three weeks the Spaniards endured Apalachen; then,
in something like the panic that prefaces rout, abandoned that
site and marched south in quest of a rumoured village, Aute
on the sea-coast, plentifully supplied with provisions, if no
gold. The Indians followed on their heels, attacking at fords
and lake-crossing, great gaunt, painted bowmen wielding
dreadful bows compared to which the Christians’ crossbows
seemed mere toys. Casques and plate-armour split and crackled
under the impact of arrow-heads hardened in fire and water ;
the strayed Mexican cacique, “Don Pedro”, was slain ; so was a
cavalier, Avellaneda. Cabeza de Vaca was wounded; and
the rabble of the commonalty among the adventurers doubt¬
lessly suffered even more. At night the insects of those jungle
lands awoke in myriads and feasted upon the travailling
whites ; by day sun and Amerindians scourged their travailling
march. Aute, attained at last, was found burned to the
ground and the inhabitants fled.
A party under Cabeza de Vaca set out for the sea. That
reached, they found it deserted, no ships in sight, a smoulder
of stinking flats. They returned to Aute and reported. The
hearts of the Spaniards sank within them. Nightly the woods
echoed to the war-whoops of the great bowmen. In a long night
I38 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
attack the expedition was almost overwhelmed. Narvaez
determined to march all his fever-stricken, gaunt and dis¬
heartened band down to the sea.
At the coast at last, the adventurers took counsel. The
ships appeared to have vanished from the face of the earth.
They could not make their way along that impossible coast.
They must build boats and skirt the coastline down to
Tampico where the northernmost Spanish settlement in
Mexico was held.
They had neither tools, craftsmen, skill nor strength.
They had neither food nor knowledge. But the barges were
built after incredible pains and incredible labour the while
the diseased and haggard Spaniards subsisted on their slain
horses and meals raided from Indian villages. The Indians
retaliated. Ten Spaniards were found transfixed through and
through with the great Amerindian arrows. Night-times
were times of terror, expecting massed attacks on their
settlement where the limekilns glowed and the half-made
barges lay in sprawling disarray on the sands.
At length the barges, great sogging hulks, were com¬
pleted, equipped with clumsy oars, the shirts and under¬
wear of the Spaniards hoisted as ineffective sails, and the
flotilla prepared to depart. They believed Panuco of Tampico
close at hand to the west. They had no vision of the long,
creaming weariness of surf that stretched for almost immeasur¬
able leagues between themselves and the harbour they hoped
to gain.
§6
The journeyings of the Spaniards in those crazy boats were
an odyssey in themselves, if no more than prelude to the
sufferings and far wanderings of that dark and kindly and
enigmatic soul, Cabeza de Vaca himself. For thirty days they
ploughed and sweltered along that barren sun-smitten coast.
By day the heat maddened them, equipped as they were with
leaking water-bottles made of horse-hide ; by night chill winds
froze their uncovered, sore-scarred limbs. Finally, after dreadful
privations for lack of water, they seem to have made Pensacola
Bay, where an Indian settlement loomed shorewards. The
Indians, gigantic men, welcomed them on the shore, gave them
water to drink, and then attacked them—why it is difficult to
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I39
say. All that night the fight raged on the shore, the majority of
the Spaniards taking to their boats, though Cabeza de Vaca
and the less wearied carried on the fight on the beach. By
morning the Indians had fled : Alvar Nunez had thirty of
their canoes broken up and burned. Then the expedition sailed
out in the Gulf waters again.
In Mobile Bay, where they put in for water, a negro
and a Greek adventurer insisted on departing with the
Indians who paddled out to view them ; neither were ever
seen again. Disintegration of discipline set in rapidly in the
sweltering boats labouring along the low, flat coastline. Men
dropped exhausted through heat and malaria, and with glazing
eyes remembered Spain.
Of these Cabeza de Vaca was not one. Piloting his boat
and apparently encouraging even his own commander, he
seems to have been the first to sight the lip of a great river’s
mouth—wide and brown and tremendous, great-currented,
wheeling down to that desolate shore. It was the Mississippi,
at its mouth a fusion and confusion of islets amidst which the
ragged flotilla swayed and ebbed, and, at length caught in the
great current, drifted far out to sea. They lost sight of land
for three days, and then coasted up to America again, seeing
as darkness fell all the landline alight with great fires. But
again contrary currents swung the flotilla round, to the open
and unprotected Gulf, and Cabeza de Vaca’s and another
boat were lost or abandoned by the frightened Narvaez.
In the morning Cabeza de Vaca and the commanders of
that other boat, Penalosa and Tellez, joined forces and held
raggedly north-west. Storms hurled them across the Southern
Texan shore : far off, in the cream of the breakers, they
glimpsed the islanded coastline where New Orleans was to
rise. After seven nights on an uncertain sea an equally uncertain
night came down on the two boats. But near dawn Alvar
Nunez “heard the tumbling of the sea ; for as the coast was
low, it roared loudly”. A wave in the darkness flung them up
on this low shore, and the few who survived crawled out and
waited chilledly for the dawn. They found themselves on an
island—la Isla de Mai Hado, Bad Hap land, Cabeza de Vaca
was to call it.
Bad Hap Island (an island off the modern Galveston)
was inhabited by a race of lowly fishers and hunters, tall
bowmen, who stared childlike wonder at the Spaniards, fed
I4O NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
them and coddled them and doctored them in the true style
of the Golden Age that was vanishing so quickly from that
coastland as agriculture and science drifted up to it from the
Aztec lands. To the Spaniards it was a land and a life of horror ;
few, even Cabeza de Vaca, realized at first the hospitality and
childish simpleness of their hosts.
Winter was near. The wrecked party was joined by another
from the same expedition—one that had foundered on the
northern shores of Bad Hap land. The newcomers were as
useless as the followers of Cabeza de Vaca in the procuring of
food, and though the Indians continued to feed them with
indefatigable generosity the whole business was a strain upon
the economic resources of the island.
Presently a great storm came. For six days the Indians
could neither fish nor dig up the shore-roots on which they
lived. They endured the hunger with a placid stoicism. The
Spaniards, being civilized, had less control. Some of them
went mad. The Indians discovered their guests indulging in
cannibalism, and put a stop to the practice with an angry
indignation. It was the only occasion on which the Christians
had seen those simple men of the Golden Age moved to
anger.
As curious a comment as history and the historical
processes have made anywhere may be noted in this con¬
nection. Within a hundred years the natives of those islands
and . the neighbouring mainland were ill-famed for their
warlike manners and their cannibalism. Primitive man,
simple and free-hearted, looked with an amazed and disgusted
eye on quarrelsomeness and cannibalism: it needed the
example of Christian Europe to teach him war and man-
eating.
Disease worked its inroads throughout a bitter winter,
when the winds from the Gulf blew chill through thin
Indian shelters. Presently it was more than disease—a plague
which left eighteen men surviving out of eighty and spread
among the Indians themselves. Justifiably alarmed, the latter
assembled and debated whether it would not be well to kill
off the Spaniards as a sanitary precaution. Had they them¬
selves been the guests of Spain, disease-carrying, their hosts
would have carried discussion to decision speedily enough.
Instead, the Indians assembled the Spaniards and heard their
defence. Cabeza de Vaca, ragged and torn and dark and
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I4I
devout, said humbly that it was no work of theirs, they tried
to heal themselves. The Indians admitted the justice of the
pleas, and seeing that the Spaniards were useless in fishing,
appointed the ragged survivors the healers for the island.
Gradually the plague abated : the foulness of the white men
was frozen from their flesh, though Cabeza de Vaca as usual
was to assign the cause to the special intervention of
Providence.
For those Spaniards it was an island of horror. They hated
and loathed with a shuddering abhorrence the Indians who
fed and tended them—all except Cabeza de Vaca himself,
that perfection of the civilized man of his time, with his
slow groping from cause to effect even in the agonies of his
body’s hunger. He saw his hosts generous and affectionate,
loving to their children, children themselves, and wondered
on the thing, muzzily, the while he laboured at digging roots.
Such of the Spaniards as survived had been put to this task :
even while reasonably fed they had shown an apathetic sloth of
which the natives tired. Cabeza de Vaca was later to describe
himself as a slave—albeit uneasily. He was at liberty to depart
if he liked : if he stayed, decided his simple hosts, he must
work for his living.
Spring came. The Indians crossed to the mainland on an
annual trek. They took Cabeza de Vaca with them. Exactly
a year before the proud expedition of Narvaez, now scattered
and lost in jungle and swamp, had sailed from Cuba.
§7
Cabeza de Vaca’s Indian tribe was the Coco or Cahoque.
On the mainland it seems to have spent some six months or
so every year, wandering to and fro in search of berries and
shell-fish, hunting the shy beach deer, trading with the
resident mainland tribes. And throughout the space of a
year Cabeza de Vaca himself led this life.
At first it was probably one of despair. Then sickness came
so that he lay ill in delirium for several weeks. In the space
of that period the dozen or so other Spaniards who survived
set out on a march along the coast, determined to come
to that Panuco which they imagined to lie round the next
headland or so. They gathered and looked on Alvar Nunez
I42 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
before they departed. He was obviously too weak to accom¬
pany them. They left him to the mercy of the hunger-vexed
Indians.
That mercy was not wanting. They seem to have fed and
looked after this useless encumbrance who had come into
their lives with that calm benignity that was an attribute of
Natural Man. Cabeza de Vaca recovered, possibly living the
next months or so, abandoned by his kind, in a stupor of
despair. He lived the life of the Food-Gatherers themselves,
troubled in his pride in his relationship to them, for he was
unable to do any but women’s work, unjust in his later
account of them, for that status of his long rankled in his
memory. In his account of that time he was to describe these
Indians again as his masters, and he as their slave ; yet was to
go on to confess that when he desired to leave them and pass
on to another tribe on the mainland the Cahoques made no
objection whatever.
His move to the mainland was accomplished in the
character of a pedlar. He traded to and fro in suchlike articles
as conch-shells from the beaches, skins from the woods and
prairies. Winter came. He hibernated with a mainland tribe,
the Charrucos, and endured the usual torments of insufficient
food. Spring found him on the move, a dull if competent
trader, already with some knowledge of the generic languages
talked by the mainland folk.
Here definitely the Indians were tribal, hunters and
agriculturists constantly at war. It is difficult to understand
those wars around Galveston Bay as described in Cabeza
de Vaca’s record but as ceremonial wars. In a like measure
a large part of their entire existence was regulated. There
were ceremonial drinking feasts on a brew made from the
ilex vomitoria—a brew which the communicants drank at
intervals for three days on end, greatly to the Spaniard’s
astonishment. Sometimes a tribe would raid and massacre
another tribe at whose lodges he had arrived. He himself was
left unattacked : he was outside the ceremonv.
He wandered a considerable distance inland through those
stretches of treey America, and more than a hundred miles
along the coast, southwards, without setting eyes on longed-
for Panuco. He had dressed in skins and carried his trade goods
in a deerhide pack. He was barefooted and haggard and greatly
bearded. Externally and internally he was slowly altering and
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I43
reshaping with the ready adaptability of a member of the
earth’s most adaptable species.
The single other Spaniard left in the vicinity was one
Lope de Oviedo, on Bad Hap Island. Cabeza de Vaca tells
that he tried again and again to persuade this timorous and
reluctant soul to set out with him on a march to the south,
in search of Christians. Each year Oviedo put him off with
this excuse and that: he seems to have found the life of the
Simple Men to his taste. But at last, in the early autumn of
1532, he consented to make the attempt in company with the
trader.
For three weeks they plodded and tramped and swam the
sandbars and creeks of the muddy Texan coastline. Some¬
where near the modern Port O’Connor they fell in with an
Indian tribe, the Quevenes, who had news of the dozen
or so Spaniards who had set out to make Panuco three years
before. All but three of these wanderers had died—two white
men and a black-faced one. ... It was a new and a bitter
country into which Cabeza de Vaca and his companion Oviedo
had come. The Quevenes were both truculent and cruel—
perhaps the passing bands of Spaniards had misbehaved in
the usual fashion, leaving a fury of resentment in the Amerin¬
dian breast. Cabeza de Vaca and Oviedo were pelted with
mud, jeered at, threatened with bows. Oviedo looked at the
scene and endured it for a little. Then he came to his simple
conclusion. He had had no particular desire to leave Bad
Hap land : and he was going back there.
So back he went, and passes from the record. Perhaps two
hundred years later, when those Indians of that region were
cannibals and ferocious warriors, they had amongst them
those with the proud blood of Lope de Oviedo in their veins.
§8
Cabeza de Vaca escaped the Quevenes, holding south to
Guadaloupe River. Here he fell in with a new tribe, the
Mariames, who came every year feasting in the pecan groves
of Guadaloupe. And here he met with the three survivors of
the Spanish hijra—Andres Dorantes, Alonso del Castillo, and
Dorantes’ negro slave Estebanico. All three were held for
service by the Indians, grinding the pecan nuts in hollow
mortars; they were treated with a bitter cruelty which makes
144 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
strange reading. War had very quickly destroyed the morale
of the simple men of the Americas.
In that period of enslavement by this inland tribe Cabeza
de Vaca studied them closely enough and reports at length
on their lives and habits. Some of his details are unconsciously
humorous. The Mariames are described as “casting away their
daughters at birth and causing them to be eaten by dogs”.
Women were raided from hostile tribes. Though one recog¬
nizes here a distorted version of the world-wide exogamic custom
which went with the Archaic Civilization, the details sound
improbable, especially as the chronicler goes on to say that the
surrounding tribes did the same. A multitude of tribes with¬
out daughters must have found difficulties in procreation.
But they were certainly a degenerate congeries of stocks,
those seashore Amerindians. One of the most remarkable
institutions of the Mariames was that of a third sex—the
homosexual or the hermaphrodite was a common and tolerated
phenomenon, with definite social duties, pleasures and res¬
ponsibilities. This purely American evolution was indeed
widely paralleled over the great plains and mountains far to
the north in the America of that day and much later, though
Cabeza de Vaca went unaware of the fact, thinking it only a
loathsome local practice.
The Spaniards determined to escape as soon as the tribes
moved on their annual migration to the great tuna (prickly
pear) region in the south-west. Late in the summer of 1533
this migration began among the Mariames: the Spanish
slaves carried loads like women, and like women bore the
stripes. After a rough and hungry march they sighted the
great region of the ripe tunas somewhere in the neighbour¬
hood of the modern Corpus Christi; there, however, their
plannings to escape were frustrated. Quarrels broke out among
the tribes. Loaded with produce of the tuna country, Cabeza
de Vaca trailed back to the Mariame squatting-places for
another year’s weary slavery. In this he was separated from
Dorantes and the others but kept in touch with them by
unchancy messengers, planning yet another escape when the
prickly-pear season returned.
Summer of 1534 flaming its sunrises and its misty sunsets
over the Texan wastes. Again the tribes assembled to drink
of the sweet juice of the tuna ; and again the three Spaniards
and the wide-grinning Estebanico were united.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I45
They fled in the dark of a moonless night and attained
the shelter of the lodges of another race, perhaps the Coahuil-
tecans, gentle primitives whose habitat was somewhere in the
region of the modern Alice.
The Coahuiltecans were in trek southwards to their
permanent lands across the Great Sand Belt of Brooks. For
five days the plodding tribe with the three gasping white men
and the obscure negro made their way across those glittering
lands. At last they reached regions of herbage and fruitage
again. It was the Arroyo Colorado.
Late prickly-pears were in fruit; water sang and gurgled.
Scattering, the entire tribe sought food. Cabeza de Vaca
wandering farther than most was lost for five miserable days
ere he stumbled upon his hosts and companions again. He
was fed and welcomed like a lost sheep.
Here, halting in the Colorado Arroyo, Cabeza de Vaca
gradually acquired among the surrounding tribes the repu¬
tation of a miraculous healer. He and the other three refugees,
asked if they could raise the dead and heal the sick, appear
to have replied, in desperation, that they could. Cabeza de
Vaca was led to a hut where a man lay dead—or apparently
dead. Cabeza de Vaca prayed over the corpse, massaged it,
and breathed upon it. A short while afterwards the cadaver
got to its feet, smiled, and walked about.
Great kudos came to the Spaniards as a consequence : it
was plainly a miracle wrought by God to prove them to the
heathen. A later and more sceptical generation might ascribe
it to convenient exhibitionism on the part of the unauthentic
corpse.
Yet there was probably more in it than that. The grave
and pious Alvar Nunez from his ordeal in the wilderness had
emerged with a burning faith in his own unworthiness pre¬
served by God for some mysterious means. So possessed, it is
likely he possessed some considerable degree of that physical
magnetism that in modern times can still perform psycho¬
logical miracles. The Indians believed so. The fame of their
cures (for the others practised as well) spread far and wide
among the simple food-gatherers. As that winter came on
the refugees lived on their reputations as doctors, plus much
backaching carting of wood to the great communal fires.
The winds blew chill and famine came. Naked, the Spaniards
shivered ever closer to the fires, longing for the Spring,
K
I46 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Spring came at last. A misty plan had matured in Cabeza
de Vaca’s mind—to press ever southwards, seeking Mexico.
South-west lived a friendly food-gathering tribe, the Malia-
cones. Thither the refugees tramped, a long seven leagues.
The Maliacones welcomed them and took them on yet another
trek in search of mesquite and ebony beans. The region was
found with the beans yet unripe ; the Maliacones turned back.
But the Spaniards and the negro believed they might as well
starve forward as in the rear. Killing two small dogs and eating
them, they pressed on south-west through desolate country.
They lost their way. Rain in drenching torrents swept the
tundras. In a forest they encountered two women and some
youths who led them to the camping-ground of their tribe,
the Cuchendados. Here Cabeza de Vaca practised the healer
again, amidst great applause. They rested and fed themselves
on their hosts’ bounty for a fortnight, then held on to the
south-west.
Still they were in land where the feet of other white men
had never trod. And still there was no rumour of men like
themselves. The stray tribes encountered fed them and feted
them ; they were fed on meal from the mesquite bean, that
detestable flour, and found it delicious. It was a kinder country
into which they had come now and the natives unspoiled
primitives even at that late day. At length through country
of thorn and scrub they were led by guides from a tribe,
healer-denuded, to the banks of a great river that flowed wide
and tremendous across the countryside—“wide as the Guadal¬
quivir at Seville” says Cabeza de Vaca. It was the Rio
Grande.
Probably they crossed it somewhere in the modern Hidalgo
County, Texas. Still they were in the land of the food-gatherers.
These simple folk convoyed them from village to village,
honouring and fearing them, according to Cabeza de Vaca.
But penetrating behind universal motive we may obtain an¬
other picture. The Spaniards were probably regarded joy¬
fully and amusedly as astounding freaks come to relieve the
monotony of life. Hundreds of years before, south in Mexico
and west in California, similar freaks from Asia had landed,
Children of the Sun, and been acclaimed and welcomed by the
primitives of those regions, and left to debase the minds and
hearts of those primitives the rituals of religion and kingship
and shamanism. The Spaniards were in the tradition. Fed,
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I47
they preached their creed to the natives, who gaped and
yawned and laughed and were impressed.
Now they were in Northern Mexico, though they remained
unaware of the fact. Escorts of Indians convoyed them on¬
wards and their faith-healing, simple and often unefficacious,
was greatly in demand. South-west they still marched, over
thorny plains thinly inhabited by the Pintos, that strange,
light-coloured race which suffered from ophthalmia and had
possibly a European ancestry—it is possible they were
descendants of pre-Columbian white settlers. What settlers ?
But here at last their south-westwards progress was stayed.
Far in the south in lines of battlements upon the sky appeared
the crests of range upon range of mountains. The Spaniards
stared at them troubled. How pass these—and what lay
beyond ? Mexico—or some unknown devil-land ?
A great confusion as to compass-points, customary in that
day, appears to have fallen upon them. They debated their
next move and decided against turning east and seeking the
sea-coast where they had been so starved and mishandled.
Southwards the mountains appeared to bar their progress.
Westwards the tribesmen told them was an uninhabited land,
desert, where they would assuredly starve. There appeared
only one practicable route. This was to turn north-west,
through the Rio Grande tributaries, and skirt to the north the
great desert of rumour. So at last they might hold through
fertile lands till they again attained a favourable southwards
passage remote over there in the horizons of the west.
Moreover, we chose this course because in traversing the country
we should learn many particulars of it, so that should God our Lord
be pleased to take any of us thence, and lead us to the land of Christians,
we might carry that information and news of it.
He was consciously at last what he had not been when
he left Seville for the bright glamour of the unknown coasts of
the west: an explorer.
They had been seven years in North America. Through
those seven years they had worked a slow passage along the
Gulf coast to a point roughly near where the modern Mon¬
terey stands. Now they set out on a journey that was to last a
long two years, through the habitations of dim tribes that even
now we may identify only dimly, over a trek that extended for
more than two thousand miles.
I48 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
§9
The Indians parted from them with tears and waving
hands, refusing that unknown west. The Spaniards plodded on
alone, uncompanioned, the windings of the Rio Grande
remotely seen in the north. Presently the affirmation of their
late hosts that the west was uninhabited proved false. Instead,
the exploring Spaniards arrived in a village where they dis¬
covered the first true agricultural activity they had seen since
leaving Apalachen seven years before. They were on the edge of
settled agricultural communities again. Maize and squash and
pumpkins grew in well-tended fields. Halting a night and a day
now at this village, now that, the Spaniards with their repu¬
tations and practice as healers pressed on with some speed. A
curious rite accompanied them. A hundred or so Indians from
one village would march with them to the next and at that
next village levy toll on all goods available. Then the taxed
village would send on its escort to the next village and levy a
retaliatory tax—it was playing over again the game of touch
which Cabeza de Vaca had learned in Jerez as a boy.
Everywhere they went in this new land they were hailed as
Children of the Sun, miraculous travellers from other lands
bringing new gifts of healing and enchantment. Cabeza de
Vaca believed his progress and reception unique ; but much
the same seems to have greeted Quetzalcoatl landing on the
Pacific shore of Mexico some six hundred years before—a
strayed Indonesian or Hindu also hailed as a Child of the Sun.
All those agricultural lands were alive with tales of miraculous
beings just such as the Spaniards who had proved the bane and
blessing of remotegenerations—as indeed,legend apart, they had.
In one village they were presented with the sacred gourd
rattles, marks of magicians, which accompanied them through¬
out the remainder of their journeyings, wielded by the black
Estebanico. In another, remote up the slopes of the Sierra
Madre, they encountered two aliens at a village—cotton-
clad men who had a plenitude of copper—who presented
Dorantes with a copper rattle. Where these two came from is
still mysterious, but the Spaniards were stirred by the sight of
the signs of pseudo-civilization as for eight years they had not
been stirred. The wonder civilization that had led them from
Spain—could it be near at last ?
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I49
Northwards was the land of copper, said the strangers, and
northwards the Spaniards turned through the confluents of
the Rio Sabinas, a rich and fertile land where they were well
entertained by the Archaics. Here, also, they encountered
buffalo-hides for the first time. The buffalo-herds of North
America roamed almost as far south as this. They were beyond
the lean and starving coasts of Galveston. Hunters as well as
farmers, these tribes lived well on deer-meat, rabbit, turkey,
and fed their strange guests lavishly as the latter wandered
north in their search for the Golden City. Sometimes they went
accompanied by small escorts, sometimes with thousands of
hangers-on and holiday-makers tagging out behind them, at
night the glow of their camp-fires lighting up forest and plain
like the bivouacs of an embattled army.
But presently tiring of that northwards stravaiging they
turned north-west and so for a period passed out of fertile
country into the grim tundra-stretches of the Coahuila Desert.
Here the rattlesnake lurked, and hunger with him, and here
their escorts thinned out. But still before them and about
them in those sparse holdings flew the news of the coming of
the Children of the Sun. Ragged, bearded, burnt black in the
sunshine, the Spaniards with their slave marched now with
unaching feet, tempered to travel by the long roads from
Florida. Beyond desert at last, they came again to a great
stream gushing between canons, the upper reaches of that river,
the Rio Grande, which they had crossed long months before
far down in the west.
Somewhere in the Big Bend mountains trouble stayed
them awhile. The tribe neighbouring the handsome agricul¬
tural mountaineers amidst which they sojourned was a warlike
one : once again we are apprised of the being of raiding no¬
mads, like those of Galveston, which hung on the fringe of the
Archaic settlements. Those folk of the west were buffalo-
hunters, fierce men. The mountaineers were determined that
the Children of the Sun should not go among them.
They compromised and went south instead to another
agricultural community somewhere in the neighbourhood of
the modern Presidio del Norte, where the Rios Grande and
Conchos join. Here they found well-built pueblos inhabited
by the “most civilized” race they had yet encountered. They
were received as usual as Children of the Sun, and implored to
heal the sick and teach magic. The latter at least they did,
150 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
learning the simple natives the sign of the cross and suchlike
ritual gestures. Then they sat down to debate their forward
route.
North-east would lead them far from Mexico. South they
were told was broken, inhospitable territory. North-west was
a starving land up the banks of the Rio Grande.
Incomprehensibly, they chose the Rio Grande route, and
early in January 1536 resumed their trek into the unknown.
§ 10
It seems to have been a cool and pleasant march, that
upwards journey along the banks of the Rio Grande, despite
the constant hunger which gnawed below the breast-bones of
the travellers. The Indians were starving : hospitably or fear¬
fully they shared their scant food with the wanderers, mis¬
taking them, as usual, for Children of the Sun. Without
gratitude the food was accepted and the Spaniards hurried on.
By this time it is evident that all three, if not the negro, were
men mentally overwrought, half-believing in their own
divinity while still ascribing the thaumaturgism of their
occasional “miracles” of faith-healing to the kindly gods of
their own lost and kindly Spain. They made swift passage :
they ate little, even in a land where there was little to eat.
Seventeen days after setting out they crossed the Rio
Grande again, somewhere near the modern El Paso, and so
reached their furthest north in the course of their mem¬
orable journey. They were on the borders of New Mexico,
swarming with tribes half-nomad, half-settled, including the
skilled pueblo-dwellers of remote Zuni, the most highly
civilized race north of the wanderings the three Spaniards had
involuntarily undertaken.
But they had heard of waterholes at intervals to quench
the thirst of those who crossed the desert. West accordingly in
the track of the sunset they turned their bare and toil-har¬
dened feet, through the sandhills of Medanos, by the salt-lake
of the Salado, by trails age-old in that ageless continent, roads
and routes tracked by the Amerindians of those regions since
the coming of the first civilization to the first Americas fifteen
hundred years before. Near Samalayuca they turned south¬
west, and through mountain and desert passed with hasting
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I5I
feet, their convoys of attendants from village to village still at
their heels, into country that grew gradually more fertile, that
gradually gave evidence of a more settled and orderly existence.
Finally, penetrating the Sierra Madre to a village that appears
to have stood somewhere on the Yaqui River in Sonora, they
found fields waving green with maize, plantations of pumpkins
and squash, a cotton-clad agricultural people who bore jew¬
elled arrow-heads in their ceremonial dances, kindly folk who
welcomed the frayed Children of the Sun with kindness, and
even, it would seem, washed their garments for them. ... It
was a new glimpse of the diversity of races and cultures in even
a fragment of the great continent they had almost crossed.
But they were not quite to accomplish that crossing.
Cabeza de Vaca’s exploratory spirit was for the moment broken,
the rumoured Golden City impossible of achievement. He
longed as passionately as his companions to escape these regions
of staring admirers, decently cotton-clad though they might
be, covering “their shameful parts” in seemly fashion, not
naked and unashamed like the coast-dwellers of Bad Hap land.
Wars sometimes raged in these regions; but news of the com¬
ing of the Children of the Sun led to truce. Cabeza de Vaca
and his companions, unhindered, marched from village to
village, southwards, finally descending the Sonora Valley
almost within smell of the Pacific to an Indian town, adobe-
built, somewhere by the site of present-day Ures.
Here they heard again of the Zuni wealth and power far
in the north, and perhaps hesitated, thinking of a raid up into
those remote regions, themselves to catch sight of the golden
cities of Ciboa. But they were in no case for any such expedi¬
tion. They turned definitely south.
The sea, the Pacific, was less than a hundred miles away, but
they had had enough experience already of the hard life of
Amerindian fishers and seafolk to have any hankering to visit
its coasts. Marching parallel with that unglimpsed ocean they
passed by the modern Matape, forded the flooded Yaqui River,
and came on an Indian wearing a necklace of which a sword-
belt buckle was part of the decoration. ... So they learned
of the nearness of their kind at last—an expedition that had
raided up as remotely north as this, killing, plundering, raping
in the usual Spanish fashion ; till the Indians had gathered in a
great body and exterminated it near the Rio Fuente.
But they levelled none of the blame on the foot-weary
I52 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
travellers. Instead, they lodged them and fed them and sped
them on their southwards search.
Presently Alvar Nunez and his companions found that
southwards search giving ample proof of the presence or near¬
ness of Christians. Gutted villages, rotting corpses by the side
of the trail, trees decorated with fleshless skeletons—all
showed that Spanish raiding-parties had passed. Cabeza de
Vaca records his joy to know of nearness to his kind ; but also
a wild compassion stirred in his heart, seeing the wilderness his
kind were making. Perhaps his mind went back to the unham¬
pered journeyings of the last two thousand miles, the kindli¬
ness and gratitude with which he had been received, the
simple men of Bad Hap land who had shared their last mouth¬
ful with the wanderers, all the incidents of trail and trek that
had shown these heathens of the great lost continent kinder
than Christians, heathen though they were. As though pene¬
trating wall on wall of prejudice and fear and gross and bestial
superstition, that knowledge of a common kinship of huma¬
nity reached down to the heart of Cabeza de Vaca and never
again, it would seem, quite left it.
The lands devastated by the slave-raiders drew nearer.
Dorantes and Cabeza de Vaca in one party, Castillo and the
negro Estebanico in another, they set out in search of the
Christians. Burning homesteads marked the nearness of those
followers of the Prince of Peace. The Pacific littoral reeked
with tales of their cruelties ; whole tribes had abandoned their
fertile fields and fled to the safety of the hills. At length, early
in March of the year 1536 Cabeza de Vaca emerged from the
bush near the River Sinaloa into the sight of four halted
horsemen. They stared their surprise at his almost naked
figure, his matted beard, and then cried out and ran towards
him as he called to them, weeping, in broken Spanish.
§ 11
It was a slave-raiding band of Diego de Alcaraz, an under¬
captain of Culiacan, that they had encountered. The slaver
was delighted, casting eyes on the six hundred or so Indians
who had come in escort of the Children of the Sun. Promptly
he fell on their camp and enslaved them. Castillo, Dorantes
and (though his opinion was of no account) the negro Este-
SOUTH AMERICAN JOURNEYS OF CABEZA DE VACA
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I53
banico appear to have looked on with considerable compla¬
cence. It was what Indians were for.
But Cabeza de Vaca, that devout, dreaming soul, was of
different calibre. He was moved to a passionate shame that this
should befall the followers of the Children of the Sun. Straight¬
way he set out for Culiacan and there lodged his protest with
the governor of the district, one Melchior Diaz. So doing, he
passes out of that eight years of wandering and exploring—
involuntary and voluntary—which have brought him to the
pages of this record.
But we may note with brevity his life in that long hiatus of
years before he set out again adventuring through the unknown
lands of the New World. Diaz upheld his claim and had his
escort released by Alcazar; that accomplished, Cabeza de
Vaca and his companions journeyed down to Mexico City
and attained at last Christian food and company and soul-
comfort, Cabeza de Vaca a wild and ragged figure astounding
the hidalgos with his appearance and the tale of his incredible
Odyssey.
But one incident in it was credited readily enough—the
rumour of the golden cities of Ciboa (which was founded on
the rumour of the distant Zuni pueblos in New Mexico).
Would Cabeza de Vaca join an expedition against that northern
El Dorado ?
He would not. He had other plans. Another Golden City,
never seen on sea or land, had enslaved the vision of Cabeza de
Vaca. Probably he did not confide his plans to the Mexican
Viceroy, Antonio de Mendoza. They were daring enough. He
had ascertained that the grant of the lands of Florida to
Narvaez had never been rescinded or supplanted. Now Nar¬
vaez was dead and he himself, as he knew, the only worthy
survivor to take his place. He sailed for Spain determined to
obtain the concession of all the lands of the modern United
States to his governorship. And when he himself was
governor 
It is probable that his intentions towards those natives
among whom he had sojourned were kindly enough, though
his altruism has been distortedly magnified by later com¬
mentators. He planned to found a great northern colony where
the Indian would not be enslaved but suitably (and no doubt
forcibly) Christianized under due supervision. And in the
so doing the Golden Cities of Ciboa would be discovered and
154 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
suitably annexed to the king’s domains, and ruled by the
Church for the glory of God.
After various misadventures of encounter, flight and fight
by the way—for the seas swarmed with French privateers—
Cabeza de Vaca’s vessel put in at Lisbon on the 9th of August
I537* Here he heard (from his point of view) appalling news.
A golden kingdom in the Americas had indeed been discovered
—that of Peru, in South America. Pizarro had subdued it.
Adventurers were flocking back loaded with the loot of the
most glorious civilization of the Amerindians, that civiliza¬
tion carried across the Pacific in the early days of the
Christian era, that civilization compounded so skilfully of so
many alien fragments—Indian ritual and Polynesian myth
and Egyptian culture, and even stray fragments of Greek
philosophy. . . . But of these facts the Spanish conquista-
dores, robbing temples and murdering nobles, had had no
cognizance and would have been little interested if they had.
The most notable among their returned number was a certain
Hernando de Soto from whom the king had borrowed
money, and who in return had obtained from His Majesty
a grant to occupy and colonize all the lands known as
Florida. . . .
It was a bitter blow, and for a little it seems that Cabeza de
Vaca sank under it. He went home to Jerez, to the greeting of
that dim wife on whose face the light of history shines hardly at
all, whose voice we hear only once, and that faintly, giving
her husband an account of how she behaved as steward of
his property while he was in the “Indies”. She had behaved
commendably. Perhaps it was she who urged him to go to
court and lay his case before the king, seeking to have the
de Soto grant rescinded.
En route, he halted in Seville and conferred with Hern¬
ando de Soto. The latter offered to make him lieutenant of his
expedition. But this was not good enough for the grave¬
faced, taciturn man who dreamed of himself as the Ruler and
Protector of all the Northern Indians. He journeyed on,
seeking the court. King Charles was in Monzon. Cabeza de
Vaca obtained an interview with him; the king listened
kindly. He fully agreed as to the barbarity of the methods by
which the Indians had been entreated. He himself (and this
was no lie) was strongly opposed to enslaving the Indians. But
he could not cancel de Soto’s grant. Cabeza de Vaca must wait
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I55
on the Council of the Indies for employment on some other
and suitable expedition connected with the West.
The summer faded from the grey walls of Saragosa ; winter
came howling down the bleak passes of the mountains ; and
still, shiveringly, Cabeza de Vaca besieged the court for
employment. Spring came, another summer, another year, and
we see him dimly through the dust and squabble of those
years, his purpose still firm in his mind, if heartsick for ful¬
filment. Who but he had a right to seek out new golden lands,
carrying the teaching of Christ ?—himself, a Child of the Sun
in Indian eyes.
And in September of 1539 his patience and his dogged
badgering of the Council of the Indies was rewarded. The
Spanish colonies on the Rio de la Plata in South America were
in sad case, crying for help, fever-ridden, Indian-attacked,
badly governed. Cabeza de Vaca was appointed the new
governor, his territory extending from the borders of Peru to
the Straits of Magellan.
In October 1540 he sailed for Paraguay with two ships
and two hundred and forty expeditionaries.
§ 12
Juan de Ayolas had been governor of the Plate River
settlements. As noted before, an expedition had pushed
through the trackless Chaco from those settlements, reached
the Andes, looted there a mysterious silver-rich native state,
and marched back to the Paraguay where the Spanish murder¬
ing adventurers were in return murdered by the natives.
Fired by the news of this feat, Ayolas had had a numerous
convoy row for long weeks up the Parana and Paraguay till he
came to Candelaria. There he had split his forces, instructed
Domingo Martinez de Irala to hold the base camp, and himself
launched out into the wilds in search of the silver city. With
him he had taken two score conscripted Indians: Indians of
much the same stage of civilization as those Cabeza de Vaca
had encountered around the headwaters of the Rio Grande,
agriculturists, shy, strong men, friendly but suspicious.
Irala had awaited the return of his commander only a few
months, then had sailed down river and established Asuncion.
His brutalities in charge of the colony had led the River Plate
Spaniards to send to Spain the request for a new governor.
I56 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
There was an important codicil in Cabeza de Vaca’s
appointment. If Aydas should return from his expedition into
the bush, and still prove sane, Cabeza de Vaca must
surrender the governorship to him, and serve under him.
. Tta squadron meandered across the Atlantic in the easy¬
going sailing of those days. Almost they ran aground on rocks
off the coast of Brazil and so would have done but for a cricket
aboard which chirped loudly at the suspected nearness of land.
Finally they put in at an island which rose wooded off the
Brazilian shore. It was Santa Catalina island, inhabited by shy
Indians whom Cabeza de Vaca had lured from the woods “and
entreated with kindliness”. The rest of the Spaniards stared.
Was this their new commander’s method of dealing with such
ordure ?
. It: was- And at first it proved successful. From the shy
simple men of Santa Catalina he heard of two Franciscans,
relicts of a previous expedition, living on the mainland. He
had them brought to his ships and questioned on the affairs
of the River Plate colony. Of those they knew little. But soon
additional information came to hand with a boatload of
deserters from the Buenos Aires garrison far to the south.
Ayolas was reported dead, killed by the Indians of the Para¬
guay. Irak was acting governor back in Asuncion, deep in the
bush, surrounded by tribes every day growing the more
bitterly hostile.
. How long would it take the expedition to reach Asuncion
sailing up the Parana and Paraguay ?
Perhaps a year. Perhaps longer. And by that time it was
very likely that Irak and his expeditionaries would be dead.
Cabeza de Vaca then came to a decision that was to enlist
him on the second great exploring expedition of his life.
Instead of coasting down to Buenos Aires and sailing with pain
and trouble up the rivers to remote Asuncion and its threat¬
ened garrison, he would land an expedition and march across
country.
His companions attempted, with growing hostility, to
dissuade him. The country was wild and barbarous, filled with
cannibals, savages who lived off the flesh of men, wild beasts
scarcely less ferocious than the men. Cabeza de Vaca was
unimpressed. He had encountered both before.
Landing a hundred men under one Pedro Dorantes, he
ordered them to scout ahead to the west as to the practicality
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
157
of a route. Reluctantly they marched off into the green day-
night of the Brazilian jungle, adventured and rested and
plodded ahead there for a long three months, crossed a hilly
stretch of country, encountered no hostile natives, and
appeared at last in view of Santa Catalina island whole and
unharmed. The route was practicable, if the stretch of country
so enormous as to defy courage.
Cabeza de Vaca’s courage was unimpaired. On the 15th of
October, 1541, he had two hundred and fifty men landed at
the mouth of the Tapucu River, fifty miles to the north of the
island. There he exercised them, examined their arms and
equipment, and on the 22nd of November marched off at their
head into the interior of Brazil.
§ 13
At first the going was by forest paths, deep in detritus,
green and a glare in the hot sunshine. The men behind the
governor, lightly clad, plodded on stoically but uninspirited.
They were given no licence to loot and rape and rob in the
Indian villages encountered. Was this the fashion for a
commander to treat his conquering army ?
At length came the beginnings of the hills, cold and barren.
They ploughed through their sulphurous passes into the strange
Brazilian sunsets. Nineteen days after leaving the coast they
came in sight of great plantations of maize and cassava. The
cultivators were Guaranis, cannibals and fowlkeepers. Cabeza
de Vaca bargained for food with them, paid for what was
delivered, and kept a tight rein on the looting propensities
of his followers. Murmuring grew ever louder in the Spanish
ranks.
On through the unending, unbegun forests again. Five
days from the first village they came to a great river, the
Iguazu flowing through the woods westwards. Here Cabeza
de Vaca appears to have built a bridge to transport his foot¬
sore expedition across the water, and then marched on along
the Iguazu banks. Lured by the tale of the white man’s
friendliness, the Indians of the forests flocked to meet them
and feed them. Maize, honey, birds, deer were readily obtain¬
able and the expedition feasted, but grumblingly, for Cabeza
de Vaca ordered them each night to camp at a distance from
I58 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
the Indian villages. Nor would he allow them to trade directly
with the Indians but only through his personal lieutenants
and other intermediaries. This fact was yet to be remembered
against him.
Instead of holding their march down the Iguazu-Parana
and reaching the Paraguay, the expedition crossed the river
and plunged again into the forests beyond. It was the true
Brazilian jungle, choked with creepers, the air bright with the
flash of insect-wings, great monkeys screaming from the trees
as the soldiers passed underneath, lazy alligators opening a
languid eye by this creek and that to stare at the passing feet
of the Spaniards. Presently the cultivated clearings of the
Guaranis were left behind. The forest thinned out on the
fringe of a range of barren mountains, never properly explored
to this day. They climbed them gasping in air that seemed
thin after the coagulated flow of air-currents in the corridors
of the forests. Westwards, they saw jungle rise again.
Cabeza de Vaca walked ahead of the expedition, barefoot
by now, the Indian guides trotting beside him, glancing
round now and again at the haughty, contemptuous faces of
the mounted hidalgos, or the sweating countenances of the
Spanish rank and file trailing despondently west. So thick
grew the undergrowth that a score of men at a time went
forward to hack out a way for the labouring expedition. With
night came clouds of insects that might only be endured with
the lighting of great fires which glimmered far and bright
through the wastes of the forests. Reclining to rest, some
Spanish soldier would give an ejaculation of alarm as a bright
snake glided away; or, peering into the darkness beyond the
encampment, see slinking, tawny forms turning towards the
firelight bright golden eyes. Were they completely lost ?
Was there any end to this forest ?
At last they came to a great village and a clearing. Here,
famished, the Spaniards ate so that all the next morning were
troubled with stomach-ache—all except Cabeza de Vaca
himself. He gave orders for the forward march despite a wail
of protest. March they could not: half of them were sick !
To this he answered that those who stayed behind would stay
permanently. He set forth with the guides, and after him,
stragglingly, belly-gripping, came the expedition. Presently
they had walked off the effects of the feast, as Cabeza de Vaca
had foreseen.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I59
The forest avenues seemed endless. Wild boars scuttled
across the choked trails : they saw the strange armadillo and
in dark depths heard the sloth cry his strange eerie plaint.
Crossing themselves, they followed on at the heels of the un¬
tiring . Cowhead.. He had gone mad again, they sneered,
again imagined himself a God as in North America, and was
searching for Indios to worship him.
_ December passed. With the new year the forests again
thinned out, and again came uplands sparsely clothed in bam¬
boo scrub. By now the provisions they had carried were
exhausted. They split the bamboo canes and ate the weevils
that nested within them, and drank of the brackish waters
of those curious slopes. Then the bamboo brakes were left
behind : in the west they saw the flow and glow of a river.
Next morning they found themselves in a rich riverine land,
watered by nameless tributaries of the Paraguay, haunted by
great droves of deer and peccary and wild boar. They hunted
the boar with their crossbows and halted and ate flesh after a
long fast.
Here the two Franciscans quarrelled with Cowhead and
disappeared into the forest ahead with a hundred followers,
mostly Indians. They vanish from the record for a while,
but for incidental mention of the fact that they plundered
stores of food here and there, and slept with great numbers of
Indian women. The Indians seem to have been complaisant.
Cabeza de Vaca was less so. He had a formal indictment of
the Franciscans drawn up by his notary.
Rumours had come to him that Asuncion was now un-
distant. At a spot which he ascertained was a tributary of
the Paraguay, Cabeza de Vaca despatched two Indians, by
river, to bear the news of their whereabouts to Asuncion,
and asking for two luggers to be sent down the Parana to
convoy them upstream. The two Indians set out on their
journey, and Alvar Nunez and his following took to the forests
once more.
Presently they came again on the banks of a great water.
It was the Iguazu, met anew after long wanderings. Here it
seemed broad as (that unfailing comparison) “the Guadal¬
quivir”. Cabeza de Vaca determined to descend it, hoping
to meet with the rescuing luggers from Asuncion. Instead, as
the canoes purchased from the natives swung half of the
expedition around wide bends, and the other half plodded along
l6o NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
the shore, they heard the distant thunder of falls. So that day
they came, the first of their kind, to the foam and fall of the
great Iguazu. falls, very terrifying and lovely, a play against
the evening light. Here they had to disembark and set about
a long and difficult portage. Arriving exhausted at the foot
of the falls, and hoping for rest and food, they discovered
neither.
Instead an army of Guaranis, strong bowmen, had assembled
to resist the passage of the invaders.
Cabeza de Vaca had neither doubts nor hesitations. He
remembered the road to Culiacan and the Indians who had
greeted him as a Child of the Sun when he walked among them
fearlessly. He did so now, carrying gifts. Grumbling and shame¬
faced, the Indians lowered their bows. Instead of massacring
the weary expedition they soothed and petted and feted it,
and guided it across the Iguazu, to resume, luggerless, its
seemingly endless march.
But now the forest had been left behind. They had come to
the thinly wooded, rolling llanos of Paraguay, rich and fragrant
in flowers at that season, so that the Spaniards stared astounded
at such loveliness in this dark continent. The natives guided
them on, trek after trek, with friendliness because of the ap¬
pearance and acts of the dark-faced, devout leader. February
passed, and the rumour of the river drew near. With rumour
came at least an emissary from Ascuncion itself, to guide them
to the town.
So, at nine o’clock in the morning, on the nth of March,
1542, the expedition of the new governor marched into
Asuncion, having walked a thousand miles from the coast
through land never before trodden by white men and pre¬
viously considered impenetrable.
§ 14
Asuncion Alvar Nunez found under the temporary govern¬
orship of Domingo de Irak, a typical Spanish soldier of the
time, courteous, cruel, courageous and domineering. With
a poor grace Irak surrendered up the governorship to the
newcomer, and that newcomer proceeded to astound and
mortify Asuncion. He commanded that the Indian slaves
be freed : he forbade unnecessary wars and raids against the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN l6l
dark tribes of the forest: he planned the building of a City
of God in the heart of the dark, half trodden Americas;
and (seeing no incompatibility of one vision with the other)
he set about organizing a great expedition to penetrate north
and north-westward to the Golden City of Manoa.
That northwards road had been ascended twice before.
But no such detailed account of it comes to us as from the
expedition that Cabeza de Vaca led. Both he and his enemies
left voluminous accounts of that most pathetic of all the
attempts to reach the Golden City of the interior—that
Golden City which Colonel Fawcett set out to find less than
a decade ago.
Wherever the Spaniards penetrated from the Atlantic
seaboard into South America they were met by rumours of a
land, of great wealth, ruled by kingly dignitaries, magicians,
godlike men, which lay long days travelling into the west.
Its centre was a city where gold was so common that it was
used for uthe most shameful” of domestic utensils. Beside this
city was a great lake with templed islands in the midst thereof.
Its ruler was a Child of the Sun.
The modern investigator in that haze of inaccurate
documentation that details the rumours and legends and
wanderings of the time is faced with two alternatives, and
generally selects unhesitatingly. Either this persistent rumour
of a secret city which has haunted South America from that
day to this was and is no more than a transfiguration of the
legend of the power and wealth of the great Peruvian native
civilizations, or there actually was some other region remote
^ the Brazilian bush where the Archaic Civilization flowered
forth even such strange bloom of culture and attainment as
was encountered by Europeans in the flourishing metropolis
of Cuzco or remembered in the ruins of Tiawanako.
Even yet the second alternative has not been definitely
disproved : we are as far from certainty in that matter as
Cabeza de Vaca was, though we lack either his optimism or
his urge. That such a civilization could have grown to maturity
in the dense riverine jungle is not impossible : civilizations
root for almost every reason but sound economic ones. But
that it should still survive undiscovered is, to say the least
improbable. Even so, there may yet be explorers who
will come on the ruins of some pueblo in that bush and know
they have found Manoa at last.
L
l6l NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Cabeza de Vaca seems to have had little doubt of the success
of the expedition he launched from Asuncion six months
after his arrival there. With ten luggers and four hundred
Spaniards, besides a force of Indian auxiliaries, he ascended
the Paraguay through the droughts and heats of a long summer.
Sometimes they had to land and make portage ; sometimes
they rowed and stumbled through long leagues of marsh.
The Indians flocked down to the shores to stare on them :
Indians generally hostile in encounter, though speedily
pacified by the tactics of Alvar Nunez. He might be on a raid
against the great Indian city of treasure and legend, but he
would allow no robbing of the roosts and riverine plantations
by his grumbling, fever-stricken followers.
In a month they had reached as far up the river as that
spot where Juan de Ayolas, the earlier governor, had died.
This was Candelaria. It was on the border of Gran Chaco, the
Green Hell of modern nomenclature. Alvar Nunez halted,
parleyed with the Indians, antagonized them in an unfortunate
speech, and had to set about the penetration of that wildest
stretch of the American bush unaided.
Mosquitoes descended in stinging droves upon the ad¬
venturers as they fought on northwards through weary days
and nights; vampire bats sucked their blood while they slept
—Cabeza de Vaca himself had a “slice of his toe” bitten off.
Then, on the right, they found the great converging mouths
of the Taquary pouring their slime-green waters into the
attenuating flood of the Paraguay. Caymans lifted lazy eyes
from the mudbank to stare at the labouring advance of the
luggers : great anthills towered offshore. At night, tying up
the luggers, they would hear far off the wail of the sloth, the
howl of the hunting jaguar.
They reached the broad mouths of the Cuyaba. Down
this stream, into the Paraguay, the Portuguese from Brazil
had penetrated once before, turning west in search of the
Golden City. So Alvar Nunez heard, and himself turned west
in their tracks, coming at last to a spot where he erected a
permanent base, Los Reyes on Lake Gaiba. Here a great Indian
village was encountered : Alvar Nunez entered into friendly
relations with those ceremonial cannibals, the great-eared
cultivators of that forest, men who worshipped the devil
in some contentment and happiness. Alvar Nunez had them
sternly warned against this practice, instructing them to listen
nine against the unknown 163
to the teaching of the Christian friars, who would acquaint
them with the terrors of hell. Impressed and grateful, the
Indians promised to bring supplies of food to the base.
As November came in Cabeza de Vaca completed his
preparations for the march on Manoa. Quite definitely it lay
due west: some Indians said twenty days’ march, some thirty.
He left a fourth of his men to guard Los Reyes, and took the
trackless jungle track into the west.
. Indians guided them. Presently even the accustomed
guides were at fault in that dense tangle of flowering under¬
growth and giant cane-brake. Cabeza de Vaca had men walk
ahead with cutlasses cutting a passage for the labouring advance
of the main body. Horses floundered fetlock-deep in the
viscid mud of the treey corridors, and the Spaniards, who
had. learned no lessons of dress or accoutrement from all
their years in the Americas, cursed under the weight of heavy
clothes and heavier armour. But Cabeza de Vaca was unde¬
pressed looking at the sunset colours in gold and blood as he
took to his bed each night. Strangely, devout and ascetic though
he was, he had a fine camp-bed carried into those jungle
tracks for his use. Muttering and cursing, sweating men
swore to remember that bed.
But that light in the sunset boded no good. Four days
after the commencement of the march the rain began to
tlm great tropic rams of the interior. Presently the jungle
paths became quagmires. An Indian sent forward to a
rumoured village had to crawl half the way there and back.
Yes, he reported, the Indians of the forward village confirmed
that there was inhabited land even further west—at a distance
of sixteen days’ journey, a rocky hill uprising from the forest.
Sixteen days ! Alvar Nunez had his hopes rekindled.
But his following boiled over. Sixteen days of crawling on
hands and knees along the littered, choked, and dripping
trails ? Carrying the governor’s bed the while ? . . . They voted
an instant return to Los Reyes.
§ 15
. There was nothing else for it. Reluctantly, with that bright
vision of Manoa remote in the bush to haunt all the remaining
years of his life, Cabeza de Vaca gave the order for the
164 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
expedition to turn about. So turning, he ended the last of his
ventures in unknown America.
Los Reyes he found in desperate straits. The surrounding
Indians had revolted and refused to bring food to the needy
Christians. Cabeza de Vaca sent expeditions up and down
the river in search of friendly natives and food. Some of the
expeditionaries perished of fever, some under the clubs of
the cannibal Guaranis. But one, led by a Captain Hernando
de Ribera, sailed up the Paraguay for twenty-three days and
returned with a strange tale. At the end of that twenty-three
days’ voyage, beyond the leagues-stretching marshes of Xaray,
they had come on a great town of the Indians, neat and reed-
built, where the ruling chief presented Ribera with a great
bar of gold and a crown of silver. Near at hand, he had told,
was the country of the Amazons, the breastless women,
who might be raided by the Spaniards if they desired more
wealth.
The Spaniards did so desire. Abandoning their boats
somewhere near the site of the modern San Luis, they had
marched off west into the slither and pelt of the jungle rainy
season. It was a land of miasmic swamps. They waded knee-
deep hour on hour, day on day. By night they collected
drifting wood and piled it on sandbanks and kindled unchancy
fires. By day they slipped and staggered and stumbled into the
beckoning west where the breastless women were reputed to
be “very hot and very rich”. For fifteen days this fantastic
march endured. Then higher land came. The Spaniards
climbed out on it, dripping, to be met by dejected groups
of starving Indians. Ribera gestured questions : Where was
the country of the Amazons ?
In another month’s travel, beyond the westward floods, he
would come to that land of heart’s desire, the Indians
replied, staring a lacklustre unsurprise at the draggled
adventurers.
Ribera and his Spaniards cursed them, their country,
the distant Amazons, all the soaking, reeking planet, and
turned back to flounder through the lagoons to San Luis.
That attained, they sailed down the Paraguay again and came
to Los Reyes, where Cabeza de Vaca, wearied and dispirited,
lay deep in fever the while mutiny and a violent distaste
for the governor and all his ways seethed throughout the
colony.
NINE
AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
§ 16
Beyond that point the saga of Cabeza de Vaca, that strangest
admixture of devoutness and monomania, gentleness and arro¬
gance, sinks into the turgid waters of plot and counterplot,
battle, murder and sudden death, an epitome of early Spanish-
American colonization. He returned down-river to Asuncion
a sick and beaten man. The colonists revolted, imprisoned him,
threatened him with death, and finally shipped him to Spain
with a load of accusations against him—some of them read
curiously unreal in this later day, some of them have an authen¬
tic ring. So, for the last time, in a day in March 1545,
peering from the tiny porthole in the tiny cabin where he lay
chained, Alvar Nunez looked back on that continent that had
given him so much of fantastic dream and fantastic adventure,
and saw its shores glide off into evening, and lowered weary
eyes from the sight. . . .
En route to Spain his captors attempted to poison him.
But by then he had recovered much of his old strength of
will. He refused the food, lived half-starved, and at last, in
December, reached Spain. Then began a course of trial and
imprisonment that lasted many years.
He is a dim figure amid that squalid squabble of accusation
and counter-accusation. He is not only a dim but a tiring
figure. It was well-nigh impossible to adjudicate between
him and the Paraguayan colonists, though the Spanish court
at length did so, finding him three years after he landed guilty
of all the charges brought against him. This was in March
155!. He was removed definitely from the governorship
of the Rio de la Plata, forbidden to visit the Americas again,
and ordered to serve as a horseman in Barbary in the King
of Spain’s army.
Old and poverty-stricken, he was still kept in close custody,
despite the later proviso of the court’s finding. But six
months later the sentence was modified. He need not go to
Barbary. He was released from prison. All Spain was very
bored with him and his case. It hoped he would keep quiet in
future.
It was mistaken. He continued to make appeal on appeal,
impoverishing himself and his family in those vain pursuits!
We hear dimly of his wife, old and impoverished as himself,'
l66 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
assisting him loyally. But at length all his money was spent.
In 1556 he fell very ill and appealed direct to the king for aid.
Incomprehensibly, the king relented and made a substantial
grant in September of that year to Alvar Nunez “that he might
be cured of his illness”.
Thereafter the records are silent. Probably no cure was
affected, though he may have lingered on a few years more.
History had passed beyond him, history and exploration alike,
the Americas resounding, north and south, to the tread of the
feet of following adventurers on those trails he had beaten
through wild leagues of bush and swamp while he sought the
golden cities of mirage, the unknown lands where he would
win wealth and many souls to God.
So the Child of the Sun passed to a last eclipse.
§ 17
The final chapter in the history of American exploration
was not, as we have noted, written by Cabeza de Vaca. Indeed,
that final chapter is still unwritten. But his service was a
real and a great one. For his era he was among the most acute
and penetrating of explorers; he had a close interest in
mountain and bluff, tribe and tribal weapon, the setting places
of the sun, the appearances of the sky in rainy seasons, all
the good land-hunger in another sense. Equally, his deficien¬
cies were largely those of his time : his insistence upon regard¬
ing all the ceremonial of the Indian’s religion as directly
inspired of the devil, his practice of foisting upon all that mass
of observance pseudo-Christian or Satanic meanings, his
hunger for the ease and security that successful gold-thieving
would bring.
But his two great journeys as no others opened the eyes
of men to the wide and wild diversity of culture and custom
that dominated the Americas. Here at last, Europe began to
realize, was no stray fragment of Asia, but verily a New World,
with new and strange peoples—a world thinly populated,
conquerable. Europe belted on its armour and sailed west;
where before there was scarcely a ship but a Spanish ship,
France and England now sailed their fleets to conquest.
And if that conquest the unprejudiced may hardly write
on the credit side of Cabeza de Vaca’s achievement, yet
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 167
he left for us much that would otherwise have been lost.
His pen was one of the least prejudiced in recording the life
and being of the Amerindians, of customs ranging from those
of the Simple Men who entreated him so kindly to those of
the Archaic Civilization, raiders and freebooters, kindly
human beings like himself distorted from the human norm
under the influences of civilization and its misbeliefs.
VI
FERNAO DE MAGALHAES AND THE FORTUNATE
ISLES
§ i
COLUMBUS had set out Westward, on the trail of a
dozen rumours, and encountered, like Leif Ericsson, the
great Barrier of the Americas. That barrier Cabeza de
Vaca and a score of others had explored and traversed,
convincing themselves that between Europe and the Far
East was a new world, an unimagined and greatly unimaginable
continent. Was there any passage or strait that led through
this continent to the sea beyond, to a westward route by
which men might attain the islands of wealth and perfume
and spice and legend ?
Here the chronicles achieve a fine confusion of names and
dates. By the beginning of the sixteenth century the English and
French had already commenced a northwards search for that
passage-way ; southwards, along the coast of the South Amer¬
icas, it is possible that lone Spanish traders (in not officially
recognized ships or expeditions), had penetrated as far as
Cape Horn, or perhaps passed entirely through that strait
that was later to be christened with the name of the remark¬
able individual who dominates the scene in this section. For
few of those traders and voyageurs who put out southwards
from Buenos Aires were explorers in any sense at all. Their
objects were speedy enrichment by trade, and return to Spain.
The globes of Schoner, issued in 1515 and 1520, suggest that
the passage south of South America was already known ;
and that possibility summons up a vision of a lone and secre¬
tive trader slipping through that passage-way and penetrating
across the unknown Pacific to trade with the distant East
even while Ferdinand Magellan was attempting to din home
his plan, unwitting his lateness, at the courts of Portugal and
Castile.
But this is only a possibility, and a remote one. The geo-
168
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
169
graphers of that age were armchair men greatly given to
armchair daring, what of the breadth and extent of the area
of the planet confirmed by the voyages of Columbus and his
successors. Schoner in his globes may well have been doing
no more than exercising his imagination on the Americas as
he did on Terra Australis—that immense southwards continent
he postulated as a geographical necessity around the South
Pole and extending far into Antarctic and Pacific waters.
Slowly the sea-route to the Far East, round the coast
of Africa, was being mapped out by the indefatigable Portu¬
guese, brown men, bearded, greedy and cruel and strangely
inhuman to our alien eyes. They were adventurers in the geo¬
graphical unknown of as shoddy a quality as was ever known.
Few had vision or selflessness in any degree; they were most
of them the wealth-haunted, ghoul-haunted men of their
time and class, so that even Vasco da Gama is not for this
record, he lacked both that impersonality and that pitiful
heroic perversity which characterized men like Columbus and
Cabeza de Vaca, men like that youth, Fernao de Magalhaes,
who sailed with da Gama’s great expedition of 1497.
§ 2
Magellan was born some time about the year 1480 at the
family seat of Sabrosa, near Chaves in Traz-os-Montes. He
was of ancient and haughty and much blood-letting Portu¬
guese descent, a noble, the oldest of a family of three sisters
and two brothers. Very early there was instilled into him
the arrogance and pride and self-possession of his blood.
The Magalhaes were not of towering lineage, and their province,
the only inland province in Portugal, was of no great moment
or import in those stirring days when Portugal had awakened
and looked seawards. But Magellan considered himself of a
blood and descent equal to that of any in the land ; he seems
to have had few doubts or disbeliefs in either himself or the
established order of things. A dark-faced, heavy louring boy
in the trunks and hose of his period he wandered around
the great odoriferous, rambling family residence at Sabrosa,
perpetually covered in the moist Portuguese dust, crowded
with innumerable uncles and cousins, retainers, cooks, page-
170 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
boys, mules, donkeys, offal, and all the litter, animate, inani¬
mate and in between that characterized the domestic economy
of a house of his time and class. But he did not envisage those
things as either fulfilling his life or his destiny. He had early
made up his mind to seek the court and recognition there ; he
hated with a very deep passion the squalor and dull indignity
of his ancestral estate.
So, growing up amidst the safe solemnities of life at Sabrosa,
he seems to have found the mountains perpetually vexing his
horizon, in wonder on what lay beyond, what they did and
wore and said at Lisbon, how the king looked, how a great
captain felt sailing his treasure-ships up the Tagus ? Treasure-
ships from the East, ships from the dim and distant and strange
West discovered and claimed for Spain by the vile-born
Genoan merchant, the Colombo. ... A mere merchant!
If a noble should essay such voyages what glory might he not
attain !
He would stare, in the hot silence of the long afternoons,
at the ancestral arms carved above the great wide door at
Sabrosa while the urchins peered out at him from the rambling
shacks of the servitors. To add fresh glory to those arms ! . . .
And turn away, to regret his own youth and look forward
to the time when, as promised him by that indefinite father
of his whose name, if it was not Pedro, was either Ruy or Gil,
he might ride out of this sleeping valley with its hot smell of
goats and peasants, its droop of unintoxicating vines—on the
road to Lisbon, to life in Lisbon. . . . Years afterwards men
were to come riding down the valley at the king’s command
and hack that coat of arms away in crumbling flakes; but
that was no vision of the heavy-jowled boy staring across
the hills.
At last, at the age of sixteen or seventeen, the time came.
A certain shyness seems to have come over Fernao at that
coming. But father Ruy-Gil-Pedro and mother Mesquita
Impenta treated his shyness with a brusque disregard. There
was no other way of advancement for a gentleman than to go
to court and there win to favour, secure command in the army,
a place on the council, or the like honour. Their vision did not,
as their son’s, extend to those seas in unceasing play flinging
up the long questing Atlantic rollers against the coasts of
Portugal.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
171
§3
He found the Portuguese court agog with the news of
the great voyage of Vasco da Gama—the voyage which had
carried the Europeans around Africa, the first circumnavigation
since the days of King Necho, to the Indian Ocean and so
across to India itself. Calicut had been reached, rich in wealth
from the spice-trade, and its rumours of even richer lands
beyond—Ceylon with its cinnamon, Malacca with its cloves,
Malaya with its great tin mines. For a little while it seemed to
the court at Lisbon, listening to the account of that amazing
voyage of 24,000 miles, that the expedition of the Genoan
across the Atlantic had been foolish and unnecessary. Here
was the Land of Spice—that necessary commodity in the
keeping and eating of the meats of the day—brought in contact
by the reasonable and secure eastwards passage. Magellan,
nineteen years of age, heavily built, haughty, courteous,
listened and pondered, as he learned his duties as a Gentleman
of the Household. The eastwards route might be the most
obvious route—but what of those lands that the Genoan had
discovered out there in the Atlantic ? What connection had
they with those distant lands of rumour of which da Gama
had heard—the Spice Islands, the Moluccas ?
In such speculations and his ordinary duties he vanishes
from our eyes for five long years. Throughout that period
the far-sailing Portuguese continued to extend their influence
and enlarge their trade about the coasts of India. Relations
with the Indian potentates—especially with those who har¬
boured Moslems—remained unsatisfactory. Portuguese were
upon occasion murdered with a fine, almost Christian brutality,
and their ships confiscated. And still the sea-route remained
uncertain in great stretches down the half-known African
coast, out in the wilds of the Indian Ocean. A second official
voyage was required.
Vasco da Gama was commissioned to it in 1504. He was
to take an Armada of fourteen ships, re-traverse the route of his
great voyage, establish the Portuguese power firmly in India,
and leave Francisco de Almeida there as Viceroy.
Innumerable Portuguese flocked down to Lisbon to volun¬
teer for service in the expedition. The great Admiral, the
cruellest and least magnanimous of men, a Portuguese Catholic
1/2 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Puritan, had a heavy task in choosing between the service of
this and that ragged but competent shipmaster, this and that
incompetent noble who was nevertheless a good man with
sword and harquebus. Disliked by his fellow-countrymen,
sneered at as a prig and a proselytizing clown, the Admiral’s
task would have seemed hopeless to any other.
But with a chilling severity, refusing here, accepting there,
da Gama manned his Armada. Presently the ships were in
trim, loaded with provisions and guns and trade goods.
Solemn mass was said, and the sins of the voyageurs commuted
in invocation of that peaceful God whose name they were to
spread abroad the Far East till the most obscenely cruel and
treacherous of easterners were to shudder with a sickened
horror at mention of the Christians’ God. Vasco da Gama
had his company confessed and embarked. In the ship stores
was a supply of oil, capable of being boiled and used for the
questioning of recalcitrant natives.
Among the common sailors was Fernao de Magalhaes,
a volunteer, a dark-faced, louring, squat court gallant who had
abandoned the court, its dogs, its flirtations, its heavy spices
and its chill meals in quest of—what ? Honour and glory, he
would have answered, even as his mind strayed off unceasingly
on that question ?—Columbus’s Cuba—how did it lie in
relation to the Moluccas ?
§4
Long years were to pass before he was even to attempt
the answer to that question—years in which he endured the
blister of suns on hot decks in the reel and sway and excrement-
smell of sea-fights, years in which he hasted up and down
this and that Indian street that ran with the blood of massacre,
years of pillage and cruelty and a sordid avariciousness beyond
the concepts of home-staying Europe. With Albuquerque he
fought at Diu in that great sea-battle where the power of the
Moslems in India went down before the superior strategy and
artillery of the Christians; with Albuquerque he was at the
siege of Goa when the town was captured, coldly considered,
and then carefully and serenely given over to rape and massacre,
so that not one man, woman or child escaped. . . . He seems
to have taken it all with a surly dispassion. There are tales
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I73
of his heroism and his escapes, conventional tales, showing
him the conventionally cruel and savagely courageous Portu¬
guese of his age and class. But the essential Magellan remains
hidden away while slowly the Portuguese power crept down
the Indian coasts.
Ceylon had been reached in 1507. In 1508, after Goa’s fall,
an expedition was despatched to Malacca where centuries
before the homeward-sailing ships of Marco Polo had waited
the monsoon long months. Malacca was seized and a fleet
under Antonio d’Abrei despatched to discover the Islands
even more distant, the islands of cloves and nutmegs.
Magellan sailed with that expedition, into those strange
seas and about those stranger islands, down by Java, to Sumarat,
where he captured a slave who was to help him much in his
subsequent voyagings—and repay his enslavement by a royal
revenge. Perhaps the slave was no Sumatran native—he told
Magellan much of the seas and tides down there in the un¬
certain east. Magellan discoursed on these with his friend
Francisco Serrano. Serrano’s objects in these voyagings and
adventurings were sane and Portuguese : he wished to make
money, to capture women and sleep with them, to return to
Portugal. But Magellan had become an uneasy quantity
among these islands. An old question had come haunting his
mind : which of them was Cuba, the island discovered by
the Genoan ?
To Magellan and the men of his time there was nothing
more likely than that some Indonesian island was Cuba. The
vast extent of the hemisphere of water was not realized.
That the earth was indeed a sphere had not been proved by
actual circumnavigation : it was merely an article of faith.
Cuba and the surrounding islands—the American continent
itself was accounted a cluster of islands—were held, quite
falsely, to be no more than remote, detached lands on the
fringe of the Grand Khan’s dominions. In a fashion,
knowing as we now do how much of their cultural capital the
early American civilizations drew from Asia, we can acknow¬
ledge this as true : the early Spanish explorers in the Central
Americas who thought so much of the life and ritual and decor¬
ation of those countries repeated the East were not mistaken.
But of the immense distances which those early Asiatic
colonizers, civilizing America, had crossed, there was no
concept. Somewhere beyond Cuba, beyond Panama, beyond
174 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Florida, a short distance sail, was Asia and the Asiatic
islands. . . .
So Magellan believed, and so a project appears to have
slowly matured in his mind. Perhaps he gathered from
his slave and others in the Moluccas rumours of the still more
distant islands of Polynesia, inhabited by a simple and child¬
like people—undoubtedly such hospitable innocents as the
natives of the West Indies who had vexed the Spaniards
“because the hardness of their heads blunted good swords”.
Sailing south-west beyond Cuba one might pass amidst those
islands and a new, swift route to the Moluccas.
In 1517 he sailed for home, coming to Lisbon, and there
apparently immersing himself in a sudden and unexpected
study—that of navigation. It was an essential part of edu¬
cation among the cultured of the day—ladies studied navi¬
gation, lispingly, in the Portuguese veiled rooms—but its
genteel and unintelligent application was not sufficient for him
who had sailed from Portugal as a common sailor with Vasco
da Gama. He had suddenly glimpsed light and reason for
making of himself the master-navigator of his age.
His parents were dead—he seems to have heard of their
death in those years of war and wandering in the far east—
and Sabrosa of no interest to him. He had grown tall,
though still burly, with dark hair and brows that met in
an austere frown across a beaked nose and heavy-lidded
eyes. In Lisbon he studied his navigation ; and, turning eyes
and ears westwards, heard of all those voyages extending
the supposed “islands” of the Americas into the great con¬
tinent that men now realized it was—the voyages of de Solis,
of Amerigo Vespucci, of the two Cabots—voyages defining
ever more clearly the extent and nature of that gigantic
westwards barrier which uprose between Asia and Europe. . . .
If so it did uprise. For there could, even now, be moments
of doubt. What if there were verily no terrestrial globe, but
some twisted surface of no geometrical name ? So that no
voyage could ever be made westwards, reaching Asia and those
islands where he had captured his slave . . . He put the fan¬
tasy from him impatiently. Somewhere, somewhere re¬
motely south of the furthest journeyings of the Spaniards,
was surely an opening.
It is possible that this was more than a mere hypothesis
in his mind. With his return to Portugal it seems he was made
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I75
free to search amidst the innumerable charts and maps of the
Americas which, since Columbus’s day, had drifted into the
great repository of the King of Portugal’s treasury. They
were maps and charts of a muzzy uncertainty in coastline
and latitude, many of them. Beyond the limits of his own
exploration the explorer would draw the figures of a man-eating
savage, a hypogriff, a sea-monster. But certain of them were
as cold and accurate as Magellan himself ; and, long after his
voyage, it was stated that among those charts he discovered
one which showed clearly the mouth of the strait that was
afterwards to bear his name.
Whether or not that was so, he was presently, with the
persuasive and learned aid of a geographer of the time, one
Ruy Faliero, engaged in soliciting the attention and patronage
of the King of Portugal for this expedition he planned. It
must be a great expedition—the greatest of all expeditions—
for it would give to Portugal not only wealth to discover a
westwards passage to the Spice Islands, but honour and glory
beyond that known to the rest of Christendom. There must
certainly be a passage to the south of the American lands,
Magellan persuaded—with his mind’s eye, according to later
and hostile commentators, on that chart of Martin of Bohemia
which reposed, neglected, in the royal treasury.
King Manoel appears to have listened with little attention.
He was a lively and volatile monarch, quick and airy and cruel
and light-hearted, and he appears to have detested Magellan
almost from the moment he set eyes on him. In the intervals
of study, Magellan had crossed to Africa to take part in the
war against the Moors. Wounded, he returned without per¬
mission and took to badgering the king for support of his
project to sail beyond America. King Manoel was more in¬
terested in questioning his breach of discipline ; presently
the royal nerves could be badly frayed at mere sight of the
limping figure of the navigator, dour and obsequious. Manoel
disliked his appearance, his record, his mode of address, his
code of life, and everything that appertained to the rough-
bearded, heavy-eyed adventurer from the Moluccas. His plans
and his theories were accorded a brusque disregard. Magellan
found himself treated in a fashion he had little looked for.
He appears to have awakened with a haughty rage. He
had no small idea of his own importance, his powers of navi¬
gation, his faith in himself as the ideal leader for a conquering
I76 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
armada. After an obscure but vicious squabble in the year
1518, he rode out from Lisbon in company with Ruy Faliero,
to an unknown destination.
It was not long unknown. News came to Lisbon that
Magellan had ridden to the court of Spain, had there offered
his services, and been accepted as captain of a great westwards-
sailing expedition to add fresh wealth to the treasury and
fresh glory to the name of the Spanish king.
§5
He was received by Charles V with a fine Spanish courtesy
which presently gave way to interest and enthusiasm as
Magellan’s plans were unfolded. He was plainly, with his
geographic notions, his experience of the Moluccas, and his
widely reputed skill as a navigator, the commander Spain had
been long awaiting. An expedition of indefinite intention,
under the command of one Estefano Gomez, had been prepar¬
ing for some time. Its object no longer indefinite, Magellan
was appointed to command it, superseding Gomez. A charter
of instruction and exhortation was drawn up, carefully and
politely guarding the rights of Portugal:
Firstly you are to go with good luck to discover the part of the
ocean within our limits and demarcation. . . . Also you may discover
in any of those parts what has not yet been discovered, so that you do
not discover nor do anything in the demarcation and limits of the
most serene King of Portugal . . . nor to his prejudice but only within
the limits of our demarcation.
This should have satisfied Manoel. But the latter, un¬
reasonably, was filled with fury. Magellan was outlawed by
Portugal and down through the valley of the transmontane
province rode the emissaries of the court to dusty Sabrosa,
there to deface the coat of arms above the doorway on which
the boy Fernao had gazed often and oft in the days before lie
went a page to court. . . . Magellan heard the news with
indifference, his whole attention engaged in reorganizing and
staffing the expedition of Spain.
Or almost his whole attention. For in those unhasting days
one learns with little surprise that the work of reorganization
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I77
took nearly two years ; and in some pause of it Magellan loved
and married that Beatriz Barbosa of whom little or nothing is
known, except that her alliance with the Portuguese was “a
love affair of passion and splendour”. Magellan was certainly
capable of both, if in other devotions than to women ; and
presumably the woman who drew such storm of regard upon
herself was of other quality than the usual languid Spanish
harim-women of the day. She came to live with Magellan at
Seville ; their son Rodrigo was born there in March of the
year 1519, and Magellan drew up a new and careful will in his
favour. . . . He visioned not only the achieving of the Spice
Islands, but the founding of a noble family in Spain.
But while the Guadalquivir near their house in Seville was
astir morning and night with the coming and going of seamen
and officials and ship-chandlers and long trains of provision¬
laden mules, panting and raising up the slow little dust-clouds,
Magellan was slowly realizing how deeply all Spain that was
not of Royal blood resented his coming, his command, and his
pretensions. Estefano Gomez proved a trouble-maker from the
first. Magellan had appointed him second-in-command—a
move he was deeply to regret—but that did not stay his
hostility. Hatred and distrust of the Portuguese may be said
to have affected the expedition adversely from the beginning.
Magellan was not a tolerant man, haughty and uncom¬
municative, with the glare of his inner vision—beyond Cuba /
—under the beetling brows, and the Spaniards regarded him
with a passionate distaste. What was the object of this extra¬
ordinary voyage, where did the Portuguese hope to steer ?
For it seems that he kept the expedition in doubt of his
route, if not of his ultimate aim, as his devoted chronicler tells
with the usual rhapsodic adulation :
The Captain-General, Ferdinand Magellan, had resolved on under¬
taking a long voyage over the ocean, where the winds blow with
violence, and storms are very frequent. He had also determined on
taking a course as yet unexplored by any navigator. But this bold
attempt he was cautious of disclosing, lest any one should strive to
dissuade him from it by magnifying the risk he would have to encounter,
and thus dishearten his crew. To the perils naturally incident to the
voyage was joined the unfavourable circumstance of the four other
vessels he commanded, beside his own, being under the direction of
captains who were inimical to himself, merely on account of his being
a Portuguese, they themselves being Spaniards.
M
I78 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Magellan’s caution in disclosing his route to the Spaniards
he allowed to lapse very early in his intercourse with the
expedition’s geographer-historian, the Italian Antonio
Pigafetta. From the first (and perhaps in consequence)
Magellan for Pigafetta was the hero who could do no wrong.
His chronicle is Magellan’s apologia, and no poor one. To our
later eyes it seems reasonable enough that the Italian amidst a
host of Spaniards should turn in admiration to the single other
foreigner among the men of note who manned the expedition :
they were both in a measure outcasts, barbaroi, dreaming men,
visionaries, shifty and untrustworthy, among the hard,
contemptuous Spaniards. But Pigafetta’s admiration was
deeper : it long survived Magellan’s patronage, and indeed,
Magellan himself.
Five caravellas, each from a hundred to a hundred and fifty
tons burden, were outfitted on the Guadalquivir. The caravella
was oddly reminiscent in shape and rigging of a Chinese junk,
clumsy but strong, hard to steer and hard to destroy. The
flagship chosen by the louring Portuguese was the Trinidad,
the largest of them all; and no sooner had this been done
than Magellan proceeded to lay down rules of unexampled
severity in discipline. Men on board ship must do thus and
so, saluting here, assembling there, sleeping in selected places,
awakening at stated hours. ... It sounded appalling .to
Spanish ears, accustomed to the easy perennial state of dis¬
orderly half-mutiny characterizing all the westwards-sailing
crews. But Magellan was of other mettle than Columbus. He
had no fancy for venturing those immensities of sea-space in
company with the unruled and the readily insubordinate. He
planned and was to enforce an elaborate code of signals for the
purpose of keeping the flotilla together, by night as well as by
day. Columbus’s experiences with the Nina should not be his.
So at last all things were in readiness. “On Monday morn¬
ing, the 10th of August, 1519, the squadron having everything
requisite on board, and a complement of two hundred and
thirty-seven men, its departure was announced by a discharge
of artillery, and the foresail was set.” This according to
Pigafetta : the expedition streamed down the river from
Seville, only, however, in the absurd anti-climax beloved of
the times, to cast anchor immediately afterwards at the port
of San Lucar, and proceed, solemnly (forgetting it had set
out fully equipped) to “lay in a stock of provisions”.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I79
Through August and well into September, with a bored
laggardness, Spain provisioned the ships. The crews lay
stewing and fuming, cursing the delay and the foreign com¬
mander, sneering at his piety and his regulations alike. Wait
till they had him well out in the Atlantic. . . .
Before he sailed, Beatrix was again with child. Knowledge
of the fact must have stiffened Magellan’s resolution to achieve
both fame and worldly success—somewhere, beyond the
Americas. And on the 20th of September, 1519, that expedition
which had charmed his vision for ten long years sailed out into
the Atlantic on its first lap of one of the greatest voyages of all
recorded history.
§6
One very dark night this light appeared to us like a brilliant flambeau
on the summit of a large tree, and thus remained for the space of two
hours, which was a matter of exceeding consolation to us during the
tempest. At the instant of its disappearing it diffused such a resplendent
blaze of light as almost blinded us. We gave ourselves up for lost, but
the wind ceased instantaneously.
Thus Pigafetta on the meteoric lights that played about the
mastheads in the storms beyond Teneriffe. His is a chronicle
rich in wonders, by sea or land. Presently, the storm abating,
the sailors looked out and saw “birds of many kinds. Some
appeared to have no rump ; others made no nests for want of
feet, but the female lays and hatches her eggs on the back of
the male, in the midst of the sea”. Those unnatural fowls
presently disappeared as the fleet went hull-down on its
weary voyaging west.
The ships, “very old and patched up” had not benefited
with the storm encountered beyond Teneriffe. There ensued
unending days of contrary winds which drove the ships hither
and thither about the Line “until fair weather came”. Not
until two months had passed did the battered and heat-frayed
flotilla arrive at Rio de Janeiro and proceed to load up with
fresh supplies of vegetables. Magellan had as yet had little
trouble with his subordinates. But that trouble was unremote.
Loaded with potatoes and sugar-cane, the flotilla coasted
slowly down Brazil. Reaching the mouth of the Rio de la Plata,
l8o NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Magellan, with a dour disinterest, proceeded to quash the
rumour that the immense estuary of that river might lead to
some unknown strait. He sailed up the estuary and had buckets
lowered from the ‘Trinidad and the water tested. It was fresh.
Here could be no channel to the Western Sea.
For five months of which there survive but the barest
records of sailing and close-reefing and anchoring, the
Portuguese coasted modern Argentine, searching each bay and
inlet with scrupulous care to see if it might qualify as the
expected channel. Magellan’s caution and care seem the best
disproval of the rumour that he followed definite information
of a channel in these regions. Winter (but in those latitudes a
winter of summer weather) went by in such pursuits and the
weary crews grew ripe for mutiny. Where was this outcast
from his own country leading the chivalry of Spain ?
Towards the end of March 1520 they put in at an excel¬
lent harbour in lat. 490 30' S, the harbour that was to be
christened Port San Julian. Winter—when it should have
been summer !—was coming on with some intensity, and
Magellan determined to await the passing of the storms that
had begun to lash the desolate coasts of Patagonia with great
breakers. That coast haunted the halted ships—desolate and
deserted, with the tall pampas scrub wilting under the coming
of winter. The Admiral brooded alone over those charts he
was reported to have stolen from Lisbon : the crews yawned
and gossiped and stared over the sides of the vessels, remember¬
ing Spain and the long, hot days of a spring month there.
April went by : the storms ran their long foaming currents
past the mouth of Port San Julian : birds drove before them
in great numbers. The sky was a scudding desolation, like the
shore. May followed it, and still Magellan refused to move.
But suddenly the boredom on board the ships was broken. The
sailors crowded anew to stare at the shore.
A man of gigantic stature presented himself before us. He capered
almost naked on the sands, and was singing and dancing, at the same
time casting dust on his head. The captain sent one of our seamen on
shore with orders to make similar gestures, as a token of friendship
and peace, which were well understood, and the giant suffered himself
to be quietly led to a small island where the captain had landed. I
likewise went on shore there with many others. He testified great
surprise on seeing us, and, holding up his finger, undoubtedly signified
to us that he thought us descended from heaven.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN l8l
Those gigantic primitives of remote South America,
but slightly tinged with the spread of the Archaic Culture
from Peru, had nevertheless their memories of Sun Children,
as almost everywhere on the New Continent. Magellan’s men
were credited with like origins. Magellan himself stared under
his scowling penthouse brows at the gigantic fatagones of the
native—the fur-shoes worn to protect the feet from the stubble
of the pampas—and christened the country on that—in
several senses—understanding.
The giant was allowed to depart in search of companions.
Presently he brought back men and women of his tribe to
stare at the Spaniards, to gesticulate to heaven, and to astound
the sailors with their unvaryingly gigantic stature. Here were
the ogres of the world’s end. Magellan cautiously decided to
carry away a couple as specimens: they would amuse the
Spanish court, might even breed there, and astound future
generations: nay, what beasts of burden they would make !
He had two of the men enticed on board by a trick, and
manacled. They howled loudly, great and astounded and
weeping children in the hands of the gods. The Spaniards
thrust them below to stay their cries, and went ashore in a
furtive endeavour to capture two of the women, those future
breeders of the solution of Spain’s transport problems. But
the alarm had spread. The Patagonians fled into the scrub
pursued by the enraged Spaniards. If they could not have them
alive, it was sport to shoot at the gigantic leaping figures.
Unfortunately, one of the Patagonians was also a keen sports¬
man. He hid behind a bush with a bow or blowgun and waited
till the Spanish pursuit came up. The nearest Spaniard, an
arrow in his thigh, called out loudly that he was wounded. He
was mistaken : in a moment he was dead. The arrow had been
poisoned.
Daunted, and indignant at this heathen abomination, the
Christians sorrowfully halted the pursuit, gathered up the
body of their companion and retreated to the shore, on the
way burning down the shelters of the Patagonians that these
barbarians might realize the superiority of Christian moral
and ethic.
Magellan had the men-captives kept in chains. Breedless
or not, they would amuse Spain when he presented them at
court. But presently he gathered intelligence which made it
unlikely that he himself would ever see Spain.
>
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
l82
§7
This was a plot, slowly maturing throughout those months
of idleness among the ship-commanders, to murder Magellan
himself and sail back the flotilla to Seville. But at the last
moment the hearts of some of the conspirators misgave them.
News was brought to the Portuguese, and he acted promptly,
diplomatically, murderously. Omitting the ship commanders,
he had Juan of Cartagena, the vehador ; Luiz de Mendoza,
the treasurer; Antonio Cocca, the Paymaster ; and Caspar
de Casada arrested and tried. The remainder looked on with a
sullen irresolution.
Magellan acted according to his nature and the brutish
times. Juan of Cartagena was ordered to be skinned alive. He
was taken ashore and this atrocious punishment carried into
effect with a refined and deadly cruelty which the expedition
was not to forget. Mendoza was stabbed to the heart; Cocca
left in chains. In his treatment of Caspar de Casada, Magellan
showed, as his companions viewed it, the cloven hoof of the
treacherous Portuguese. At first pretending to pardon this
officer, whose life he dare not attempt (he having been directly
appointed by the King of Spain), the Admiral next had him
marooned on shore in company with a priest. The Patagonians,
he calculated, would soon return and settle Casada’s problem
out of hand.
Even in Pigafetta’s chronicle, so meticulously adulatory of
Magellan, these read cruel and cowardly deeds on the part of
Magellan : that skinless body which squirmed and screamed
on the shore till it died haunts us still. But had the mutineers
succeeded in their objective they would have killed not only
Magellan ; they would have killed that on which he had set
his heart and soul—the reaching of those Moluccas he
believed with a visionary’s strength lay somewhere beyond
this land of Patagonia. He displayed a fanatic’s ferocity in his
treatment of the mutineers—unfortunately amended with an
unfanatical diplomacy that denigrates even that excuse.
Misfortune had not ended its play of dark happenings
over the expedition on the Patagonian coast. One of the
caravellas, the St. lago, had been sent southwards to explore
the coastline as the weather lightened. It was wrecked and
the crew scrambled ashore. Presently two of their number,
nine against the unknown 183
having walked overland, appeared weary and limping at the
harbour of San Julian. Magellan had to set about organizing a
relief expedition. Not only must the men be rescued but all
the provisions and stores brought overland from their ship.
Tune and July passed by in this unprofitable trade. Summer
had come in these remote lands. At length all was ready. The
pious commander had a cross erected on the summit of a
neighbouring mountain, the Monte Christo, and sailed from
Port San Julian on the 21st of August.
In lat. 50° 40' S, however, such a storm arose as almost
wrecked the squadron. Magellan put in to shore, into a bay he
named Santa Cruz, and cast anchor, awaiting the subsidence
of the storm. Wood and water were plentiful, and fishing good.
The ships restocked with fresh provisions. Magellan appears to
have decided that his move in August had been too hasty ;
he halted in Santa Cruz for a couple of months, preparing, say
his chroniclers, to face with healthy and contented crews
the dangers of the unknown south. #
But those inconstant fingerings and plannings read queer y
to this later day. It seems more likely that a faintness of ueart
had come on Magellan, a cold uncertainty in which he mislaid
for a while, in doubt and some measure of despair, that urgent
vision that had been his since his days as a page-boy in Lisbon,
since his days in the Moluccas. How could he ever achieve that
channel—if it did exist ? How hope for success with those who
hated him ? r j 1. j j
But at length, after having the crews confessed, he ordered
the anchors to be weighed and put out from Santa Cruz. On
the 21st of October a great rightwards opening in the rugged
coastline was discerned. Precipices towered on either side,
and as the squadron sailed in through the opening at the
Admiral’s signal they saw open out in front of them what
appeared to be merely another great bay, land-locked by
beetling crags and mountains that lifted in glacial scaurs of
snow their crests far into unhappy skies. The waters boiled
round the rocks that sheltered under the crags and the
Spaniards stared their dismay. Was this where the Portuguese
planned to destroy them ?
Mutiny again raised its head. But no actual engagement
ensued. Magellan stirred to a virile activity, commanding
and directing and suddenly inspiring. He despatched the
Sun Antonio and Lu Concepcion to examine the westwards end
I84 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
of the bay and determine its nature; La Trinidad and La
Vittoria anchored close inshore. Raising their heads, the
Spaniards saw the wheel and dip of immense clouds racing up
from the south.
That night a great storm came on, and raged through
all the night and all the next day. The two detached ships
vanished from sight in the great walls of spray that boiled
across the surface of the apparent bay. On the second day,
while murmurs arose that the ships had been sent to their
destruction without reason or warrant, smoke was seen arising
far in the west. This could mean but one thing. A ship had
been wrecked and survivors were signalling from the shore.
But on the fourth day, with flags flying and guns firing,
the two ships returned, and signalled their success. They had
discovered and penetrated through a narrow gut leading from
this present bay into another. Leading from that other they had
discerned while they fought the storm yet another channel
vanishing into the west.
§8
Magellan had the Trinidad's anchors weighed and sailed
for the third bay. Herein he found not one outlet but two,
cliff-surrounded, with the foaming tides pouring down dark
canyons south-east and south-west. The San Antonio and
La Concepcion were despatched down the south-east gut; the
Admiral on the Trinidad, with the Vittoria in attendance,
attempted the south-western channel.
It broadened and narrowed and broadened yet again,
retreating into the hazes of the west. Finally they came to the
mouth of a river and cast anchor in uncertainty. Here the
sailors found abundance of “small fish like sardines” and from
here Magellan despatched a boatload of men to explore
the coast round the great cape that rose westward. The boat
put in to shore and the seamen climbed the heights of the cape.
So doing, they saw the western outlet of the channel, perhaps
the first Europeans ever to see it, and beyond that, “another
sea, which is called the peaceful sea”.
When news of this was brought to Magellan on the
Trinidad he broke down and wept, to the astonishment of the
sardonic Spaniards. At last—visions fulfilled ! He paced the
decks and stared with a stirring heart at the towering moun-
VOYAGE OF MAGELLAN
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 185
tains to north and south, the precipitous cliffs that shielded the
Old World from the Far East, and knew then, perhaps, such
joy and fulfilment as he was never to know again in his life.
For one of the officers on the San Antonio, which had sailed
to investigate the south-eastwards channel, was that Gomez
whom Magellan had superseded in command of the expedition
outfitting on the banks of the Guadalquivir. He conceived,
and correctly, that his opportunity had arrived. He and the
other officers on guard attacked and overcame the captain of the
San Antonio, put him in irons, and, clapping on a press of
canvas, turned about and made for the eastwards outlet.
That attained, they turned north, put in at San Julian, rescued
Casada and his priest from the Patagonian shore and made
for Spain.
Unaware of this defection, Magellan, rejoined by the
Concepcion, set about searching dreary mile on mile of strait
and inlet for sign of the missing vessel. Finally he conceived it
impracticable to remain longer; and, leaving signals on
“islands and promontories to guide the wayward vessel” he
turned to the adventure of braving the perils of the Peaceful
Sea.
Summer had come. There were only three hours of night
in those southern latitudes and Magellan occupied the days as
well as he might in re-outfitting the diminished squadron
for his attempt on the Moluccas. Southwards, in the rugged
islands, there would gleam far away as the day waned pin¬
points of fire ; and the Spaniards would cross themselves as
they watched those enigmatic signals upon the darkness in
that bleak unknown country, Tierra del Fuego, the Land of
Fire. We know those fires to have been but the cooking fires
of one of the last races of true primitives left in the Americas,
the Fuegans, strange, naked happy savages living amidst snow
and ice without fears or houses or gods or culture, without even
knowledge of the Children of the Sun. They had been in their
time the world’s greatest explorers—descendants of men who
had traversed all northern Asia and held south through all the
Americas till they came to the last island where land ceased
and their wanderings with it. Perhaps ten thousand years
before Magellan stared at their craggy land under his pent¬
house brows they had come to that land. But their Golden
Age was something remote from the concept of the seeker of
the Golden Isles.
l86 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
A long delay was dangerous. Magellan had only three
ships left, who had started from Spain with five. Of the
complement of 237 men only 183 remained. Provisions were
running low and despite his anxiety over the San Antonio
she must be left to her fate. On the 18th of November, 1520,
a year and two months after his departure from Spain, the
Portuguese Admiral raised anchor and headed west. . . .
About the same day the San Antonio, homewards bound,
was crossing the Line and committing to the sea, unceremoni¬
ously, the gigantic, wasted body of one of the Patagonian
ogres.
§9
They were the first that ever burst
Into that silent sea.
Magellan had the ‘Trinidad steered north-westwards along
the coast for a little while. Then, taking his bearings, he
determined to attempt the great stretch of the Pacific without
base or support. The weather remained calm and still, upon
the sea the flying fishes scudded before pursuing birds, a mild
breeze blew up the colourful clouds of sunset in the face of
the little squadron trimming its sails. No ships, no men, no
cultivation or sign of cities in all that wide stretch behind.
In front . . .
Day on day they sailed north and north-west, the land
long lost behind them, the trade-wind following at their heels.
Presently they were aware of strange skies above their heads,
of a vanished Polar star.
The Antarctic has not the same stars as the Arctic Pole; but
here are seen two clusters of small, nebulous stars which look like
small clouds, and are but little distant one from the other. In the
midst of these clusters of small stars two are distinguished, very large
and very brilliant, but of which the motion is scarcely apparent;
these indicate the Antarctic Pole.
So they looked, the first of their race, on the nebulae of
Magellan’s Clouds. Near it they saw gape the Coal-Sack, an
apparent hole in the sky, unstarred and untenanted ; and
beyond, in the Pacific night, the glory of the one Christian
constellation, the Southern Cross. To them it seemed near
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN l8y
and friendly, sign of the eternal verities of their faith, a friendly
thing in that alien night with its coloured candles lighted
across the great arcing candelabrum of the Milky Way.
Day followed day and still there came no sign of land,
Magellan pacing his poop with grim eyes below the heavy
brows, the sailors yawning and laggard at brace and clew, t e
spindrift gleaming fading in the wake of each ship. Days lapsed
into weeks, weeks into first one month, then another, and still
there came no sign of land. Steering north-west by west, they
crossed the Line after traversing some twelve thousand
geograpical miles. No land was seen, no storms encountered
even as now a more westerly route was steered. IVIagellan s
self-imposed route had a mathematical directness; but it took
him far from the Pacific Islands and their verdure and hospit-
* Water and food grew scarce ; disease and unease increased
in the stifling constriction of the small vessels.
The biscuit we were eating no longer deserved the name of bread,
it was nothing but dust and worms, which had consumed the sub¬
stance, and what was more, it smelled intolerably, being impregnated
with the urine of mice. The water we were obliged to drink was equally
putrid and offensive. We were even so far reduced, that we might not
die of hunger, to eat pieces of the leather with which the mainyard
was covered to prevent it from wearing the rope. These pieces of
leather, constantly exposed to the water, sun, and wind, were so hard
that they required being soaked four or five days in the sea in order to
render them supple ; after this we boiled them to eat. Frequently,
indeed, were we obliged to subsist on sawdust; and even mice, a food
so disgusting, were sought after with such avidity that they sold for
half a ducat apiece. ...
Nor was this all. Our greatest misfortune was being attacked by a
malady in which the gums swelled so as to hide the teeth, as well in
the upper as in the lower jaw, whence those afflicted thus were incapable
of chewing their food. Nineteen of our number died of this complaint,
among whom was the Patagonian giant and a Brazilian, whom we had
brought with us from his own country. Besides those who died we
had from twenty-five to thirty sailors ill, who suffered dreadful pains
in the arms, legs and other parts of the body, but these, all of them,
recovered. . . .
And during the whole of these three months and twenty days we
went in an open sea while we ran fully four thousand leagues in the
Pacific sea. This was well named Pacific, for during this same time we
met with no storm, and saw no land except two small uninhabited
islands.
i88
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
These smallj uninhabited islands5J sighted on January
the 24th, 1521, have been identified with Puka-Puka in the
Paumotu Archipelago. Magellan made no attempt to examine
them in detail, but pushed on in hope of shortly encountering
the Spice Islands. Skilled navigator though he was, however,
he was out of his reckoning. Not until March 6th did land
appear on the bow, and then not of the Spice Islands.
It was, instead, Guam of the Mariannes. Putting in to
shore in search of vegetables and fresh water, the first Europeans
to cross the Pacific encountered the remote Polynesians who
inhabited those islands, tall and olive-brown and almost naked,
a people without gods or kings or even images to worship,
primitives who had been but slightly touched by the passing
fringes of the Archaic Civilization long centuries before.
Yet they remembered sufficient of that raiding passage, and
remembered war, and the evils then wrought upon them. As a
result, they set about stealing everything of the strangers on
which they could lay their hands.
They stole weapons, _ caps, dirks; they stole the skiff
hanging astern of the Trinidad; had they had the time and
experience, they would probably have stolen the entire flotilla
and left the Spaniards gasping in the sea. . . . Magellan had
had enough. He knew how to treat these men abandoned of
God. Landing with forty men, he burned down the nearest
village, stove in all the boats he could see, killed seven of the
disgusting non-idolators who had not had the address to flee,
and, leaving behind him these marks of the coming of a
superior civilization, took to his ship and steered due west.
He christened the islands the Ladrones, the Islands of Thieves;
what the inhabitants christened Magellan history leaves
unrecorded.
Again the interminable ocean. Not even a sea-bird marred
the desolation, the chronicler tells, and voices had a startling
sound in that sea-waste. What if there were no Spice Islands
to be found on this track—no complete globe to round ? . . .
put at sunrise on the 16th of March the Admiral lifted liis
Jfanatic eyes and saw far ahead, shining in the dawn, the peaks
of a high country. Slowly it drew nearer and they were aware
of an island covered with luxurious vegetation. One of the
Spice Islands at last ?
It was Samar of the Philippines. But Magellan and his men
knew nothing of that; they cruised doubtfully off-shore for a
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 189
little, then put in at a convenient bay. Magellan landed
armed boatloads of men and surveyed the near beach. No
natives, hostile or friendly. He gave orders for the crew to
disembark and bring the sick on shore. . ,
But next morning a vessel was observed in the bay beyond
the ships—a “vessel of superior build’h It was hovering doubt¬
fully off-shore and at sight of that hesitation, the Admiral, in
a fever to discover his whereabouts, gave orders that no
Spaniard was to make the least move, hostile or otherwise.
They waited, breathless. The boat came nearer. The Europeans
stared their relief. .
It was filled with men in rich but outlandish garb men
it was plain with rulers and gods, devils and beliefs and
afflictions like themselves. They had reached civilization again.
§ 10
Pantomimic gestures of questioning and welcome were
exchanged between the Spaniards and the boatload of civilized
islanders. Off-shore, the Spaniards discovered, was a native
fishing fleet; and a rapid trade sprang up between the
Filipinos and the Europeans. Here, for the first time, the
latter set eyes on bananas—“a fig a foot long” as the impressed
chronicler avers. Finally, the natives gave the crews to under¬
stand, in expressive pantomime, that they had no other trade
goods at hand ; but would sail to their own homes and return
in four days’ time with other articles.
Four days later, true to their word, they returned, bringing
—surety at last that the Spice Islands were near—pepper,
cinnamon, cloves, nutmegs. Much more to the point, gold
appeared plentiful. Painted chiefs wore bracelets and armlets
of gold ; pepitos of gold were used as a kind of currency. And
still more to the west, the natives gestured, was a land of gold.
It was the familiar device of all such people for getting rid
of over-pressing guests. Magellan and his Spaniards swallowed
the bait with great simplicity, and raised anchor and held
west—firing, as they did so, a parting salute which threw the
Filipinos into a terrified confusion.
Magellan’s personal slave, captured long before in Sumatra,
had survived the voyage ; now it struck Magellan for the first
time that he might soon be able to put this dependant’s
19° NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
linguistics to use. Eight days after leaving Humumu he put
in to the bay of one of the islands, and had his slave stand by
his side as a boatload of men approached. These hailed the
ships in some doubt, but were a little reassured when the much-
travelled Sumatran cried down to them words of peace and
amity—words which they apparently understood. The slave
begins to emerge into prominence for the first time in the
record : he is not to retreat from that position.
The Filipinos paddled away and the Spaniards waited
until the next morning, when Henry the Sumatran was sent
ashore to negotiate with the “reigning prince”. This mission he
appears to have carried out with considerable skill and diplo¬
macy, assuring the island chief that the unpleasant-seeming
foreigners were not bent on rape, loot and conquest, but were
voyaging these seas for pleasure. Probably anxious to view
such curiosities at closer hand and tell the tale of them to
his grandchildren in the future, the “reigning prince” came
aboard the Trinidad, embraced Magellan, and “presented him
with three porcelain vases full of rice”. In return the heavy-
browed Portuguese treated the native potentate to breakfast
and then an exhibition of the armaments and armour of the
expedition. The Filipino was impressed. If not gods, these
foreigners were evidently devils. Impressed by the weight of
his own reasoning, he invited Magellan to send two of his
people to examine the country.
Pigafetta and another were given the task ; they landed
and spent the night in wassail and admiration ; of the country,
complacently, they saw nothing, believing it like all such
countries full of uncouthness and heathen abomination. But
in the morning, returning to the ships, they were accompanied
by no less a personage than the chief of the neighbouring
island of Mindanoa—a tall and handsome individual covered
with golden ornaments. He was also an unrestrained talker.
Gold, he told, was so plentiful on his island that they made the
baser utensils “of the bed-chamber” of that precious metal.
The Spaniards listened with a loose-mouthed avariciousness.
Where—and at once—was this Mindanoa, ruled over by this
silk-clad heathen who gave his barbarous title and name as
that of the Raja Siagu ?
But Magellan, pious as ever, delayed departure in search of
the islanded El Dorado in order to celebrate Easter Mass on
shore. The natives crowded to stare their surprise. The service
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I9I
finished, Magellan had a large cross erected on a neighbouring
height, informing the Raja Siagu that this was
the standard confided to him by the emperor his master to plant
wherever he landed; and that in consequence he should erect it on
the island, to which this symbol would, moreover, be auspicious, as
all European ships which would in future visit it. would know, on
seeing the cross, that we had been received as friends, and would
refrain from any violence to the persons and property of their (the
Filipino chiefs’) subjects; and should any be taken, prisoners, they
would only have to make the sign of it to gain their liberty.
Thus Pigafetta ; the reactions of the Raja Siagu are not
recorded. Possibly an attitude of .fixed and unwavering
diplomacy with these strange sea-raiders had been decided
upon. Pigafetta noted with disgust the habit of the common
people of going almost naked and chewing betel-nut: it was
evident that they were not so civilized as at first had been
assumed. But the upper classes, with their silks and porcelain,
trade-goods obtained in contact with the Chinese, were
evidently wealthy and important beings of a. wealthy and
important archipelago. Magellan, slowly collating reports of
the whole group, gathered that there were three principal
islands : Leite, Mindanao, and Sebu. Sebu was the greatest
of these.
The Admiral determined to steer for Sebu, obtain its
Raja’s submission to the authority of Spain, trade the shoddy
goods in the ships to the simple inhabitants in exchange for
solid gold ; and then, with such bright offering to lay at the
feet of Charles V, seek out the genuine Spice Islands and
return at once to Europe and the empty arms of Dona
Beatriz. ...
They were empty enough. The second child had been still¬
born ; and even as Magellan was steering his ships into the
port of Sebu, his son Rodrigo lay dying in Seville.
§ 11
On April the 7th, 1521, Magellan’s squadron entered the
port of Sebu with flags flying and a “general discharge of
ordnance”. This last, according to the chronicler, was intended
as a general salute. But the scared inhabitants of Sebu, rich
192 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
and civilized bourgeois, fled into the interior streets of that
important town, and the Admiral, anchoring, looked in some
doubt at an all but deserted sea-front.
An envoy, together with Henry, the invaluable Sumatran,
was sent ashore to interview the Raja. That dignitary was
discovered in the market-place surrounded by the terrified
inhabitants. With the hauteur of the badly scared he sug¬
gested to the envoy that his master would do well to enter
foreign harbours more quietly : but, now that he had entered,
did he know he was subject to the usual harbour-duties ?
Somewhat staggered, the envoy had the Sumatran slave
reply that the Admiral Magellan was the messenger of the
earth’s greatest king, one who paid tribute nowhere. If Sebu
would prefer an invader rather than a friendly visitor, let it
say so.
Fortunately, Sebu was advised by a merchant present in
the market-place, a wandering Arab or Malay who had seen
something of the devastation wrought by the Portuguese at
Goa or in the East Indies. He strongly advised Sebu to put
on as cheerful a face on things as it might, for these foreigners
were undoubtedly devils without bowels of compassion.
Sebu took to a day’s meditation on this cheering counsel.
Then the Raja Humabon entered into cautious negotiations
with Magellan’s envoys. He would give presents to the strangers
—providing the strangers gave presents to him. This naive
summarizing of all royal gift-giving impressed Magellan as
sensible. But he made the further condition that the Raja
must acknowledge the suzerainty of the King of Spain, and
this, according to the chronicler, Humabon did—probably
with various mental reservations.
Direct negotiations were then established between Admiral
and Raja. Permission was given to open a storehouse on the
shore, and down to this store flocked the whole of Sebu to
trade, bartering nuggets of pure gold in exchange for articles
not worth half a ducat. There was great cry and commotion
on the ships because of the orders issued by the Portuguese
regarding the necessity of caution in bargaining, ulest the
natives believe that we hanker unduly after gold”. The
common sailors were of the opinion that Admiral and officers
were doing well in the trade ; why might not they also ? As
night fell over the warm Philippines they would slip ashore
and trade rings, beads, knives, caps and cloaks for the precious
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 193
metal, conceal it about their persons, and steal back to the
ships to dream of ease and rest and long cool drinks on the
long-lost patios of Spain. Everyone traded : gold was here,
after so many disappointments of the Americas, easy to obtain
from the heathen. .
But meanwhile state and religion awoke. The priests
accompanying the expedition insisted on the conversion of the
inhabitants to Christianity, and were aided m this pious
project by a miracle. The Raja’s brother, dying, confessed
himself a Christian. He promptly recovered, burned all the
images of his gods, and proclaimed the new faith far and wide
Sebu heard, saw, and was conquered. Within a fortnight the
entire population embraced Christianity, casting out its native
devils in favour of the foreign ones. ...
Such at least is Pigafetta’s account. Subtracting nine-
tenths of the account as either the result of palm-wine pota¬
tions or genteel propaganda, there was probably some basis
of truth to foundation the tale. Looking at that face with the
gloomy penthouse brows, Humabon may have confessed as
formal a Christianity as he confessed the Spanish King his
suzerain. . . . That second confession was now to bear its
^Acknowledging the King of Spain his overlord, Humabon
had done it on the understanding that he himself be recognized
as ruler over all Sebu and the neighbouring Isle of Matan.
Magellan had agreed. Now there came news from Matan that
one of the two chiefs there refused to acknowledge either
Humabon or the King of Spain. At this news Humabon
demanded the assistance of a boatload of Spaniards in subduing
the recalcitrant Matani. . .
Magellan consented, and himself determined to captain
the boat. It was a splendid opportunity, he conceived, for
displaying his power and prowess before the natives, friendly
and hostile. He envisaged a short, sharp engagement, the rout
and destruction of the Matani forces, the burning of their
villages, the rape and massacre of their women. Probably
there would be gold. . . . He had sunk considerably from that
stern dreamer who had left the Guadalquivir with the route to
the Spice Islands, Atlantic-crossing, his vision. The Spice
Islands he now knew to be close at hand ; and, in other aspects
of character no different from the men of his class and times
he looked forward to loot and wealth and a return to Spam as
194 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
his worthy objectives. He himself would command the boat.
His captains, little love though they had for the Portuguese,
tried to dissuade him : he had proved too valuable a com¬
mander for them to allow him to imperil his life unnecessarily.
We entreated him not to hazard his person on this adventure,
but he answered that, as a good pastor, he ought not to be
away from his flock.”
So he took the fateful decision, and with a boatload of sixty
picked men, in helmets and cuirasses, armed with muskets,
swords, shields and lances, set out for Matan. Thirty boat¬
loads of native auxiliaries accompanied the invading expedition.
§ 12
Magellan’s forces arrived off the coast of Matan three hours
before daylight, seeing the ghostly shine of the beach under the
heavy Indonesian stars. The Admiral had a message sent ashore
warning the Matani to submit, for he came with steel lances
to enforce that submission. Nothing daunted, the Matani
returned the answer that they also had lances, though only of
bamboo, stakes hardened in fire. But they knew how to use
them, and had their country to defend. It was a gallant reply :
in other times and circumstances it might have moved a
classical historian to grave approval of those island Laconians.
They were Greek in their subtlety as well. With the
returning messenger they sent the request that they be not
attacked till daylight—as they were expecting reinforcements
with daylight.1 Pondering this naivety, Magellan came to
the conclusion—correctly, as events were to prove—that
the Matani hoped this message would lead to the Spaniards
attacking while it was still dark, and so find themselves en¬
trapped by some stratagem. Indeed, this was the Matanis
hope : they had dug covered pitfalls between the beach and
their encampment.
The boats waited off-shore as the stars slowly paled and
went out and a quiet breeze arose and blew in the dim foliage
of the shoreward trees. Then Magellan commanded his men
to the attack, forty-nine of his men. The rest were left in
charge of the boat. Raja Humabon and his Filipinos were
forbidden to take part in the engagement : Magellan desired
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN I95
them to lie off and watch the fashion in which Spain dealt
with rebels.
This grim request was complied with. The morning rose
very still, cocks crowing far inland. Rowing inshore, the
Spaniards with their dark-browed Portuguese commander saw
the islanders, brown, naked men with bamboo lances, assemble
in great force. The shore approach was shallow and the
Spaniards had to jump from the boat and wade through the
water waist-deep, musketeers to the right, crossbowmen to
the left.
Attaining the beach, they were forming up and firing into
the brown of the natives when the undaunted Matani charged.
A desperate fight broke out then along a wide stretch of the
beach, the Matani mown down by the fire of the European
archers and harquebusiers, the Spaniards pressed back and like
to break under the weight of the sheer number of naked spear¬
men. It was a miniature Marathon, the Spaniards the Persians,
the Matani making up in courage and agility what they lacked
of Miltiades’s men in the way of weapons. Wielding small
shields, the natives flung themselves on the ground as each
ponderous weapon was discharged at them, then leapt up
afresh to renew the combat. Nevertheless, the slaughter in
their ranks was terrible, and they gradually drew back.
Beyond the pits they brought their own archers into play
on the hesitating line of invaders. These archers were wielders
of the blowgun, shooting poisoned arrows which rattled
harmlessly off the Spanish mail like hailstones. Observing
this, the Matani aimed lower, at the unshielded legs of the
white men, and Magellan, much vexed, ordered a sortie right¬
wards against the straw-built village, with the command to set
it on fire, so that the natives might be drawn off to stay the
conflagration, and the invaders attain their boat again.
The sortie succeeded. Presently Matan village was in
flames, lighting up the struggle on the beach. But its effect
was the reverse of Magellan’s expectation. Howling, the
Matani fell on the Spaniards with renewed ferocity. Two
of the seamen were killed in the village as the party was driven
back to the beach, and here the struggle grew ever more grim.
Islanders tore stones from the ground and hurled them in the
Spaniard’s faces, hurled earth and sticks and lances in a frenzy
of valour so that here and there, stabbed or overwhelmed
under sheer numbers, a Spaniard went down. Seeing that the
I96 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
day was lost while yet hardly begun, Magellan ordered retreat
upon the boat.
At that moment a poisoned arrow lodged in his leg, and he
staggered and almost fell. But, recovering instantly, he
motioned his companions back towards the water, and, himself
facing the enemy, began to retreat.
Seeing that the day was lost, the majority of the Spaniards
turned about and reached the water, squattering and swimming
towards the boats. Curse the Portuguese ! Let him fend for
himself.
But some seven or eight still fought by Magellan’s side,
among them the faithful Pigafetta. Magellan was now stag¬
gering and weak with the poison in his blood, and found himself
singled out for the especial fury of the natives. They had
recognized him by his rich armour.
This combat, so unequal, lasted more than an hour. An islander
at length succeeded in thrusting the end of his lance through the
bars of his helmet and wounding the captain in the forehead, who,
irritated by its effects, immediately ran the assailant through the body
with his lance, the lance remaining in the wound. He now attempted
to draw his sword, but was unable, owing to his right arm being
grievously wounded. The Indians, who perceived this, pressed in
crowds upon him ; and one of them having given him a violent cut with
a sword on the left leg, he fell on his face. While falling, and seeing
himself surrounded by the enemy he turned towards us several times,
as if to know if we had been able to save ourselves. As there was not
one of those who remained with him but was wounded, and as we were,
consequently, in no condition either to afford him succour or avenge
his death, we instantly made for our boats, which were on the point of
putting off. To our captain, indeed, did we owe our deliverance, as the
instant he fell all the islanders rushed towards the spot where he lay.
Thus perished our guide, our light, and our support; but the glory
of Magellan will survive him. He was adorned with every virtue; in
the midst of the greatest adversity he constantly possessed an immovable
firmness. At sea he subjected himself to the same privations as his men.
Better skilled than any one in the knowledge of nautical charts, he was
a perfect master of navigation, as he proved in making the tour of the
world, an attempt which none before him had ventured.
§ 13
So fell the boy from the far-off estate in the Portuguese
hills who had wondered on the whereabouts of the land beyond
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 197
Cuba. With him there fell eight of the Spaniards. The boats
made back in haste, in company with the silent Raja Humabon.
He had looked on white men in battle, and had been un¬
impressed. And the great captain was dead.
Another was conscious of that as the greatest happening
his life had known—Henry, the Sumatran slave, whom
Magellan had seized years before and put to the question
regarding the seas beyond the Moluccas. He went ashore and
conferred with the Raja, and together they made their plot.
It was almost completely successful. Juan Serano, the
new commander of the expedition, was invited ashore together
with the other commanders “to receive a great present from
the Raja ere they should sail for the Moluccas”. And some¬
where up in that dark welter of native streets, under the
decorated Chinese cornices, Serano and his score of leaders
were done to death, very bloodily and probably very slowly
and ingeniously. Their cries of agony and for help ring pain¬
fully down four centuries from Pigafetta’s pages, obscured
only in the cries of that man who was skinned alive on the
Patagonian shore.
The survivors made for a lonely island remote from the
main group, revictualled there, emptied La Concepcion,
burned her, and steered the single surviving ship again east.
The weary seas resumed their still glare. Then, on the 6th
of November, 1521, after an absence from Spain of two years
and three months, they sighted at last the Moluccas which
Magellan had sought with such persistence and valour and
bloody tenacity.
But Magellan himself was dead, and the remainder of the
tale of that voyage comes down the years in diminuendo.
Ultimately harried by the hostile and unforgiving Portuguese
authorities from the East Indies all about the Cape of Good
Hope and up the African coast, only the Vittoria reached
home to San Lucar, with its Spaniards having circumnavigated
the globe for the first time in human history. On board it bore
the faithful and voluble Pigafetta, he who wrote the story of
the expedition’s wanderings and loved Magellan, and presented
that story to Charles V of Spain, and then vanished from
our sight.
So, in its broader effects, the lure of the Spice Islands
that had haunted European seamen of so many races to so
many ventures, found at last its greatest triumph. That
I98 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
triumph opened up innumerable other seas and untraversed
lands to the explorer ; but the greatest of the feats had been
accomplished—the circumnavigation of the globe from a fixed
point of departure.
Dona Beatriz died when she heard the story of her husband’s
death.
Spain gained little from the expedition but glory, not
unmerited, we may think, and it preserved in some state the
annals of the voyage.
While it did so it is probable that Magellan’s corpse,
hoisted on a stake, bleached and bleached through long years
in the sight of the villagers of Matan, till the flesh fell from
the bones, and the bones themselves apart, vanishing away
even these, the last mementoes of a life lived sternly and
cruelly, tempered with a thin-pointed flame of resolve, and
wasted at the end on such cruel, small folly as that of a boy
seeking to kill a bird for vanity and meeting in the act with a
tiger in its lair.
VII
VITUS BERING’S SEARCH FOR AMERICA AND
GOLDEN GAMA LAND
§ i
WITH Vitus Bering and his two great ventures we turn
to a new trail in that quest of the Fortunate Isles that
Magellan abandoned with the spears of the Matani
Filipinos in his throat. The Pacific was mapped and charted
and greatly sailed throughout the next two centuries. Drake
voyaged around the world, the first of the commercial explorers,
seeking very definite gains in loot and wealth, no magic islands
of escape from his age or himself. Michael Drayton’s doggerel
embodies the creed and intentions of such with a fine explicit¬
ness :
A thousand kingdoms we will seek from far,
And many nations waste with civil war. . . .
And those unchristened countries call our own,
Where scarce the name of England hath been known.
Even in search for the rumoured great continent of the
South Seas—Terra Australia Nondum Cognita—his attitude
was more that of a company promoter of a doubtful mine
than of one who was haunted by the sound of the nameless
sea on the undiscovered isle. The voyages of Pedro Fernandez
de Quiros in 1605 were of like kind, charting the Low Archi¬
pelago, the New Hebrides, New Guinea. Schouten, Le Maire,
and Wiliam Janszoon (the first recorded discoverer of Australia)
were bronzed Dutch chapmen slightly astray from their
ledgers and warehouses; the great Abel Tasman of 1642 was
the same chapman bitterly urgent for solid new spheres and
routes of trade. The sixteenth and seventeenth century
explorers of the South Pacific suffered and achieved terribly
and commendably ; but they are outside this record.
The North Pacific remained a region of myth and legend.
I99
200 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Betaking itself from the coasts of Africa, from the Indian
shores, from the Spice Islands (so long its home) the Fortunate
Land went north and hid in the mists of the unexplored
Pacific in the lee of the long north-western coasts of America,
the equally unknown coasts of opposing Asia. From the death
of Magellan onwards there had developed a fairly regular inter¬
course with Japan on the part of the Portuguese and Dutch ;
and outside the sailing routes of trade rumour and the specula¬
tive geographers studded the seas with islands of gold and good
fortune as of old—Gama Land, that the Spaniards were said
to have discovered, the Staten Landt and Compagnies Landt
of the Dutch navigators Vries and Schaep.
Myth flowered from legend and sometimes from lies, as in
the case of the remarkable Juan de Fuca who claimed that in
1592 he had been outfitted by the Spanish government in
Mexico and sent northwards to explore the coasts; and had
found a great channel driving north-eastwards into the
American continent—undoubtedly the North-West passage ;
and had returned to Mexico and been treated with neglect and
opprobium, finally setting out for Europe and sympathetic
gossip in his old age. . . . The tale enlivened a great portion of
the seventeenth century, exhilarating and confusing men’s
minds. But the urge to explore the North Pacific remained
faint and negligible, despite the chance of brisk loot in golden
Gama Land, the certainty of brisk trade and quick profits if a
North-West passage were charted from the Atlantic to the
Pacific. Sensibly, commercial enthusiasm considered it better
to follow the ordinary trade-routes than to freeze in the icy
seas off northern Canada.
But in Northern Asia itself events had begun to develop,
to sketch in the background to those ventures that were to
push back the bounds of shadowy Gama Land, the lost
Fortunate Isle, into the Arctic Circle itself. This was the
Russian invasion and conquest of Siberia, a long and bloody
tale of robbing Cossacks crossing the Urals, seizing Tartar
kingdoms and attaining recognition from the Tsar on sending
him gifts of furs. The Tartar kingdom of the Obi fell in 1577
and in the track of the invading forces came Russian traders
and trappers in great numbers, into a thinly-populated,
uncheerful land, bright with flowers and crops in the summer,
in winter an unmapped chaos of snow and desolation.
Tobolsk, a trading post, was built. Tomsk was reared to
201
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
dominate the upper valley of the Obi. Town followed town,
the disorganized Tartar tribes making unwilling submission,
European geography following with notebook and sphere the
eastwards press of bloody-heeled soldiers and bloody-handed
traders. Men reached the Delta of the Lena, unwitting the
gold below the frozen surface, staring out in winter at the
great berg mountains that shadowed the coasts. They followed
the Lena up towards its source, by the Aldan and the Maia.
Finally, through great mountain valleys, the Uruk took the
Russians to the Sea, the Sea of Okhotsk that the Kuriles and
Kamchatka enclose from the North Pacific itself. . . . This
mastering of Northern Asia was one of the great feats of mass
trade-exploration, greater than that achieved by any other
white people after the rise of the Second Civilization.
The Okhotsk was reached in 1640. Four years later a
determined trader, one Michaelo Staduchin, accomplished a
marvellous journey. Trekking along the Arctic shore through
Yukahi he reached the outlet of the Kolyma river where
Kolymsk now stands. There for another five years exploration
halted. Then in 1649 the adventurer Deshnef led a party of
sable-hunters into the Anadyr peninsula.
Abruptly exploration halted. The Anadyr, the furthest
outreach of Asia as we now know it, was inhabited by an
excitable, valiant, stone-using people of the Archaic Civiliza¬
tion, the Chukchi, of very different quality from the class- and
religion-oppressed Tartars whom the Russians had subdued
with comparative ease throughout the length and breadth of
Siberia. The Chukchis bitterly resented the appearance of the
hunters. They were unimpressed by the Second Civilization.
War broke out, the Russians retreated, cold and the ferocity of
the regrettably manful natives compelling the retreat. Between
the Anadyr and the Kolyma was still terra incognita triumphant.
The news of the Russian feat slowly penetrated to Europe
and slow geographers, with many a pause and many a mistake,
filled in the outlines of this great new campaign in the conquest
of the earth. At Kolyma, like the Russians, the geographers
halted. And here, having nothing to go upon in fact at this
furthest point of Asia, faith came in as knowledge went out,
that naive faith that had haunted civilized man since the first
Egyptian pondered on the dead beyond Nile Bank. North of
the Kolyma, beyond the Anadyr sources—what was there
but the Fortunate Isles, the Wells of the Waters of Youth, the
202 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Land of Gama rich in spices and gold and great wealth for
the taking ? . . .
Some, as always, doubted the land. It was questioned if it
was a separate land at all, surely rather an extension of the
coast of America meeting at last with Asia, this Gama Land,
the ultimate point between the two continents, rich accord¬
ingly. It was the obvious bourne of future exploration.
But that exploration delayed for long. Russia busied herself
in the fur-looting of the kindlier parts of Siberia, this new
treasure-house so easily come into her hands. It was purely as a
fur-bearing, a sable-bearing state, that for a long century
Siberia was regarded, ruled over in each province not by a
governor, but by a Voivode, a Chief Factor, whose duties were
to collect the tribute on furs and enrich firstly and officially
Russia and secondly and unofficially himself. Humanlike, he
often reversed the order of enrichment. Wars were waged
against the tribes, not in order to Russianize them or Christian-
size them, but to exterminate the furless. The fur flew all over
Asia, as the light-hearted historian might comment. But the
north- eastwards ultimate peninsula, filled with a dreadful cold
in winter and the equally dreadful Chukchis all the year round,
was left to a severe solitude while decade followed decade.
Till, towards the end of the seventeenth century, Europe
turned to watch with an admixture of amazement and amuse¬
ment the rise of Peter the Great.
§ 2
Vitus Bering Svendsen was born at Horsens in Jutland
some time in the summer of 1681, the son of a patient and
unfortunate man, a trader, Jonas Svendsen, with whom the
gods had dealt meanly and unjustly all his life. Even in marry¬
ing Anna Bering he had but little bettered his fortune, though
the Berings had been distinguished souls for centuries. Trade
gaped and fled when Jonas appeared on the scene ; Anna’s
sister May married two successive mayors of Horsens, and did
from behind the mayoral chair what little she could for the
unfortunate Anna and her spouse. But Jonas was a man pre¬
destined to trouble as the smoke flies upward, and the appear¬
ance of Vitus on the scene appears to have been the coping-
stone to a great piling of misfortunate phenomena.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 203
He had an immense family which had eaten up his earnings
like locusts. He had a wicked son, who sailed away and returned
and got in trouble at Horsens, and vexed Jonas’s respectable
soul. ... It was probably an anxious and careworn and over¬
crowded home amidst the flat midlands of Jutland where
Vitus came to school age and calligraphy and a hurried flitting
home of night through dark unlanterned wynds, the salt of
the North Sea in his nostrils, the glimmer of the candle in his
mother’s room to light the way to the lowly and unfortunate
house. There is no picture or portrait of Vitus of those days
—his later biographers perforce built it up from the limnings
his Russian colleagues were to make of him long afterwards :
tall and ruddy and darkly bearded, grave and competent and,
up to a point—a far point—fanatically energetic, fanatically
visionary. Then, at that point, would come a sudden falling
from resolve, a sudden and querulous timorousness, a dis¬
position to turn and run. . . . Father Jonas had passed on his
troubles, if not his nature, at a very early date to young Vitus,
it would seem.
But these later lapses were as yet inapparent. Young, he
was of the daring and resourceful nature that found little to
hope for in fortune from the shops or warehouses of Horsens.
He showed some skill and aptitude at school—especially in
mathematics: he showed even more in haunting the sea front
at Horsens, in sailing out the wide-bottomed Jutland boats and
running with a flagging sail up the long flat coasts into the
spray of the wintry North Sea. He resolved to seek, by shipping
as apprentice on an East India trader, more of the world’s
goods than Jonas had ever been able to accrue.
He vanished into that life, perhaps at the age of sixteen,
perhaps even earlier, and there is little record of what he did
or thought for several years. He sailed to the East Indies, he
developed into “an able seaman”—which surely had hardly
the present-day connotation of the term ; and in 1703 at the
age of twenty-two he made the acquaintance in Amsterdam
of that remarkable soul, Cornelius Cruys.
A Norwegian, Cruys had risen to the post of assistant
master of ordnance in the Dutch navy, and might have risen
even higher but for the eruption on the European scene of that
remarkable barbarian, Peter the Great of Russia. Peter wanted
a navy: native Russians were incapable of either building,
directing or sailing a navy. Scandinavians were navy people
204 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
by inclination and instinct. Ergo, Scandinavians he must have.
The result was that Cruys passed to his service, Peter
Sievers passed to his service, Skeving, Grib, Dan Wilster.
High pay and quick promotion were promised to all. Cruys in
Amsterdam was a kind of roving recruiter on the outlook for
likely young men : he looked on the twenty-two-year- old Vitus
and found him good. Probably there was only the resolution
and the energy notable then : he was a hasting and sincere and
serene young man, little of a disciplinarian, but with large
ideas, brave and perhaps somewhat rash Cruys heard. . . . He
spoke with Bering to considerable purpose.
The result was that a few months later Vitus Bering had
joined the Russian fleet as a sub-lieutenant.
What Jonas and Anna thought of the happening—not to
mention that great horde of brothers and sisters that are always
a vague limning in the background of Vitus’s life—is not
recorded. Vitus himself again disappears into incidental
mention in diaries and the like for several years. He was
appointed to a Baltic ship. War broke out, Charles of Sweden
like a destroying fiend assailing with a fine impartiality Den¬
mark, Norway, Russia, and any other competitor who chanced
to near the lists. Peter’s fleet was chased, or sunk and bom¬
barded from one hiding-hole to the next. In that grim struggle
Bering learned, with a score of others, seamanship and a rigid
and cold obstinacy against the risk and disaster of tide and
night and the frozen seas of the winter Baltic.
§ 3
It was more than the Baltic. Presently, as the Russian fleet
scattered and reassembled through chaotic years, Bering was
sailing swiftly round Europe to the Black Sea, to the Sea of
Azov, dumping stores and ammunition, creeping back through
the Bosphorus with other stores, running gauntlet of Turk
and Swede before he reached safety again in the Baltic. Some
of his exploits fame now questions—especially the renowned
running of the gauntlet through the Bosphorus in 1711 ;
with Peter Bredal and Simon Skop perhaps belongs the myth.
But he emerged from those years with something of a repu¬
tation, he was known to Tsar Peter—“Ivan Ivanovitch”, he
called him, refusing the “Vitus” and acknowledging in the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 20$
patronymic royalty’s only cognizance of the unfortunate
Jonas, he was known to Western Europe. His was hardly
fame, some element in his nature denied him that, but the
Russian navy commanders appear to have noted him with
some emphasis.
His character is almost as dim and uncertain in those
years as his voyagings. Possibly he had both the outward and
inward seeming of a good officer, addicted to the somewhat
insanitary amusements and intemperances of his time and
class when he was not actually on duty, accumulating by open
or discreet peculation the customary fortune collected with a
fine assiduity by the flock of Norse ravens which Peter had
brought with his navy to assist in dismembering the carcase
of the Russian sheep. He was steadily and conscientiously
promoted, a lieutenant-captain by 1710 ; five years later cap¬
tain of the Selafail, a new ship ; in 1720 a commodore. Then in
1721 the disastrous Peace of Nystaad descended on the Baltic
scene. In the ensuing furling of the battle-flags Bering dis¬
covered his steady course of promotion interrupted. He was
overlooked in promotion—deliberately, he thought. Perhaps
some intrigue at the court of the semi-insane Peter had worked
against him, perhaps he was genuinely believed incapable of
holding higher rank. The act seems to have staggered him
considerably.
He resigned from the Russian navy. He had a house in
Finland, at Viborg, in a Scandinavian colony there, and to
Viborg he retired. Perhaps he married then. If so, his wife
(according to her own declaration of age in 1744, when she
affirmed she was 39 years old) could have been a bare sixteen
years of age. It is probable enough. She was a haughty, ambi¬
tious, bitterly pugnacious female, probably alternately teasing
and petting the kindly Vitus. If he found some delight in her
arms it is possible that he found little peace, and sometimes
sighed for the sea and a ship again.
No word of how the promotion-dispute fared emerges
out of the darkness of three long years. No doubt Bering, the
wheels of intrigue in working against those hypothetical
enemies of his at court, found the shore and the comforts
garnered from navy peculation a bore and a weariness to the
flesh very speedily, hungering for a return of work and responsi¬
bility and that sense of righteous fitness interwoven in his
nature in the twenty years or so since Cruys enlisted him at
206 nine against the unknown
Amsterdam. But of this there emerges not a whisper from the
records of the past: he was a man in many (we suppose) of his
most intriguing moods and stances and characteristics one
whom history has left entirely unchronicled.
Instead, history turns a new page to the failing years of
the Divine Peter, the Beard-Cutter, the Crazed Loon of
Europe, half savage, half moron. Western Europe had never
forgotten the blank in the map of further Asia. Steadily such
blanks elsewhere were being filled in as the new century
advanced, and geographers began to question Russia on its
abilities to deal with that unknown further point. Surely
Russia under a cultured and progressive Emperor would not
allow the question of the north-east land to remain long
unanswered ?
The Barbarian of the Neva was flattered. Especially was he
flattered at the discreet and kindly reproachings of the French
Academy. It is probable that his own vision of the planet was
palasolithic, his vision of human destiny neo-Sumerian, his
outlook upon science one of gaping, unintelligent misappre¬
hension. But flattery could pierce the thick skull where other
weapons failed. He was pleased to be considered civilized,
scientific : he had records of those explorations eighty years
before unearthed and read to him, and presently, fired by the
notion of looting the Land of Gama, the Fortunate Isle, and
acquiring notoriety and French praise in the doing of it, he
resolved on an expedition to Kamchatka and the Anadyr.
He sent off a preliminary one, to spy out conditions in
Kamchatka and the Kuriles. It came to grief, but returned
with a report. This was sufficient to strengthen the then
failing Peter in his resolve to investigate further. He looked
around for a competent commander, a man accustomed to
command, but not too large commands, a sure and earnest and
trustworthy man.
The name of Vitus Bering was brought to his memory.
§4
Bering was in his forty-fourth year, greying at the temples,
when he received news of his recall and promotion to the rank
of Full Captain. He was noted for his kindness and consideration
towards his inferiors, qualities so little to the taste of the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 20/
country and age that they survive surprised in history. When
Jonas had died in 1719 and left his lugubrious will, signed by
himself and Mother Anna :
We are old, miserable and decrepit people, in no way able to help
ourselves. Our property consists of the old, dilapidated house and the
furniture thereto belonging, which is of but little value,
it is recorded that son Vitus passed on the 140 rigsdaler,
which was his share, to the poor of Horsens. So strangely and
uniquely commingled of these uneighteenth-century virtues,
Bering found himself in charge of the great expedition to the
North-East.
. seems to have studied the maps and supposings of the
time with some care. Gama Land lay in the quarter he sought,
a Golden Land. Some said that between it and America lay
the Strait of Anian—a strait as mendaciously fathered on
geography as the exploits of Juan de Fuca. Hondius’s map,
with a pleasing regularity, showed Eastern Siberia and Alaska
balancing each other neatly, each side of Anian Strait, in the
shape of perfected triangles. . . . Rumour said a multitude of
things with no uncertain tongue—or rather, with a multitude
of tongues. The failing Peter himself jotted down instructions
for the expedition in that hazy and spasmodic manner charac¬
teristic of him :
I. At Kamchatka or somewhere else two decked boats are to be
built. II. With these you are to sail northward along the coast, and
as the end of the coast is not known, this land is undoubtedly America.
11L bor this reason you are to enquire where the American coast
begins, and go to some European colony; and when European ships
are seen you are to ask what the coast is called, note it down, make
a landing, obtain reliable information, and then, after having charted
the coast, return.
This fine mixed bag of instructions tied about his neck
Bering set about organizing his expedition. The year wore on
to its close while sailors, carpenters, mechanics were enlisted
officers appointed, and Bering made acquainted with his two
principal lieutenants, Martin Spangberg and Alexei Chirikoff.
Chmkoff was second in command, a sailor himself, haughty and
efficient and intelligent. He was appointed to lead the van in
the journey across Siberia.
208
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Winter was the time appointed for departure, while the
snow still lay thick and frozen and sledge-trekking would coyer
great distances till the boats and portages of the Siberian
rivers were reached. On the 24th of January, 1725j Chirikoff
and his long line of sledge-teams, in a cloud of snow-dust from
the steel runners, passed out of St. Petersburg on their long
journey across Asia to the Pacific.
Four days later Tsar Peter died.
His passing was to slow down not the tempo of the expe¬
dition, but the speed of assistance loaned it by all officials
thereafter. The terrible Peter was dead, thought the Voivodes
of Siberia, and they might yawn away a day and a night and turn
again to a drowsy consideration of the needs and requests
of this alien, Bering, with his plans to explore for Gama Land.
Bering had lost his best prop in the passing of a man who was
both his cultural and moral inferior.
But of that, starting out with the second half of the
expedition on the 5th of March, he had no foreseeing. The
snow held well and the long line of sledges, drawn by shaggy,
half-wild ponies, passed in quick day treks over the Dvina,
through the passes of the Urals, south-east to Kai on the Kama,
and thence by Tyumen to the banks of the Tobol. There they
found Spring in the air and Chirikoff and the advance guard
awaiting their arrival. From Tobolsk they were to proceed by
Boats and barges in great confusion and number had been
chartered for the expedition, Bering himself superintending
the embarkation with a quiet serenity and authority. The
desolate Siberian countryside was thawing under the coming
of a slow sun as the boats held up the Irtish, northwards, with
their motley crews. Snipe were calling in long marshes to right
and left, and the Siberian bear snuffled in this and that thicket
and paused to peer beady-eyed at the long train of river-yraft
that bore Bering’s expedition and hope. So far, not a single
Junction with the Obi was made at Samarovsk, and they
turned up the Obi against the strong current, running bright
and turgid and swollen with the waters of Spring. Here oars
had to be manned to back-breaking toil league on league. The
mixed expedition crew murmured and sweated, but took to a
manful toil under the eyes of the Dane, ‘a real captain’, kindly
and considerate in all difficulties, reasonable, grave and
FIRST EXPLORATION OF VITUS BERING
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 209
thoughtful. Nights they tied up the barges against the flow of
the current and the glow of their cooking-fires lighted up the
waste banks long miles around, while Bering wrote up his
diaries and stared eastward into the darkness, ceaselessly
calculating and planning for yet another and another day’s
trek in that illimitable journey across the world’s greatest
continent.
Beyond Makofska Ostrog on the Ketya was a forty miles
portage to the Yenesei. How might that be accomplished?
§5
It was done. They toiled and tripped and swore, bearded
and ragged, the expedition’s crews, as they loaded guns and
gear and stores of food in rough country carts, on mule-back,
on. man-back, for the portage through the sodden tracks.
Chirikoff proved a jewel of the first water, sardonic, efficient*
competent to a degree, an admirable lieutenant. And at last,
beyond the portage, the Yenisei came in sight. After long
wrangling and delay, fresh water-transport was wrung from
the district Voivode of Yeniseisk.
June came with the heats of Siberia sweating the expedition
as the boats were poled into the entrance to the Tunguska,
the great eastern tributary of the Yenisei. Here the current
ran swifter and stronger than in any river they had yet fought;
and as the days went by in slow rowing against the stream the
boats creaked and split in the heat, food sometimes grew
scarce, sometimes for long hours they paused in enforced
siesta or drowsy stare on a land that glowed bright green and
brittle beyond the river-banks, waving hot and fertile in the
hot sunshine, deer-haunted, a land for the trapper and hunter.
They saw little of humankind for day on day as that fight
against the Tunguska went on, and June passed and July came
in. Still the expedition, salted now, and with strong', if straining
sinews, held on without mishap. g
In August, far up the Tunguska, the waters began to fail.
Brown rocks rose boiling from the low river-bed, and long
stretching miles of sandbank over which the boats had to be
poled and pushed and urged and cursed. Sometimes a boat
stuck fast, gored as by a bull, and there were delays and halts
in patching and mending : then again to the river’s battle.
o
210
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
On the 30th of September Ilenisk on the Ilin was reached.
Winter was near, a rapid winter with but little Autumn
preceding it here in the heart of Asia. Bering resolved to go into
Winter-camp for the rest of the year.
Of that Winter and the work in it there exists only a record
of bare and necessary detail. Spangberg was sent overland
eastward to the Kut, the nearest tributary of the Lena, there
to build fresh boats and barges against the coming of the
Spring. In strong huts and tents throughout the Winter the
expedition suffered but little. Bering himself took to sledge
journeys out and around Ilenisk, at last far south to Irkuts
itself on Lake Baikal, well out of the expedition’s route, but a
handy place to learn all there was to be learned about the
necessities of the journey ahead. It was a mere trading post,
Irkutsk, as were all the Russian so-called towns in that region
so remotely east from St. Petersburg. . . . Returning from
Irkutsk, Bering found Spangberg also returned.
The boats were ready.
They awaited the Spring. Beyond were the easy reaches of
the voyage down the Lena to Yakutsk, and from there the
dreaded land journey across the Stanovoi Range, half-known,
uninhabited, to the shores of the Pacific at Okhotsk.
§6
Yakutsk was reached in June, after an easy voyage down the
Lena. It was a small and odoriferous village, equipped with a
surly Voivode whom Bering with a serene confidence over¬
bore into helpfulness. Then, having rested for re-equipment
and supplies, he set about the task of reaching Okhotsk.
He divided the expedition into two forces, one to proceed
on the boats by way of the multitude of intersecting rivers.
This was placed under the command of Spangberg and his
route lined out for him—by way of the Aldan, the Maya,
and the Uruk, up foaming rivers and through desolate passes, a
hazardous attempt. But scarcely less hazardous was the passage
which Bering planned for himself—a forced march across the
mountains with two hundred laden pack-horses. Both he and
Spangberg must hasten, for the Winter was close the hasting
Winter of those latitudes that knew no Autumn. On the yth ol
July Spangberg sailed.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 211
In mid-August Bering marched out his land-expedition to
take the trail across six hundred and eighty-five miles of
trailless country. It is one of the great marches in history.
Exactly forty-five days afterwards, on the 1st of October, one
of the dozen or so Russian fishermen who made up the popu¬
lation of Okhotsk looked out and saw a long train of laden
horse descending towards the shore. It was Bering, who had
lost only a few horses on the way. But at Okhotsk was bad
news—no news. There was no sign or knowledge of Spangberg.
Nor as October and November went by did any news come
of the river expedition. Meantime Bering had set his men to
building houses against the rigours of the Winter. These came
speedily, howling winds sweeping landwards out of the sea of
Okhotsk, frosts that chilled the ragged and toil-worn men
brought from St. Petersburg. But by mid-December they were
warmly housed ; more than that, the carpenters and seamen
had a ship on the stocks which was nearing completion. If
only Spangberg would come 
In mid-December a toil-worn messenger appeared out of
the desolate encompassing mountains. The river-expedition,
overtaken by the winter, had abandoned its boats two hundred
and fifty miles away—but abandoned them under guard.
They were now on their way to the coast on foot.
They met hardship in plenty on that march, eating the
dead horses they found littering Bering’s trail (which they
fortunately stumbled upon), suffering from frost-bite and
famine and the fear of mountain-devils. Bering despatched a
sledge expedition to their relief, and at last, on the 6th of
January, they staggered down to the new-built huts at Okhotsk
beach.
Winter closed down work on the Fortuna, the new ship,
but early in Spring it was resumed, and an older vessel found
and reconditioned. The plan of Bering’s was now divulged.
Northwards lay the peninsula of Kamchatka, half explored.
On its northern coast was the river Kamchatka. They would
spend the Summer in sailing the loads of gear and equipment
from Okhotsk across the six hundred miles of uncertain sea to
southern Kamchatka, unload the gear there, carry it across the
peninsula to the Kamchatka river, sail down that river in boats
to the open sea : and there set about building new vessels with
which to explore northwards towards the inhospitable land of
the Chukchis !
212 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
It was an astounding programme on which with such
labour and sweat they wasted that year. The southern Kam¬
chatkan shore proved too shallow for the Fortuna to draw
near : goods had to be unloaded on boats and barges and rowed
to the shore. Then began the trek across the desolate peninsula
to the Kamchatka River. Midway that trek the Winter over¬
took them with stinging gales of sleet and such deeps of
temperature as hitherto they had seldom encountered. Many
died, to the worriment of the kindly Bering. The trek was
loaded down with canvas, ropes, nails, iron—all the equipment
necessary, when they reached the Northern Kamchatkan shore,
to build the new ship. If they ever reached it. . . .
They struggled through that Winter like men possessed,
and at last attained their objective. If Bering’s crossing to
Okhotsk is one of the great journeys of exploration, his crossing
of the Kamchatkan peninsula is one of the most farcical. Had
the Fortuna sailed round Point Lopatka of Kamchatka she
could have made the journey in comparative safety in a month
or so. It took Bering six months to do it overland, at ruinous
cost in men and materials, and at the end of the journey there
was still another ship to be built. . . .
It is one of the two principal incidents that have led him
to be denied the title of a great explorer. Yet it need not lead
us to deny him a title in this record. That sudden access of
timidity that made him refuse the Lopatka passage to the
Fortuna was part of his nature—inheritance from the nature
of old Jonas, now happed in earth where the wicked ceased
from troubling under the rains of Horsens’ graveyard. Know¬
ledge of the value of men and gear, hatred to set them unneces¬
sary risks, hatred of the 'thought of suffering in vainglory,
these were the elements in the compound of timidity, hardly
personal fear at all. He was, in truth, a searcher for the Fortu¬
nate Isle, that Gama Land that loomed ahead of the new
ship’s voyage, who doubted not the Island but only if the
Waters of Life were worth the price of others’ lives.
§7
Over three years had passed, he reflected, as that next
Spring came in, without anything of moment having been
discovered, any of the puzzles of the geographers solved, any
glimpse caught of Gama Land’s shores. This year 
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
213
The expedition on board the new ship, the little Gabriel,
sailed from Kamchatka on the 13 th of July amidst the cheers
and shouts of the shore-party. A good wind drove them north¬
wards : looking back, they saw Kamchatka’s flat shape toy-like
in the afternoon. Forward loomed the rugged and unknown
coast pelted unceasingly by the North Pacific combers.
For seven days that voyage went on with a good following
wind driving them further and further north along the unin¬
habited coasts of Utmost Asia. They crossed the Parallel of
6o°. Fog and rain blew squallily upon the little vessel as it
lurched into August. Fresh water became scarce and no suit¬
able anchorage was sighted. But on the 6th of August, Trans¬
figuration Bay hove in view, green and gracious and welcoming.
The Gabriel put in and cast anchor.
They drank the fresh water and explored the shore and
came on an abandoned Chukchi hut. Next morning some
Chukchis themselves appeared : one swam out to the ship and
told the news. Gama Land ? He had never heard of it. Islands
of a sort there were to the north, with Chukchis on them, the
Russians would be pleased to hear. Concealing their pleasure
without visible strain, the Russians provided him with a few
metallic toys and watched him swim back through the chilly
waters to the neolithic shore of his native land.
They had passed the mouth of the Anadyr River. Presently
they were doubling Cape Chukotski, and two days later an
island was sighted. It was St. Lawrence’s Day and Bering
christened the uninviting fragment in the ocean after the
Saint. Head winds arose, pounding the prow of the Gabriel,
and long dark fogs seeped out from the Siberian coast as they
still held northward again, keeping that coast in view. Though
they were unaware of the fact—for no sign of land was seen to
the east—they were passing through that Strait which has
separated the Old and the New Worlds for several thousand
years, that Strait that is now known by the name of the
grave-eyed Dane who captained the Gabriel.
But presently, as the Asiatic shore was seen fading away
into the Arctic west, a conviction of some moment came on
Bering, believer in Gama Land though he might be. There
Asia terminated, with no unknown land breaching the passage
between it and America—or no land within close communi¬
cation. Between Asia and America stretched this gulf of waters
in which the Gabriel still held steadily north.
214 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Where, then, was Gama Land ? Where was America ? In
the geography of the time it was possible to imagine them both
a thousand miles away in the east. No land was to be seen to
the north, Asia had vanished, there was no longer purpose in
keeping the course. So, on the 16th of August, Bering gave
orders for the Gabticl to be turned about. This was in latitude
67° 18' North. # .
There was probably some discontent at the decision,
though no record of it survives. Bering was determined not
to risk his crew in these seas now that Summer was gone, now
that Winter—that haunting Winter—would soon be upon
them. To sail only a few days eastward in search of the Fortu¬
nate Isle or America is a vision that seems one of obvious
prompting to us: to Bering it was obvious that another and
larger expedition must sail to seek those lands of repute in the
apparently unlanded east. # .
So they passed back through the Strait, still uncertain that
it was a strait, and beyond it the storms caught them, tearing
the sails in shreds, tearing away the anchor, so that when
they arrived at the Kamchatkan harbour the stout GabTiel
leaked like a sieve. They seem to have sailed midway down the
great Northern strait—at its narrowest only thirty-nine miles
wide, with both Asiatic and American shores to be discerned on
clear days. But fog, rain and storm blotted out sight of the
eastward coast from their eyes. _ • 1
Winter settled down over the Kamchatkan Feninsula.
Bering had his men in snug quarters, but himself was in some
unease, haunted by a vague knowledge of that mysterious east¬
ward land. That it was near he was convinced, the Fortunate
Island, Gama Land itself, or—less attractive—the north-west
point of America. Wandering down by the Winter shore in the
stinging sleet winds from the Sea that was to be called by his
own name, he noted how
the driftwood did not indicate the flora of eastern Asia, and the
depth of the sea grew less towards the north; the east wind brought
drift ice to the mouth of the river after three days, the north wind on
the other hand after five days ... the reports of the natives corro¬
borated his inferences In the year 1715 a man had stranded
there who said that his native land was far to the east and had large
rivers and forests and very high trees. All this led Bering to believe
that a large country lay towards the north-west at no very great
distance.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
215
§8
1729. It was four years since he had left St. Petersburg,
and he had news at last to carry there. South of 67° North,
Asia and America were nowhere connected. Nor was it possible
that they could be connected yet further north, he considered.
He had discovered at least the termination of Asia, if not the
populous countries postulated beyond.
Yet in the summer of 1729 he had one last fling at that
discovery, taking the Gabriel with sudden recklessness out in a
storm which battered its sturdy advancing shape through
three long days, then swung it about so that they were forced
to double Lopatka Point and seek shelter in Okhotsk, thus
finally proving the peninsularity of Kamchatka itself. At
Okhotsk Bering determined to delay no longer. He gave orders
for the maintenance and care of the Gabriel and Fortuna, left
guards over the stores and shipyards, and set out across the
mountains on the long trail to St. Petersburg.
Of that long journey—as triumphant in essence as the
journey of Columbus it should have been—there is little note
in the histories. But it was no journey of triumph. Instead,
Bering was regarded with indifference as he hastened across
the Winter-gripped continent, finally reaching St. Petersburg
on the 1st of March, the first of the great Russian explorers
come to claim recognition from his adopted country.
It was not in his nature to be bombastic or over-forward.
But recognition was his due. He had his maps and charts, the
record of his voyagings, the witness of his two lieutenants.
Hardly pausing to embrace his wife at Viborg, he hastened
to present his credentials at court.
And there, more formidable than the Arctic seas and the
bitter storms about the Kuriles, he encountered the Russian
Academy of Science.
§9
There followed three years of the most fantastic arguings
in the history of exploration. The Academy of Science, staffed
principally by young German and French pseudo-savants,
not greatly honoured in their own country but welcomed to
2l6 nine against the unknown
Russia with a pathetic eagerness in the Russian belief that their
coming meant culture and high western civilization, would
have none of Bering. For his discoveries squared neither with
the theories of the ancients—those remarkable ancients who
limned the world for all time from a study in Athens or
Alexandria—nor the explorations of the great da Gama or the
equally “great” Martin de Vries.
Two Academicians, Gerhard Fr. Muller and Joseph
Nicolas de L’Isle, were particularly bitter in their defence of
the Fortunate Isle which Bering’s voyagings seemed to deny.
They altered their lovely maps not a jot, declaring Bering
drunk, incapable or merely maudlin in his assertions. Neither
of them had ever visited Siberia ; but, enthroned on the
pinnacles of their erudition, they were in no mood to be dis¬
placed therefrom through the crude notions and affirmations
of a heavy Danish seaman, a cautious and uncultured man who
preferred to waste time and energy on the health of his crews
rather than seek out Gama Land—so the rumours went.
They must have been unhappy enough years in Bering’s
life. He stuck to his maps with a dour determination, neither
exaggerating nor retracting his first statements. And gradually
that dourness of affirmation began to have its effects. The rest¬
less and capable and amoral Anna Ivonovna liked Bering.
Exploration and the thought of it thrilled her agreeably. And
westwards lay Germany and France, still looking on Russia as
barbarian and uncultured. It was decided that Russia “should
show them”.
Gradually an immense expedition was drawn together—an
expedition of naturalists, metallurgists, geographers, astrono¬
mers, physicists, zoologists—and probably astrologers, milliners
and deep-sea divers to make ballast. These learned men were
instructed to investigate Siberia from all angles and in all the
range of the sciences. The Pacific Coast was to be reached and
charted fully and completely down to the shores of China,
horses and cattle were to be conveyed to Okhotsk, the wilder¬
ness was to be set a-blowing with the flower of civilization—•
and all Europe was to gape with astonishment. . . .
Tagged to the end of this command and plan came
instructions for prosecution of the search “for America or the
intervening land”.
Bering was appointed in command of the new expedition.
It must have resembled rather a trek from the tower of Babel
VITUS BERING DISCOVERS AMERICA
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 21J
than the outgoing of any explorer’s train that ever yet took
the trail. The savants could not bear to be separated from their
families—so the families and household gods went with them ;
Madame Bering found the possibility of a further long separ¬
ation from Ivan Ivanovitch too tragic to be borne. Also, it
would be agreeable to figure in the wilds as the wife of the
expedition’s commander. ... So a sledge had to be found for
Madame Bering. . . . Sledges were piled with the goods and
chattels of men and women who were never to reach the
Yenisei. Money was poured out in streams to feed and house
and marshal the host even before it had crossed the Urals.
Nearly six hundred men were under Bering’s largely nominal
command, including the invaluable Chirikoff, the equally
helpful Spangberg, a host of subsidiary lieutenants, doctors,
priests and the like unhelpful beings. In May 17345 t^ie main
body, minus various stragglers, reached Tobolsk.
Instead of pressing on to the real objective of his journey—
the search for America or the Debatable Land—Bering had
to pause here and see to the construction of a boat, the Tobol.
This was despatched down the Obi to explore the river reaches
and the lands about the Gulf ; and so doing vanishes out of
Bering’s story. Rid of it, he pressed on over the seemingly
unending Siberian ways to Yakutsk, the designed far-eastern
base of the expedition.
Here two other ships were built, to descend the Lena,
explore its Delta ; and one then to hold westward, seeking
Yenisei mouth, the other eastward, to round the Asian coast,
sail down the Bering Strait and come to rest in Kamchatka
harbour. These were launched a year afterwards, in June of
1735. The eastern Siberian coast was not rounded until a
century and a half later.
Then began the enormous task of transporting the goods
and gear of the expedition—all the gear and tools for the
building of two ships, for Bering refused to rely on the long-
abandoned For tuna or Gabriel—over the seven hundred odd
miles of way to Okhotsk. Summer fled. Winter came, with its
howling storms and cessation of activity. Then Spring, rank
and green in the Siberian wastelands as the long trails of mules
and horses staggered through mountain passes laden down with
packages of nails and cordage and iron staples. Autumn, a brief
blink before the next winter, then again the long dark. So on
and on, month after month, the costs of the expedition piling
218 nine against the unknown
to marvellous proportions, deaths from exposure and hard¬
ships common, and all the weight and responsibility, blame for
every delay, every calculation that went amiss, laid on the
shoulders of the ageing, kindly, visionary Dane.
Meantime Madame Bering in Yakutsk had tired of the
venture, of Bering and of Siberia. She had fallen out exten¬
sively with most of her friends and neighbours, indulged in
a little mild crime, and in general contributed but little to
the popularity of the Bering name. She resolved to return to
Viborg : en route she was stopped and her baggage searched
for smuggled furs. She flamed into long letters of hysterical
upbraiding. . . .
At last, in the Summer of 1757, shipbuilding was com¬
menced at Okhotsk. But the new Winter came before much
could be done, with its coming there was a cessation of pro¬
visions from Yakutsk. The shipbuilders and sailors and
naturalists had to cease from their hammering at the ship-
stocks and betake themselves to hunting and fishing for the
earnest purpose of surviving until Spring. Meantime, though
no food came from Yakutsk, messengers—Government messen¬
gers—succeeded in penetrating the mountains. Why had not
Bering accomplished his explorations ? demanded St. Peters¬
burg ; for what rhyme or reason had three hundred thousand
roubles already been expended at his whim ?
He seems to have given little evidence of discouragement
or bitterness, alone and apart, one of the loneliest figures in
the conquest of the earth, never forgetting that consideration
for the care of others that was of his life quality. He went
about energetic and calm, reproached by his Government, a
thousand cares on his shoulder as the New Year, 1739, passed
rapidly away, and a new Winter came to halt activities. Then
at last :
In June, 1740, two ships were launched. Each measured eighty
by twenty by nine feet, brig-rigged, two masts, and bearing fourteen
small cannon. On the 4th of September the St. Peter and St. Paul,
accompanied by two others [probably the old Fortuna and Gabriel]
carrying provisions left Okhotsk.
After a delay of nine years the second exploration had
commenced.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
219
§ IO
The St. Paul and St. Peter rounded Lopatka Point and put
in for the Winter at the new Kamchatkan port of Avatcha. By
then it was September. They cast out Winter anchors and
waited for the Spring, Bering meantime having all the equip¬
ment overhauled and the ships thoroughly prepared for the
perils of North Pacific exploration.
So a tenth Winter went by. In the Spring two savants
came to join the expedition—one Steller, a naturalist and
geographer, a haughty, adventurous, skilful and daring man,
the antitype of Bering ; the other the astronomer Delisle de la
Croyere. The fortunes of both were to be closely linked with
the two arms of the expedition.
They waited through a burgeoning slow Spring and the
coming of Summer for a favourable wind. And at last, on the
4th of June, 1741, that wind came, and they sailed, Bering
with Steller in the St. Peter, Chirikoff with de la Croyere in
the St. Paul. South-east, went the rumour, lay Gama Land,
and for eight days they held that course into an unknown,
unislanded sea.
No sign of the Golden Land came in view even at the lati¬
tude of 46° 09'. Bering resolved to seek America.
The course was now due east. Day followed day without
sighting land, over a glassy and Summer-stilled sea. But on
the morning of the 20th wind and fog came down on the
scene : presently a gale, shrieking through the rigging, pitching
and twirling the small vessels in its hand. Night descended as
they drove before the storm. When dawn came over the
storming waters Chirikoff looked out from the St. Paul and
saw the St. Peter nowhere about.
For three days he searched the unknown, uncharted seas
for Bering’s ship. Then, believing it either sunk or put back
to Kamchatka, he resolved to prosecute himself the search for
America. The storm had died : he held the course due east
again. . .
Day on day, week on week, while water grew scarce and in
the Northern heat the dry food from the ship larder almost
choked in scurvy-touched mouths. Still no sign of land. June
vanished and July came in, and the waste of the ocean was still
about them. Then, when Chirikoff was almost resolute to
220
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
abandon the search, driftwood was sighted and they heard the
honking of sea-birds. Land must be near. On the 14th of July
the crew of the St. Paul strained their eyes eastward all day;
on the 15 th, and at last, for the first time in recorded history,
the northern coasts of America were sighted by Europeans.
It was coast somewhere between Cape Addington and
Bartholomew. A rocky and inhospitable shore rose back¬
grounded by snow-covered mountains, dark in their uplands
with forests of pine, blue on their crests with unmelting snows.
For two days the St. Paul cruised northwards in search of an
anchorage where they could put in for fresh water ; and on the
seventeenth anchored in a bay about 58° N.
Then followed two strange incidents. The pilot, Dementief,
was ordered to take a boat and ten armed sailors up a near-by
opening, land, investigate the beach, fill a number of casks
with fresh water, and return. He was watched depart. Night
came. He did not return. No sign of his presence rose from the
shore. No sign the next day or the next or the next, while
Chirikoff grew ever more uneasy. At last the boatswain was
sent with a party in the remaining boat in search of Dementief.
He too vanished within the channel. That night the twinkle of
fires was seen far up the opening, smoke lay on the foreshore
the next dawn. But neither Dementief nor the boatswain
nor their men returned. They were never seen again.
Chirikoff was in an anomalous position: it was impossible
to land, for he had no boats; equally impossible it seemed at
first to abandon his fellow-explorers. But lack of water and
scurvy drove him to it. On the 26th of July he weighed anchor
and sailed for Kamchatka.
Unexpected storms and unknown tides beat the little ship
about on the voyage throughout August; then fogs came,
blinding the seaway. On the 9th of September islands—the
Aleutian Islands—were sighted. Natives came off in their
kayaks to view the sick and scurvy-stricken Russians: they
were unimpressed. Illness and scurvy were increasing among
the crew. Chirikoff himself was down with scurvy.
So was the astronomer, de la Croy£re. The latter had
worked out a system of keeping alive as unusual as it seemed
efficacious : he remained permanently intoxicated in his cabin.
At length, on the 8th of October, Kamchatka was sighted and
the St. Paul entered the harbour of Petropavlovsk.
Chirikoff, very ill, was taken ashore. De la Croy£re also
221
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
demanded to be carried to land. He expired in the fresh air
almost immediately.
So ended the remarkable trip of the St. Paul, the first
Russian or European ship to cross the spaces of the North
Pacific and sight the continent of America.
And Bering ?
§ li
That story was to be told by the naturalist Steller, Bering’s
admirer, calumniator, assistant and ill-wisher. Bering’s St.
Peter, like Chirikoff’s St. Paul, had cruised about for days in
search of its sister ship. Then Bering came to the same con¬
clusion as Chirikoff had come to : that he must abandon this
search and proceed with the actual work of exploration.
He turned the St. Peter eastward—north-eastward, and it
sailed through days of rain and fog, but in general with a good
following sea. No islands were sighted, no land, it was a
repetition of the fortunes of Chirikoff, with fresh water scarce,
though food was more plentiful and of better quality than on
the St. Paul. Also, the staff of the expedition in this ship was of
higher quality, trained naturalists and savants, men very ready
to brave discomfort in the service of that young infant of the
Renaissance miscalled Science.
And night and day, on an empty sea, they peered east for
the Fortunate Isle.
The coast of America was sighted on the 16th of July,
exactly one day after Chirikoff, far in the south, had sighted
the same coast. But here it was in latitude 58° 14' N, a coast¬
line dominated by a single towering dark peak against an
immense range of snow-capped hills. That peak was Mount
St. Elias. Strong winds blew, and they might not anchor and
land. But four days afterwards Kayak Island, just off the coast,
hove in view. Here an anchorage, safe enough, was secured off
a lee shore. The St. Peter was jubilant.
All but the commander. He had lain in bed ill, with
incipient scurvy as it afterwards transpired, and when news of
the land was brought to him in the dark and stuffy cabin where
he lay he questioned the messengers. Yes, they did not doubt
it was America. Their felicitations. He had won undying fame
—and so forth, politely and enthusiastically, in the fashion of
the time. For answer Bering turned his face to the wall.
222 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Something, at that ultimate point in the expedition,
seems to have gone out of him. It was as though a dynamic
machine slowed down and stopped with a jar. Land at last—■
the land he had been sent to discover, the land that had
obsessed his thoughts, his days and nights, for a dozen years.
. . . And he was ill and weary and felt no joy. He struggled
out of his sickness to dress and gain the deck and look with
lacklustre eyes at the points of Kayak Island, the rugged heights
of unknown America.
Those heights and their desolation suddenly terrified him :
We think we have now discovered everything, but we do not stop to
think where we are, how far we are still from home, and what may yet
happen. Who knows but perhaps contrary winds will come up and pre¬
vent us from returning ? We do not know this country, nor have we
provisions enough for wintering here.
It was the voice of defeat. His officers looked in amaze¬
ment on the illness-wasted face of the ageing Dane, suddenly
so peevish and fretful and—cowardly. Steller did more than
look. He had but little respect for Bering, then or later : and
he had not come to a new continent to hear grandmotherly
complaints against its inhospitality. He was determined to go
ashore and explore.
Go ashore he did, defying Bering. It was a dim and for¬
bidding island, but Steller looked on it interestedly with a
naturalist’s eye, plant-collecting in company with a fellow-
enthusiast, finally stumbling on an underground eirde, earth-
house, where he found smoked salmon, bows and arrows, a fire-
drill, all the marks of a Stone Age cult. He collected all the
implements that seemed of interest, deposited an iron kettle
and a Chinese pipe in their place, decided (in company with
modern historians) that the marks of this cult showed strong
kinship with the Asiatic and proof of Asiatic intercourse, and
was proceeding indefatigably to other researches when the
repeated firing of a cannon from the St. Peter warned him, as
darkness drew down, that something was amiss. He returned
reluctantly to the ship and the fuming reproaches of the sick
man in command of the expedition.
But next morning Bering roused from his sickness suffi¬
ciently to order the next move and that a decisive one. He
would linger no longer on this ill coast, so long sought, now
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 223
dust and ashes in his wearied, years-jaundiced sight. Pro¬
visions were scarce and the season late. They would sail for
Siberia.
The whole ship protested, Steller with frantic anger. But
Bering would not be moved from his decision. To Steller it
seemed that the commander of the expedition was crumbling
away before his very eyes, no longer a man but a mere
simulacrum :
The only reason for this is stupid obstinacy, fear of a handful of
natives, and pusillanimous homesickness.
It is the one definite and biting phrase that survives out of
that day of ceaseless arguing and bitter comment, Steller’s
remark to the commander himself. Once they seem to have
been friends : but Steller had as little comprehension and
imagination in human relationships as he had them in great
abundance in the wider matters of science and research. He
saw nothing of the wearied and defeated Titan in the heavy
Dane, the man overburdened with the cares of half a conti¬
nent through year on year of reproach and blame and thank¬
lessness, the man who had seen his life work shrivel up as the
great glaciers of Mount St. Elias pierced the forward sky, the
strangest and kindliest of the earth conquerors. To Steller the
retreat from Alaska was merely farcical cowardice :
For ten years Bering had equipped himself for the great enterprise.
The exploration lasted ten hours !
§ 12
As if to close in his last days with the reproaches of the
outraged seas, raped of their secrets at last, the secrets wherein
the Fortunate Isle had lain in men’s minds, if never in actual
terrestrial latitude, the elements wove their garments of storm
and cloud about the outward passage of the St. Peter. By the
end of July they were still off the Alaskan coast, glimpsed now
and again through sliding banks of fog and wavering sheets of
sleet. Presently they were lost and entangled in a maze of
islands, seeking to turn south and south-west, beaten back by
contrary tides and winds, puzzled by the eruption of the
224 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Aleutians out of the seething seas. Once or twice they suc¬
ceeded in landing from desolate anchorages and filling the
water-casks. But the scurvy spread ever quicker among them.
For two months the ship fought the seas off the American
coasts before it won free to attempt the passage across the
Pacific. By this time the moody and taciturn Bering, ill with
scurvy, had virtually relinquished the command of the ship
into the hands of two of his lieutenants, Waxel and Khitroff.
A following wind at last drew them near Asia. The northern¬
most Kuriles were sighted. Then a mistake due to the fantastic
incompetence of navigational science in that day decided the
fate of three-quarters of the ship’s crew.
This was a miscalculation of the nearness of Kamchatka.
Their observations gave the parallel of 56° when it was nearer
540. Land was sighted and the St. Peter steered towards it—
low-lying land, treeless, spume-swept, a great low bank of sand
and flying spindrift in the dim October day. A channel was
sighted and the vessel steered into its entrance.
Scarcely were they within this channel than it was realized
that this was not Avatcha channel. As anxious to leave as they
had been to enter, Waxel and Khitroff awaited the lifting of
the darkness. But next day it hardly lifted at all, for a great
storm had arisen, fog came with it, and the little ship, pitching
in the gale, sprung its mast so badly as to render it useless.
Below, Bering lay semi-conscious in that torpor of sickness
that had been upon him for two long months, hearing over¬
head the hurried tramp and scurry of the crew, the flail of
sail and cordage, the crash of the breaking seas. Through dim
ports he caught glimpses of the frothing waters of a racing
tide. At last they brought the news to him. It was useless to
attempt sailing out the St. Peter this season. They must
winter here.
He roused himself—his last rousing—to object. If this, as
they swore, was Kamchatkan coast, let them seek Petropav-
lovsk at all hazards. They declined, briefly, and left him.
Three-quarters of the crew was down with scurvy. They must
winter in this unknown Kamchatkan channel.
Only slowly did the realization come upon them that it
was unknown because it was not in Kamchatka. Instead, they
had landed upon a previously unseen island—that island of the
Commander Group which is now called Bering Island. Kam¬
chatka was ninety miles distant, the island, a great stretch of
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 225
many miles, had neither trees nor inhabitants. Inland, scrub
and game were plentiful, but at first sight it seemed merely an
abode of seamews and the unceasing winds.
They could remain no longer on the ship. The lieutenants
proceeded to disembark the crews in the biting November
winds. Many died of exposure as they lay on the bleak hill¬
sides above the reach of the tides while Steller and the lieuten¬
ants strove with the aid of a half-dozen sailors to erect shelters
and breakwinds of canvas and driftwood. In three months over
thirty of the crew of seventy-seven had died, in spite of the
fact that by the end of that time the indefatigable Steller had
had pits dug in the ground where the expedition could shelter
from the worst of the winter storms.
Bering was brought from his cabin and taken to a dugout
next to Steller’s. The latter’s enmity had curiously subsided
against his old commander. He looked at the explorer who had
grown an old man, and saw that the end was not far off :
His sixty years of age, his heavy build, the trials and tribulations he
had experienced, his subdued courage, and his disposition to quiet and
inactivity all tended to aggravate the disease. . . . Without doubt he
would have recovered if he had gotten back to Avatcha, where he could
have obtained proper nourishment and enjoyed the comfort of a warm
room. In a sandpit on the coast of Bering Island, his condition was
hopeless. For blubber, the only medicine at hand, he had an uncon¬
querable loathing. Nor were the frightful sufferings he saw about him,
his chagrin caused by the fate of the expedition, and his anxiety for the
future of his men at all calculated to check his disease.
So we have this last picture of Steller, as he enters this
record, assiduous in nursing, still cool and critical, coming in
from his hunting and exploring of the low, mist-hung island—
it swarmed with game, Steller killed animals with ease and
rapidity, for they knew not men—to look at the still face and
closed eyes of the old commander who had adventured so
far from Jonas’s house in Jutland. Perhaps in that adventure
he had plumbed some deeps of the human spirit unknown to
others who went before him in the conquest of the earth, the
search for the Fortunate Isles—that pessimism of hope and
outlook, that human frailty at last in the jaws of defeat. His
was perhaps an essential type to complete the gallery, more
human if less gallant than others, pity a strange ingredient in
such a life as his, and weariness at last swamping all.
p
226 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Perhaps as he lap there and they brought him the news that
this land on which they had come was an island, a faint smile
touched his lips—this was Gama Land, this the Fortunate
Isle ! Or perhaps even the humour of that might not touch
him, beyond everything but the unease of his own body, the
weariness of his own spirit.
He died on the 8th of December, 1741, two hours before daybreak.
He was buried in the sand beyond the huts, five thousand
miles from Horsens. Presently the Winter snows covered his
grave deeply. With Spring the survivors of the St. Peter built
a new boat and departed from the island (which has remained
uninhabited to this day) leaving the earth conqueror together
with his conquest in the rains and tides.
§ 13
Steller, the lieutenants, and the forty-six survivors suc¬
ceeded in making the Kamchatkan coast on the 27th of
August, bringing (ultimately to Russia itself) news of Bering’s
death and the discovery of America.
More important from the viewpoint of trade, it brought
news of the Aleutian Archipelago. Restraining its desire to
appear civilized and western, Russia suppressed almost all
information regarding the voyages and set about the exploita¬
tion of the islands and of Alaska.
Bering’s (and Chirikov’s) voyages solved the greater prob¬
lems of the North Pacific, dislodged Gama Land from the
maps, and sent the Fortunate Isle to hunt a new home in space
and time, abandoning its insularity for the folds of continental
obscurity, betaking itself to the depths of Asia, the Poles, and—
remote and curiosity-stirring—Africa.
VIII
MUNGO PARK ATTAINS THE NIGER AND PASSES
TIMBUCTOO
§ i
IN that hasting conquest of the earth’s surface which
began in the eleventh century and continued campaign on
campaign till to our remoter vision the surface of the planet
seems tracked like a spider-web, interior Africa for long
remained uninvaded. Before Columbus, the Portuguese in the
service of Henry the Navigator had coasted the Western shores
slow year on year, each year penetrating a little further south
along those coasts that they named “of Guinea” and “of
Gold”. They traded with the shoreward natives, fought them,
stole them, shipped great numbers of them to Portugal as
slaves. They noted how below a certain line of the coast—the
mouth of the Gambia—the Africans changed from indeter¬
minate brown to black—they passed beyond the region of the
Arabized Moor and came to the territories of the true Negroes.
And at last, after long years of sailing and debating that have
mention elsewhere in this record, they rounded the Cape of
Good Hope, attained Zanzibar, and made the passage to India.
They were followed by the ships of other maritime nations
—the Dutch, the Spaniards, the English. The former landed in
South Africa and took to an adolescent plundering and plant¬
ing that in maturity evolved its colonization. The Portuguese,
from Angola, penetrated far to South-Central Africa, and
erected strange “kingdoms” in indefinite localities before the
close of the seventeenth century—kingdoms which presently
crumbled to dust with the decay of the Portuguese power at
home. Africa remained in its great northward bulking, despite
those incursions from river and coast, an unknown country.
Deep in the heart of that unknown country Europe had
long been apprised of the rumour of the Niger, a great river
draining the forests and mountains, a river rivalling the Nile,
a river on the banks of which stood fabulous Timbuctoo.
227
228 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Rumour of this river had haunted the Mediterranean lands
from earliest historic times. The Egyptians of late Dynastic
days had sent an expedition in search of it—an expedition
which actually appears to have reached the Niger’s banks
somewhere in the region of Lake Chad. With the coming of
the outbreak of Islam upon the world communication or
dream of communication with that distant river was cut apart
—until the Arabs themselves evolved light and learning in
travel and geographical curiosities. In advance of those curiosi¬
ties mixed drifts of Libyan-Berber-Arabs crossed the Sahara
in the ninth century and came in contact with the barbaric
Negro states of the Archaic culture on the upper waters of the
Niger. From that contact presently arose the great Negroid
kingdoms of Songhay and Bornu, to astound the Arab geogra¬
phers who came exploring south from Morocco in the eleventh
and twelfth centuries.
Strangely, discovering the Niger, those geographers
remained in considerable uncertainty regarding two matters of
ancient debate. Where did it rise ?—In the Nile, according to
the map of Ibn Mohammed al Idrisi, published in 1153 ; in
Unknown Land, according to Ibn Batuta, most famous of the
Arabs, who paid a visit to Timbuctoo in 1353. Where did it
set ?—in the Atlantic, according to al Idrisi; in the “sands of
the interior” according to Ibn Batuta.
But, with the slave raidings of Portuguese, French, and
English down the West African coast in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, that coast became so well known and
mapped that it seemed no longer possible to assume that an
unknown river, of such immensity as the Niger in debouchure,
had its outlet on the Atlantic. All the great river mouths—the
Gambia, the Congo—were known. Could the Congo be the
Niger under another name ?
In 1778 the English African Association was formed under
the presidency of Sir Joseph Banks for the encouragement of
the Scientific Exploration of Africa.
Within five years of its foundation the Association had
despatched three explorers into Africa in pursuit of the Niger.
The first, Ledyard, an American marine, had some idea of
tackling the problem from Libya. But he died in Cairo ere his
mission was well begun. Lucas, the second man selected, had
once been a slave in Morocco. He proposed to travel to the
Niger country across the Sahara, and actually set out on that
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 229
mission from Tripoli. But, after five days travel, he turned
back his caravan, having come into collision with “revolting
Arabs” (he referred to their political activities). The next
selection of the Association was Major Houghton, fort-major
at Goree, where the great French aerodrome is now built, a
man of singular courage and address, in the phrase of the time,
and well acquainted with Arabic.
Houghton’s venture progressed further than that of either
Ledyard or Lucas. With assistance and co-operation from a
white slaver on the Gambia, one Dr. Laidley of Pisania,
Houghton passed through the negro “kingdoms” of Woolli,
Kasson, and Kaarta. Beyond Kaarta was Ludamar, a “king¬
dom” of half-breed Arabs—“Moors” as they were dubbed in
the nomenclature of the times. Jarra was the border town and
Houghton wrote from there his last and characteristic letter to
Laidley five hundred miles away :
Major Houghton’s compliments to Dr. Laidley ; is in good
health, on his way to Limbuctoo ; robbed of all his goods by Kend
Bular’s son.
With this last cryptic message, Houghton disappeared into
Ludamar, was again robbed, crawled on his hands and knees
to a Moorish village, was there refused food, and either allowed
to starve to death or knocked on the head and his body dragged
into the woods.
News of the catastrophe filtered down to the coast with
the slave caravans, and Laidley sent it on to the African
Association in London. The third venture had not been lucky.
Banks and the others looked about for someone to take the
place of the unfortunate Houghton.
§2
The remarkable individual chosen for that fourth attempt
upon the Niger had been born in a Scottish farmhouse near
Selkirk in 1771. He was one of thirteen children, his father a
peasant-farmer, his mother a handsome and competent
woman of that exclusive and surprising breed which tills the
land in Scotland. It was a family neither very poor nor affluent:
they kept one servant, the Parks, though sight of the small
230 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
whinstone house of Fowlshiels might lead the modern investi¬
gator to doubt the fact. Mungo’s father was deeply religious, a
stern and dour man ; his mother appears intellectually to have
been of a like barrenness, if fecund physically. Mungo’s brothers
and sisters were ordinary and kindly and uninspired folk. He
himself, through the play of innumerable small chances, grew
up differently to his strange destiny precipitated by the death
of Houghton in far-off Ludamar.
. He was a tall and handsome and shy youth, with brown
hair and a small mouth, and a very pious mind. His shyness is
the thing most frequently commented on in his early days : it
persisted, but little modified, all through his life. That modifi¬
cation was the assumption of an appearance of extreme cold¬
ness and reserve. Mungo below that mask was possibly such a
warring civil insurrection as we may never penetrate and
chart.
He was educated at the Grammar School at Selkirk, a
very competent and model scholar, one who read books and
books and still more books as he tramped the muddy Scots
roads evening and morning in search of the much-prized Scots
education. He read much of the Border poetry of that time,
novels and religious tracts, and very early seems to have been
moved by the wonder of plants and plant-life. It was possibly
this incipient passion for botany that moulded his whole life
in the ultimate shape it took. He refused the Church and
elected to study medicine, to the great disappointment of his
parents.
This was in 1786. He was apprenticed to a neighbouring
practitioner, in the fashion of those days, and rode the district
in company with his master, dosing the ailing and assist¬
ing at unique and bloody operations. He seems to have
acquired no great love of his profession ; but he was a difficult
youth either to know or to love. By 1789, when he went to
Edinburgh to matriculate, he appears almost as mature as he
ever became—coldly devout in the Presbyterian fashion, self-
centred, controlled, occasionally very eager with friends and
kindly with the unfortunate.
But even when he was a full and formal doctor, he seems
to have paused in doubt of the next step. He was only twenty-
one years of age, but considered that he was wasting his own
time and the Lord’s very seriously in not settling down to a
profession—his own profession or some other. He confided those
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 2$I
doubts to a friend of his brother-in-law, James Dickson. So
doing, he made yet another contact with an outpost of destiny.
Sir Joseph Banks, a man of many concerns and projects,
was interested in the dour young Scot, sympathized with his
unwillingness to spend his life in the dreariness of a Scottish
general practitioner’s round, and at last found him more
congenial occupation. This was to act as surgeon on an East
Indiaman, the Worcester, sailing for Bencoolen in Sumatra.
Mungo sailed with the ship into a year of which we know
little or nothing. He seems to have enjoyed the voyage and to
have botanized considerably in Sumatra. He wrote a paper for
the Linnean Society describing eight new and hitherto un¬
christened fishes. He spent sweating hours in the fo’c’sle, doctor¬
ing the ills of the sailors with a cool dispassion, long nights
staring at the homeward stars as the Worcester at last turned
about to seek England. They rounded the Cape of Good Hope
in good weather, and he saw for long weeks, dark in the east,
the bulking of that strangest of continents vexing his horizon.
Wonder—the explorer’s wonder—awoke in him. What lay
within ? What man of his colour would first attain the gates
of Golden Timbuctoo ? . . . Perhaps, like Hanno, he looked
out on that distant shore some night and saw its fires lighting
up the darkness.
The Worcester reached England. Mungo, paid off and
unemployed, took up residence with his brother-in-law in
London and looked about him for work. More determinedly
than ever, he was not to become a general practitioner. On the
other hand, long sea-voyaging wearied him excessively. It was
an impasse.
It was an impasse which the news of Houghton’s death,
received by the English African Association, speedily ended.
The Association, comfortably unfrightened (as it well might
be) at the fates which had befallen its various explorers,
determined to despatch yet another in search of the Niger’s
source and outlet ; and it looked around for a suitable person—•
“educated and trustworthy”—to take up the task.
Mungo’s name was again brought to the attention of Sir
Joseph Banks by the indefatigable brother-in-law. Sir Joseph
remembered. Sir Joseph was interested. He spoke to his
fellow-members of the African Association.
Mr. Park sounded suitable.
Mr. Park was summoned to an interview. He was cool and
232 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
eager and respectful, a young man with a face still faintly
browned by the suns of Sumatra. There was nothing he would
like better than to take up the search for the Niger, he declared,
“for the unravelling of the secrets of those strange lands
profoundly fascinated me”.
He was formally commissioned, and sailed for Africa in
May I795> directed, in his own words
on landing in Africa to pass on to the River Niger, either by way of
Bambouk, or by such other route as should be found most convenient.
That I should ascertain the course, and, if possible, the rise and ter¬
mination of that river. That I should use my utmost exertions to visit
the principal towns or cities in its neighbourhood, particularly Tim-
buctoo and Boussa; and that I should be afterwards at liberty to return
to Europe, either by the way of the Gambia, or by such other route
as, under all the then existing circumstances of my situation and
prospects, should appear to me most advisable.
§3
Mungo’s first meeting with Africa in speech and person
was at Jillifri, a port on the northern bank of the Gambia.
Here his ship put in to trade in beeswax and ivory, and here
he began to collect his information regarding that inland
country through which he purposed to travel in search of the
legendary Niger.
It was a country of small negro and pseudo-negro kingdoms,
some pagan, some recently Islamized. Coastwards, the preva¬
lent and prevailing negro type was the Mandingo, heavy, tall
men, good traders, “a mild, sociable and pleasing people”.
Their chief magistrate was the “caid”, their tribal conferences
were palavers”—a word which showed an antique Portu¬
guese influence. They cultivated maize and rice and cotton,
exported slaves, taxed alien slavers, and were in general a
barbaric people slowly moving from their ancient orientation
in contact with the Europeans.
_ Interspersed with them were the warlike Jaloffs, an
aristocracy on horseback, Moors in Mungo’s phraseology, and
the wild hinterlands Negroes, the Feloops, unsociable souls who
cut the throats of slavers and lived in remote jungles. These
Feloops, we may guess (for in this later day they have been
long merged in other groupings) were the original Golden Age
Negroes moved to those unrestraints of conduct and ethic
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 233
which contact with the cultured has ever wrought in primitive
men.
It was a swampy, wet and uncertain land that which lay
into the sunrise, Mungo gathered. And he would do well to
learn Mandingo, the lingua franca, before he adventured its
unknown perils.
He had now reached Pisania, last Gambia station of the
white slave-traders, and put up at the residence of Laidley,
the obscure medico and slaver-philanthropist who had be¬
friended Houghton. The Gambia was close at hand ; so were
the rains. Disregarding both, the solemn young Scotsman sat
down, hour on hour, with word-lists and native teachers, to
plod through the mysteries of Mandingo.
Slavers would come and look at the young man, and tell
him tales of the interior ; he disregarded most of these with a
placid suspicion. He was indifferent to the slaver’s trade but
distrustful of his veracity. By the end of July he considered
himself equipped for the journey ahead, and would have set
out then but that he caught a chill while observing, genteelly, an
eclipse of the moon. Next day he was down with fever.
For three weary months this fever kept him prostrate. The
rains—the tremendous gushing rains of the African coast—-
had come on, swashing across the Gambia, burying all activity
in their silvery pelt. The Gambia rose and rose, and Mungo
found little sleep o’ nights in the chorusing of the African
frogs. He took the matter with a cool, priggish philosophy : he
was at least being inoculated against the fevers of the interior.
Slowly the fever abated. He resumed his studies of Man¬
dingo, and questioned Laidley on the obtaining of servants and
horses. Laidley—he liked Mungo—very obligingly loaned him
a young Negro slave, Demba, a cheerful and happy and
garrulous individual, who was promised his freedom on
Mungo’s safe return to the coast; also, he hired for the young
Scotsman’s use an older native, one Johnson, who had been a
West Indian slave and appears to have learned little to streng¬
then either his morale or morals in the plantations of English
Jamaica. Asses to carry Mungo’s small quantity of luggage
and trade-goods were purchased, as well as a “small and hardy
horse” to bear Mungo himself into the dark interior of Africa.
At last his fever had passed. He felt well and strong again.
On the 2nd of December, 1795, he set out eastwards accom¬
panied by Laidley and two other white slavers. Besides these
234 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
was a small caravan—two negro merchants, Johnson, Demba,
and a couple of interior natives returning to their homes from
working on the Gambia. Mungo carried with him on the horse
an “umbrella, a pocket sextant, a thermometer, two com¬
passes, and a few changes of linen”.
That night they reached an inland village, Jindey. Here
they slept, and here, the next morning, the three white men
bade Mungo good-bye, never expecting to see him again.
Several miraculous chances were to disprove their expectations.
But we gather from Mungo’s chronicle that for a moment he
himself felt very young and dispirited and lonely as he watched
those men of his own blood and breed turn about and ride
into the westwards forest. He looked about him at the broad,
dark, alien faces, thick-lipped, round-eyed, of the strange
people among whom he had come, and felt no lightening of
heart. Then—already in his mind a faint bugle-call the very
name—he remembered the Niger, and rode briskly forward.
§4
He was now in the “kingdom” of Walli. Walli, at its
frontier, proceeded to tax him heavily. Seeing that the tax-
gatherers were in too great number to be shot down or ridden
down, the young Scotsman submitted to the imposition, and
rode on. It was a flat and fertile land. But jungle waved in the
south ; forward were great stretches of forest.
Three days of riding amidst little villages brought them
out of Walli into Woolli. No one as yet had hindered Mungo
greatly, or helped him either. He was still in lands close to the
coast, and the white man a phenomenon looked upon without
astounded gape. On the 5th of December, however, he reached
Medina, the capital of Woolli, a sunshine land, with the mud-
built “city” set amidst wooded hills and gentle declivities.
Here he was hospitably entertained by the negro “king”, one
Jatta, who had previously entertained Houghton. Houghton’s
name, indeed, was constantly on the negro’s lips. Did Mungo
know what had happened to Houghton ? Mungo shook his
head at this rhetorical remark : he desired information. He
had it. Houghton had been murdered by the Moors !
Mungo tried to look as shocked and surprised as possible.
He was always scrupulously polite and respectful in his
dealings with African potentates. Jatta regarded him with
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 235
a sorrowful eye, and said it was evident that nothing would
stop him. He would pray for the white man.
On the 8th, still in Woolli, and still travelling undisturbed,
Mungo and his small caravan, considerably scratched and
jaded, arrived at a town that is famous in story and contro¬
versy. It was Kolor : out of that town Mungo was to bring the
first account to Europe of a negro ritual to enrich our vocabu¬
lary. Kolor was the home of Mumbo-Jumbo. When the good-
man of Kolor arrived at the conclusion that one of his wives
was in need of correction he did not hale her before the magis¬
trates or hit her in the jaw : he proceeded outside the village
gates where hung a suit made from the bark of a tree. Getting
within this suit and closing down the visor of the mask, the
negro would wait until the fall of dusk and then enter the
village, uttering loud cries. Hearing these, the entire popula¬
tion would assemble around the village bentang—a tree in
the midst of each plaza. Orations and singings would take
place : finally, Mumbo-Jumbo would point to the recalcitrant
female for whom, she unknowing, all this ritual had been
prepared, and would have her dragged to his feet. Then he
would beat her unmercifully with a stick amidst the loud
rejoicings of all the other women.
Mungo appears to have been a personal witness of this
custom in operation. He regarded it with genteel disapproval
and resumed his journey. Soon he had passed beyond the last
stretches of country trodden by white men—except by the
unfortunate Houghton, the news of whose fate continued to
haunt his track. Crossing the borders of Woolli and Bondou, he
found himself, beyond the village of Koojar, on the verge of a
great forest, the true African jungle. The trees towered tall
and dark green, a seemingly impenetrable wall. Wild beasts
and bandits lorded over this tract in disgusting harmony.
Mungo’s servants, tremblingly, sacrificed to the gods of ways
and means, and Mungo pushed the caravan forward into the
treey depths.
For two days they traversed this unkindly region at
considerable speed, still holding due east, feasting at this
hospitable village, fasting at another. In places Mungo found
himself an object of enthusiastic regard ; in others—such as
in the village encountered towards midday of the 19th
of that month—he was persecuted by the ravenous curiosities
stirred in the African breast at sight of the young alien from
236 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Scotland. Women manifested an astounded amaze and a desire
to ascertain whether or not Mungo could be really human in
those portions of his anatomy which the other sex regarded
as of paramount proof. Mungo, gasping, mounted his horse
and fled in horror, followed by his grinning caravan.
So far, so gently. But these days of peaceful penetration
were numbered. The forests ceased. Fertile cultivated land
appeared with ant-gangs of slaves at work in the fields. Crossing
the Faleme river, they reached Fatteconda, the capital of
Bondou. This was Foulah domain, not Negro, land of the
browny men from the Saharan fringe. Some of these invaders,
surprisingly, seem to have shed their Mohammedanism in
their southwards progress : Bondou’s ruler, Almani, was a
pagan. He was also a thief. An hour after Mungo’s arrival
in the capital, he was summoned to court.
Court proved to be in an open field. Almani questioned
the traveller suspiciously : why did he wander so far afield,
if not to acquire gold and Givers of Life ? Out of curiosity,
said Mungo. Almani sniffed suspiciously, and dismissed him
till next day.
That next day brought disaster. Again interviewing the
unauthentic monarch, that individual indicated that he would
consider Mungo’s new blue coat, with brass buttons, a suitable
gift. Boiling with inward rage, but outwardly preserving a
calm appearance, Mungo took the garment off and handed it
over. Noblesse oblige. Almani, somewhat shamefaced, said
that Mungo could now proceed out of Bondou duty-free.
After an interview of somewhat embarrassing intimacy with
several of Almani’s harem, Mungo rode out of Fatteconda
with his escort on the morning of the 22nd. It was again
a land of bandits, nearing the borders of Bondou and Kajaaga.
The heat beat down with restless intensity, and Mungo
sweated under his beaver tile. It grew too hot for daylight
marching. They halted at a village, waiting for moonrise.
With the rising of the moon they set out eastward through
the forests. Beasts howled and the long moonbeams danced
and played down remote corridors of the trees. Dawn brought
the borders of Kajaaga, and midday of Christmas Eve brought
them to Joag in that state.
Joag evinced the first definite marks of African hostility.
As Mungo rested under the bentang tree of the town plaza
that night a band of horsemen came seeking him. They had
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 237
been sent by Batcheri, King of Kajaaga, an indignant monarch.
Why had Mungo not visited him at his capital, Maana ?
Mungo replied that he had had no time. All night he and the
raiders argued around the bentang tree. Finally, losing
patience, the horsemen seized his luggage, broke it open, stole
what goods they desired, and departed with the dawn.
All next day Mungo sat hungry under the bentang tree,
wondering what would happen next. He had still some gold
and amber concealed on his person, but dare not reveal the
fact in case the horsemen of Batcheri should return and relieve
him of those valuables as well. His attendants were very
thoroughly frightened. But towards night an old woman gave
them food, and with the coming of that night came further
succour.
This was in the person of a nephew of the king of Kasson,
the next native state through which Mungo must pass in his
quest for the Niger. This minor royalty had been visiting in
Kajaaga, and heard of Mungo’s plight. He was polite and
assiduous. Let Mungo accompany him to Kasson, that
civilized state, and all would be well.
Thankfully, Mungo accepted the invitation. Next morning,
after sacrificing a cock to the denizens of the jungle, the joint
expedition set out from Joag through the healthiest and most
fertile African country that Mungo had yet seen. The forests
towered green and tenebrous far in the hills of the north.
But the lowlands were closely cultivated and nearing harvest.
Far off they caught a glimpse of the Senegal. This they must
cross to enter Kasson.
§5
They forded the Senegal. The horses were seized and
hurled over a cliff and bade to swim to the promised land. The
nephew of the king of Kasson kept a hospitable eye on Mungo
during the crossing. But his hospitality was of base metal.
No sooner had they landed in Kasson than he demanded a
present. Mungo, probably feeling politely murderous, handed
over “fourteen shillingsworth of amber and some tobacco”.
The nearest town was Teesee. Here dwelt the father of
Mungo’s “deliverer”, a negro of the name of Tiggity Sego.
He was a sour ancient. Regarding Mungo with a dull eye, he
dismissed him without demanding a present. Mungo hoped to
push on unmolested.
238 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
He was mistaken. Borrowing Mungo’s horse, Tiggity’s
son rode off on a mission to the north. For eight days, wearied,
Mungo, though unmolested, wandered the streets of Teesee,
mud-walled, heat-smitten, in the throes of a war-scare. War
was about to burst on and around all this grouping of little
kingdoms. Pagan Teesee lived in fear of the nearby “Moors”
of Foota-Torra and Gadumah: while IVIungo was there
Foota Torra sent an embassy with the demand that Teesee
acknowledge the Prophet: otherwise Foota Torra would
come down and exterminate the unbelievers. With a touching
unanimity the inhabitants promptly declared their conversion
to the tenets of Islam.
. At length Tiggity Sego’s son returned from his wanderings,
bringing Mungo’s horse. Mungo prepared to depart, as
unostentatiously as possible, from Teesee. The ruling powers
demanded again, and indignantly, where were his manners ?
Falling upon his luggage, they gutted the bundles. Plus the
similar robbery which had taken place in Kajaaga, three-
quarters of the young Scot’s original baggage ha d now
disappeared.
But even yet he was not disheartened ; cold, calm, priggish
and composed, he rode out from Teesee with his following and
held on for several days through Kasson. At a village, Soolo,
he encountered a negro slave-trader who was in debt to
Laidley in Pisania, and who had been instructed to pay the
debt to Mungo. This he was proceeding to do readily enough
when more of the minor royalties of Kasson appeared on the
scene and demanded that Mungo ride at once to the capital,
Kooniakary. Distrustfully, he collected his small caravan.
What new robbery was to take place ?
Demba Sego Jalla, however, proved unexpectedly honest,
a happy prince but for the fact that he had scarcely set
eyes on Mungo than he began to ask if the latter knew
what had happened to Houghton—Mungo was more
than tired of Houghton by now. He replied that he knew
of the latter’s fate. Blearily and kindly, the king dismissed the
explorer.
His forward route lay through Kaarta. But Kaarta was
about to engage in war with a yet more distant principality,
Bambarra Bambarra where Mungo now heard the Great
River itself was to be seen. The king advised Mungo to avoid
the war-threatened lands and hold north by Fooladoo. This
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
239
he determined to do, and returned to Soolo to collect the
debt from the slave-trader and refresh himself before attempt¬
ing the trackless north-eastwards lands.
On the ist of February word came from the king that
the route into Kaarta was still practicable, and Mungo could
travel that way if he chose. He did choose. Mounting his horse,
and accompanied now only by Demba the slave and Johnson
the servant, he rode across a tributary of the Senegal and
found himself on the disturbed Kaartan borders. Streams of
fugitives were pouring into Kasson, for Bambarra, as usual, was
expected to win in the coming war with Kaarta.
It was a land of hills, matted with vegetation, sparsely, so
that they reminded Mungo, with a sudden qualm of home¬
sickness, of his own Border country. Beyond those hills lay a
stretch of desert. This they succeeded in crossing in one night,
halting at a watering hole and being hospitably entertained by
some shepherds. Hospitality was not general. At the next
village, Feesurah, the landlord overcharged him outrageously :
surprisingly, he was supported in this outrage by Mungo’s own
slave and servant. Cold and imperturbable Mungo surveyed
the situation, paid the exorbitant charges, and pressed on
westwards through more forested country. Becoming separted
from his attendants while all three were berry-picking, he
met a ludicrous adventure. This was in the persons of two
mounted blacks, encountered in a forest track, men who
had never before set eyes on a white man. They uttered moans
of horror, covered their eyes, put spurs to their horses, and
galloped away.
Rejoining his companions, Mungo rode on and came to
a wide plain in the midst of which, in mud and stench, squatted
Kemmoo, the capital of war-threatened Kaarta. Its ruler was
the Desi Koorabarri, a heroic warrior and a kindly soul. This
unusual combination of qualities listened to Mungo, thought
it nothing unusual that an intelligent man should want to
view far lands, promised him every support in his venture, and
dismissed him with presents. Rather staggered, Mungo slept
the night in Kemmoo, and in the morning sent his pistols to
the Desi as a return present.
I he black king acknowledged them and sent back an escort
to help Mungo reach the borders of Ludamar, the north¬
wards kingdom of the Moors. There Houghton had been killed,
a dangerous and fanatical land. But war had now broken out
24O NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
between Kaarta and Bambarra, and it was impossible to press
on directly into the latter country.
The young Scot rode northwards with his escort through
Lotus-land ; here the lotus berry was gathered as a com¬
mercial product. He tasted it and found it mildly appetizing.
But all the while his mind was vexed with a disquieting
question: how would the Moors of Ludamar greet his
mission ?
§6
He came to Funingkedy, the last of the Kaartan towns
to the east. Already he was passing beyond the round-shaped
negro huts, walled with stakes. Funingkedy had a “Moorish”
appearance. It lived in constant terror of raids from the
horsemen of the north. Mungo halted here a day and night
while a caravan gathered to proceed to Ludamar.
It was resolved to travel at night to evade the bandits. In
great fright and at great speed the strange convoy stumbled
northwards, hour after hour, Mungo and Demba and Johnson
at the tail of it. At daybreak on the 18th of February rocky
hills came through the mists and began to serrate all the north.
It was a land of streams, with wild horses disporting by the
banks. Under those hills showed a walled town. Unhalting,
the scared caravan pressed on ; at noon Mungo entered his
first Moorish town, Jarra.
Laidley had given him an order for money on a slaver
who dwelt even as distantly as this. The slaver received Mungo
and his blacks kindly : he was the only soul in Jarra who did so.
They were stared at aggressively by the haughty horsemen who
clattered through the streets. The negroes, here a subservient,
helot populace, could lend them no aid. Mungo sent off a
present to the ruler of Ludamar, the Emir Ali, asking permis¬
sion to skirt through the border-lands down into Bambarra.
A fortnight went by—a fortnight of black looks from the
Moors and frightened looks from the blacks. Both Demba
and Johnson made it clear to Mungo that they would refuse to
adventure forth into Ludamar. At last one of the Emir Ali’s
slaves arrived to guide Mungo on his way eastward. At that
Demba relented, and joined forces with his master.
They had gained the southern fringe of the Sahara, waste
sandy land wherein they made but slow and heat-hazed
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 24I
progress for several days. Infrequent villages would erupt
upon the horizon—villages where the travellers were stared
at askance by the negroes. The first of March brought the
considerable Moorish town of Deena. Here Mungo lodged
with a scared if hospitable black ; but soon the news of his
arrival had spread abroad. The Moors came flocking in droves
to gaze on the Christian, to spit at him ; finally, they broke
open his luggage, stole what they desired, and departed.
Mungo resolved to escape in the early dawn. He and
Demba fled eastwards through a misty morning wherein lions
howled. Day brought heat and thirst and a long stretch of
parched ground. Once they halted and would have ventured a
near-by well but that, even nearer, they heard the cough of a
lion apparently as thirsty as themselves. They slept that
night, uneasily, in a hut of some Foulah shepherds.
But next day, as they swung south towards Bambarra,
forest came again, interspersed with cultivated land. Here
for three days they journeyed unmolested, Mungo noting with
a cool interest the effect of the passing of a cloud of locusts
and the equally surprising effects produced by the native manu¬
facture of gunpowder. They came to the village of Dallu, and
rested there the night. It was almost the last town in Ludamar,
and Mungo confident that he would now escape from the
land of the Moors, robbed, indeed, but unharmed.
But even while he sat so thinking a band of Moors entered
the hut. They were a party of the Emir Ali’s horsemen, sent
to fetch him to the Moorish capital, Benowm, there to gratify
the curiosity of Ali’s wife, Fatima, who had never yet gazed
upon that horrific animal, the Christian.
§7
This was disaster, and Mungo knew it. He begged to be
left alone, he offered all his goods to the Moors, he must have
seemed—that moment while his mask dropped—a very young
and frightened alien indeed. The Moors soothed him, sardonic¬
ally. Ali wished him well: but Fatima also wished to see him.
Back along the dusty roads to Deena, where he had been
maltreated a few days before. Here a son of Ali’s was in
residence. This son, a genuine foretaste of the father, inter¬
viewed them, threatened them, and so frightened them that
Q
242 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
that night Demba attempted to escape. He was frustrated and
thrust back into the hut. Mungo slept with a cool wisdom.
Next dap they reached Benowm in the Southern Sahara—
no town of Arabs, but a great encampment of black tents.
Benowm gave a yell of surprise at the appearance of Mungo,
abandoned all its worldly goods and flocked to follow him. He
was led to the presence of the Emir Ali, a venerable scoundrel
who looked on him coldly and then determined on an acute
psychological test. It was evident that the Christian was
starving. Good. Christians ate pigs. Also good. A pig was
brought and offered to Mungo, in the hope that he would eat
it and thus openly prove his uncleanness.
Suavely, Mungo declined the gift, affirming that pork
was abhorrent to his palate. Somewhat dashed, Ali considered
a moment and was then struck by a bright notion. He com¬
manded that the pig be loosed in the hope that it would
attack Mungo.
Instead, carefully excepting Mungo, the pig attacked
everyone within range. It was secured and led captive away.
So were Mungo and Demba to a hut where all night the guards
kept thrusting in their faces torches of lighted grass to see
that their captives were still unfled. They were given a little
food and water, and slept uneasily.
Next morning they were led to a hut. Here Mungo was
commanded to take off his clothes so that the Moors might
examine them. They were especially amazed at the appearance
of his feet. They had expected extremities departing from
the true Moorish norm of homo sapiens. Obsequiously, Mungo
disrobed and re-robed through a long, stifling day. Night
brought little rest. The pig of the previous venture had been
tethered to the ridge-pole of the hut. All the hut lay in sleep.
But in the dark Mungo awoke with the consciousness that
someone was creeping upon him. Thereon he jumped to his
feet. Discovered, the intruder turned to flee. Fleeing, he
stumbled over Demba and pitched head-foremost on the
pro-Christian pig. The pig yelled and then bit the Moor in the
arm. Pandemonium ensued, only dying down as dawn neared.
Day succeeded day of maddening captivity. Ali would
neither release him nor promise a date of release until Fatima
arrived. Bored and hungry, Mungo stared out at the life of
unbearable Benowm and dreamed of the Niger and templed
Timbuctoo, and listened to the plaints of Demba. Ali had
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 243
messengers take away all his possessions except one compass
which he managed to secrete on his person. Not contented with
that, the Emir decided to put the talents of the Christian to
direct use. He appointed him court barber and ordered him to
shave the head of one of the harem boys. Slyly, Mungo
nicked the young Moor’s head till the blood gushed. He was
at once relegated to the lists of the unemployed. But the
captivity went on.
Page on page in his chronicle tells of that strange arid life
in the sands that fringe the Sahara. Fever struck him and he
crept out to the coolness of a grove of trees. The Moors
pursued him and threatened to shoot him unless he returned
at once to the stifling hut. He returned. Health came back
with a break in the weather. The break brought a deputation
from Ali’s harem—a deputation of giggling women wishing to
inspect Mungo’s genital organ, to see whether or not Christians
were mere uncircumcised pagans. With a dour geniality the
priggish young Scot said that he would be pleased to give an
ample demonstration to one of the number (pointing to the
prettiest) if the others departed. The women laughed, and went
away laughing, sending him a gift of meal and milk. . . .
Women of Africa favoured Mungo.
He was taken on a round of the harems. The women
treated him to coffee, sniffs, and looks of amazement. Bored
with his company, the riders of Ludamar, returning from the
visit, used him for impotent target practice : they poised
the young intruder in the middle of an open space and whirled
about him, lance-brandishing. He endured it all with a stony
face. When would he be released ?
Two travellers, Moslem merchants, came to Benowm.
They had acquired tolerance in their wanderings. Lodged in
the same hut as Mungo, they watched him starve and imparted
information to him. Timbuctoo ? Mungo could never journey
there. The inhabitants were the most fanatical of all the
Southern Sahara, and would assuredly cut his throat. As for
the Niger, the Joliba, he would come on that in the lands of
Bambarra.
It seemed to Mungo in those sweating days that never
would he obtain his release to make that attempt. But the
warlike events in the south affected Ludamar. News came that
Mansong, king of (for Mungo) the still unknown state of
Bambarra, was about to invade Ali’s principality. That vener-
244 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
able scoundrel was stirred to considerable fright. He gave
order for the camp at Benowm to be struck and a move made
northwards, to another site, Bubaker. Arriving there through
the dust and smell of desert travelling, Mungo at last was
introduced into the presence of the woman responsible for his
captivity.
Queen Fatima proved fat, respectable, comfortable and
cretinaceous. She looked on Mungo with an affected disgust,
then relented slightly, and, as a compensation for the mal¬
treatment of the past two months, presented him with a bowl
of milk. Unbelievably, it seems he felt gratitude. But it waned
in the ensuing days. Bubaker was an even more disastrous
place than unbearable Benowm. It was now the middle of
the hot season. Water was very scarce. Night and day the
wells and the troughs surrounding them were besieged by
hordes of maddened cattle trampling each other in search of
the precious fluid. The Moors, by scrupulous rationing,
had enough to drink : their rationing scheme did not include
comforts for the Christian or his slave. Demba and Mungo
gasped with parched throats through long hours. Did Demba
attempt to approach the wells, he was beaten off. They
begged a little water now and then from the slaves of the
Moors.
Mungo entered into long periods of delirium, seeing in
dreams the placid waters of Yarrow, sweet and grey and
crystal-clear, and himself go scrambling down its banks from
the grey homely lour of the biggings of Fowlshiels—down and
down to drink there and lave there and forget the dream of the
Great River he sought. Sobbing, he would come from sleep in
the stifling dark, alone, a captive, in the hot dark only the
tormented breath of his slave-boy, Demba.
One midnight, the fever upon him, he resolved to try his
own fortune at the wells. They lay at a distance of about half a
mile from the city of black tents. He set out, staggering with
weariness. It was pitch dark, moonless, with a shimmer of
stars. Beyond the woods he stood in doubt, and then was
guided towards the wells by the lowing of the heat-maddened
thirsty cattle. Even at this hour the shepherds were toiling
there, filling the troughs in the light of great torches. By that
the approach of the Christian was descried. The Moors paused
in curiosity to hear his request, and then drove him away with
curses and abuse.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 245
But Mungo had sharpened his spirit to a steel-like point
on humiliation and insult. Beaten away from one well, he
would try another. So the thirsting hours wore on, with the
dawn near. At last he came to a well where an old man and two
boys drew the water. Hearing his request, the old man readily
acceded and drew him up a bucket of water. Mungo was about
to take it in his hands, when superstition suddenly overcame
the old Moor’s kindness. He recollected that this was a Christ¬
ian, and his touch polluting. Turning round, he poured the
water into a nearby trough, where three cows already drank,
and indicated to Mungo that he could share with these beasts.
So the son of Mungo Park of Fowlshiels, that cold prim
youth who had landed neatly clad and composed on the
Gambia beaches six months before, knelt down in rags and
filth among the kine, and drank and slobbered in their trough,
crying with delight and fever as he drank.
But now the worst of the hot season was waning. Winds
arose and whirled the desert sands icily about the encampment.
Clouds came flooding up from the south, dimming the flare
of the midday sky, and with them, presently, the flow, of
sheet-lightning unending upon the African horizon. The rainy
season was near at hand. To Mungo this presented a new
terror. The Moors were accustomed to retreat further out into
the desert to escape the rains of the jungle belt. Would they
take him with them ?
But a fortunate accident prevented this. The Desi, the
heroic king of Kaarta, having beaten the Bambarrans and his
own rebels, threatened Jarra, the frontier town on the
Ludamar-Kaarta line. In Jarra were several hundred refugee
and rebel Kaartans. They sent an embassy to the Emir Ali to
hire a couple of hundred of his horsemen as mercenaries with
which to assail the Desi, and Ali resolved to set out and treat
with them in person. If only he would take his Christian
captive as far as Jarra. . . .
Mungo begged the intercession of Queen Fatima. Surpris¬
ingly, intercede she did. Some of his clothes were returned to
him, together with his horse, saddle and bridle. Then he and
Demba were ordered to accompany Ali on his southwards
march.
It was the 26th of May when the cavalcade set out from
Bubaker. Mungo was worn to a mere shadow : but now a
monomaniac, the Niger and the thought of reaching it haunted
246 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
his days and nights, dispelling the knowledge of the little
vexations of the hour. Even the news brought to him the first
night they camped—that Ali had stolen Demba and had sent
him back to Bubaker—moved him only a little. He swore to
himself to obtain Hemba’s redemption when he had found the
Niger. Till then . . .
Jarra was entered on the 2nd of June, and Mungo made
his way to the house of the slave-merchant. Here he obtained
food and apparently some money. He sat down to plot an
escape from Ali.
Events aided him. The Desi of Kaarta was on the march
against Ludamar, his army unafar from Jarra. Ali promptly
mislaid his warlike intentions and retreated hastily up country
again. Apparently he had forgotten Mungo’s existence. Now
was the time to escape and prosecute his search to the south¬
east.
Johnson promised to accompany him.
§8
On the forenoon of the 27th the Jarran sentinels gave the
alarm : the enemy were descried from the walls. Wiltingly
Jarra evacuated. Mungo and Johnson rode out east through a
crowded confusion of flying negroes. The heat was intense and
great dust-clouds overhung the perspiring flight of the
fugitives. The Moors had long before ridden north.
For two days, east and south-east, that flight appears to
have pursued a breakneck speed along the borders of northern
Ludamar. Then the tempo slackened. The Desi would not
penetrate thus far. Mungo was in the best of spirits. Now it
seemed that he had definitely escaped the detested Ali. Resting
at a village, Queira, he took stock of his position, and gathered
information on the best routes into Bambarra.
But that afternoon—the 1st of July—he was apprised
that he was still unforgotten of Ali. A party of Moors rode
into Queira, questioning the inhabitants as to his whereabouts.
The inhabitants seem to have lied magnificently. Very well,
said the Moors, they would seek out the Christian to-morrow.
Yawning, they went to bed.
Mungo, in a sweat of fear, gathered together his scanty
wardrobe, waiting till stillness fell on Queira. That was
towards morning. In the grey chill of the false dawn Johnson
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 247
came and whispered that the Moors were asleep. He himself
refused to accompany Mungo, but rendered this last service.
So they parted, Mungo riding east. He never saw or heard of
Johnson again. . . ,
Beyond the watering-place of Queira he was recognized
by some shepherds. These set up a loud howl of distaste.
Mungo rode on with a beating heart. Presently he heard
behind him a loud cry to halt, and looked back. Three mounted
Moors were pursuing him. This was the end : he was the
captive of Ali’s men. .
Surprisingly, it proved quite otherwise. The three Moors
seized his bundle of clothes, inspected it, stole the cloak,
clapped spurs to their horses, and rode away. They were
merely engaged in a little private robbery. M!ungo beat his
jaded mount to some pace and rode away again.
East-south-east all that day he rode through a desolate
land of sand and cactus-clumps. Here and there he saw herds
of goats feeding, but dared not approach, lest he be appre¬
hended by the Moorish shepherds. By afternoon. he was
fainting for lack of water; he dismounted from his horse,
unsaddled the beast with a curious compassion, and clapped it
on the flank to encourage it to desert him. There was no need
for it to perish as well as himself. Then he fainted.
When he came to the cold night air had revived him ;
the horse stood patiently near at hand. Refreshed, he saddled
the beast again, but did not mount it. Instead, driving it
before him, he stumbled on through the night.
That night was to prove one of the most terrifying in the
journey. Alone, lost and unaided in the heart of Africa, suffer¬
ing agonies from thirst and hunger, chance guided his steps so
that he did not stray in the usual circle but held his route still
evenly. Yet in the pitch darkness he could see hardly a hand’s-
breadth in front of his face ; his horse was almost as weak as
himself. Thunder growled overhead and once he imagined he
heard the patter of coming rain. He raised his face, with open
mouth, to the skies. Instantly his mouth was filled with sand :
it was a sandstorm.
Latei. that night real rain came. He tore off his clothes and
spread them to soak and wrung off the water into his mouth.
Blessedly refreshed, he clad himself and tramped forward
again. _ , .
At midnight avoiding a village he found himself in thin
248 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
forested country again, descending some trail he could hardly
see. A slow dawn filtered down through the tree-tops: he
heard the croaking of frogs at a near-by pool and sought out
that pool and drank and climbed a tree to spy out the land.
Far in the south-east he saw a pillar of smoke.
About noon he came to it, a Foulah village where he
obtained some food and sleep. But presently, outside the walls
of his hut, he heard some of the villagers planning to tie him
up and send him to Ali. At that he made his way out of the
village, sleep weighing so heavily on his eyelids that he could
hardly see the forest track ahead of him. Riding a few miles,
he dismounted, lay down under a tree, and was instantly asleep
again. Roused from that by two Foulahs who imagined he had
overslept the afternoon prayer, he yawned at them hazily,
mounted the weary horse, and held on south-east again.
The Sahara fringe was left behind. It was country thinly
wooded, deep in lush grass. Presently a forest-track led Mungo’s
horse to a pool beside which he determined, foodless though he
was, to pass the night. Mosquitoes came in multitudes to
sting him ; hyenas snarled about his encampment; far off a
lion roared. But the young Scot, lost, forsaken, exhausted,
slept the sleep of the tired.
Riding next forenoon, desperately hungry, he achieved
the passage of some low, hilly country and came to a village
where Foulahs entertained him hospitably. He was now on the
borders of Bambarra. Dense woods sheltered those borders.
Towards twilight he mounted and rode towards them.
Narrowly escaping a roving band of blacks, he held on in
search of a pool beside which he might sleep. About midnight
he came on such a pool, and spent an uneasy night beside it,
continually disturbed by the wurring circling of a band of
wolves.
Dawn found him, weary and haggard, pressing down the
dense forest tracks towards Bambarra. Somewhere in those
early hours he passed from Ludamar into Bambarra at last.
Early forenoon brought him to a high-walled town, Wawra,
where the headman, once a Gambia slaver, had considerable
respect for the white men. He entertained Mungo hospitably,
expecting presents in return. Mungo blandly left him in the
expectation, eating and resting through a long and blessed
day of ease.
In Bambarra : and the Niger flows through Bambarra.
FOOTATORO quDUMAH . LUDAMAft
EXPLORATIONS OF MUNGO PARK
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
249
§9
The slaver dismissed him, shortly, from Wawra next
morning, and he rode to a village called Dingyee, where he
found a Foulah ancient willing to be hospitable in return for
a definite favour. This was a cropping of Mungo’s hair. With
the hair in his possession, the Foulah planned to pound it to a
paste, eat it, and thus acquire the wisdom of the white men.
They exchanged food and hair, mutually gleeful, and Mungo
pressed on to the next village, Wassiboo. Probably the Foulah
died in convulsions.
Beyond Wassiboo was a dense forest, trackless, impossible
to attempt without guides. Mungo halted for several days,
assisting the villagers in their tasks, easily treated and carrying
himself with a polite ease. By then he was beginning to recover
his outward equanimity after the horrors of Benowm and
Bubaker.
On the 12th of July a small caravan of Kaartans, bound
for the capital of Bambarra, offered to guide the white man
through the forest. It was a journey of several days’ duration.
In between patches of the great ocean of trees were tracts of
fertile land, surrounding small and hospitable villages. But
as they drew nearer to the Bambarran capital the land grew
less fertile, the inhabitants less welcoming. Also, Mungo’s
horse staggered wearily in the rear of the Kaartans’ caravan.
Bored, they finally gave him up and pressed on themselves.
Wet weather had come, a foretaste of the great seasonal
rains of interior Africa. Squelching through the mud, driving
his horse, on the forenoon of the 19th of July Mungo met his
first slave-caravan, coming from Sego, Bambarra’s capital, and
bound for Morocco, five months’ march across the Sahara.
He turned cold, sickened eyes from the appearance of the
shackled slaves, and went on his way, unmolested.
Sometimes, in this and that haggard little village, he
hungered, refused all sustenance but a drink of water. But
now he looked too poor to rob, and, that apart, was apparently
in the midst of a pagan people, who, outside the normal press
of living, had no particular desire to rob anyone. The white
man passed before their busied gaze, strange as a unicorn,
and they stopped and stared a little in surprise, giggled and
then let him go. Not in the whole course of his journey did
25O NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
he encounter savages: he never penetrated to the wild
cannibal kingdoms of Benin far down the Niger.
But now Bambarra was coming very close. The inhabitants
were becoming cultured, citified folk. They grinned at sight
of Mungo, ragged, shoeless, plodding behind his gaunt mount.
Wits offered to purchase the beast as a zoo curiosity. Mungo
declined meekly, pressing on south-east.
He arrived at a village towards the end of July in company
with two shamefaced negro travellers—shamefaced in that
they must travel with this white scarecrow. That night Mungo,
what of the news he heard, could hardly sleep. Morning found
him with his horse already saddled, impatiently awaiting the
opening of the village gates. Out of these he rode in company
with the negroes, shortly afterwards overtaking the Kaartans
who had deserted him earlier on the trail. Somewhat ashamed
of themselves, these refugees now promised to introduce him
to Mansong, the king of Bambarra, as soon as they arrived at
the capital, Sego.
The road led by the verge of a marsh, though beyond that
and all around the country was trim and well cultivated.
Presently one of the negroes beside the Scotsman pointed
ahead—see the water !
Mungo looked, gasped, took a long breath, the first of his
European kind to see the sight. There, “broad as the Thames
at Westminster”, and flowing to the east, was the Niger.
§ 10
It was one of the greatest feats in exploration he had
accomplished, but he was impatient to accomplish more.
Flowing to the east—then did the great river indeed lose
itself in the sands of the interior ? And where, along its banks,
stood the Golden City, Timbuctoo ? He resolved to seek an
audience with the King of Bambarra, obtain—somehow,
by some miraculous chance—supplies from him, purchase a
canoe, and set off down the Great River.
He descended to the water-front at Sego. Mansong was
reputed to live on the southern bank. Ferries plied continually
from one shore to the other, but Mungo was refused passage
for the excellent reason that he had no money to pay it—
money he found to be cowrie-shells. He sat down and waited
patiently, the Kaartans having disappeared.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 251
Presently a messenger arrived from Mansong. He had
heard of the coming of the white man with a superstitious
disquiet. Not under any circumstances must Mungo cross the
river without permission.
Weary and again dispirited, Mungo sought out a village
further up the bank. The day he spent in hunger and sun-
glare, without food or water. But at night an old peasant
woman took compassion on him, invited him into her hut,
fed him with fish, gave him a bed, and sang him to sleep
one of the great and nameless heroines of all time had she her
just due, for her feat was equivalent to that of an English or
American villager inviting a ragged and scrofulous negro to
share a single-roomed cabin. For three days Mungo waited
in her hut, sending messages to Mansong, imploring
help.
On the forenoon of the 22nd of July, a messenger arrived
from the king. Provided that Mungo would set about leaving
the neighbourhood of Bambarra, here was a present for him.
Mungo opened the bag which contained the present, and
found five thousand cowries.
It was a sum sufficient to take him well on his road back to
the coast. But he planned quite otherwise. Purchasing some
food, he set off eastwards along Niger-bank.
It was rich and well-cultivated land, the inhabitants busy
and indifferent to his passage, Bambarran negroes, pagan
and practical. But two days later he reached Sansanding, a
considerable riverine port, with Moors, mosques and mulish¬
ness. The Moors assembled to threaten Mungo, to demand
that he acknowledge the Prophet, and to watch him eat raw
eggs. He endured the threats with a still, dour face, declined
to either acknowledge or repudiate the Prophet, and let it be
known that the story that white men lived exclusively on
human flesh and raw eggs had been somewhat exaggerated.
Finally, the negro headman rescued him from his tormentors
and saw him on his way along Niger-bank.
Four days of constant though slow progress brought him
to the village of Modiboo. The countryside through which he
had passed was renowned lion-country : on one occasion he
and his horse, both too tired to attempt escape, passed within
a few feet of a couchant lion. The woods that fringed the Niger
from Sego onwards thinned out around Modiboo. The Niger
had broadened greatly, he saw, fed by the swamps and invisible
252 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
streams. Midway the river were islets where the herdsmen,
pastured their cattle without fear of raiding Hons.
But Modiboo itself was the beginning of the end of his
exploration. Waking the morning after his arrival there, he
found himself ill with fever : the swamp-mosquitoes had
stung him greatly. Modiboo’s headman, looking on him in
alarm, refused to give him shelter a further night. Reeling with
fever and weakness, Mungo and his horse both, they set out
for the nearest village, Kea.
En route, the horse collapsed. Mungo removed its bridle
and saddle, patted it, left a tussock of grass in front of it, and
went on through the dim forest tracks, fever-hazed, completely
alone.
Kea refused him shelter. He found a boat which took him
diagonally across the river to the utmost town, Silla, that he
was to see that year. Beyond Silla, into a dim haze of names
and lands flowed the Great River, past Timbuctoo the sought,
into the lands of the Houssa, into man-eating Maniana. . . .
So he heard, sitting in a leaking hut in Silla. But he himself,
he realized, was incapable of further journeying. Meagre
though he considered the information he could bear back to
the African Company, much though those unseen mysteries of
the Lower River beckoned him on, he must turn and make
the coast.
§ II
It was the 30th. of July. He had himself rowed across the
gained the northern bank, and set out on his return
tramp to the coast five hundred miles away, himself ragged,
shoeless, weak with fever, in his possession only a few thousand
cowries which would not act as currency beyond the boundaries
of Bambarra.
And now even within Bambarra he found enemies arising.
The Moorish shereefs who acted as Mansong’s counsellors in
Sego had prevailed on him to believe that the white man was a
spy. Hearing that he had turned about and was retracing his
footsteps, Mansong gave orders that he should be arrested.
Strangely, his subjects showed no particular eagerness to arrest
the polite and obsequious beggar. They avoided him, cursed
him from their doors, but let him pass.
He had recovered his horse, tended and revived by a
village headman; but the beast proved more a care than a
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 253
help. Continuously the rains streamed from a grey African sky.
His fever mounted and lessened and sometimes departed for a
day or so, only to return with greater virulence. Holding north
of Sego and avoiding Bambarran officialdom as much as
possible, he tried to work out an essayable route to the coast.
By way of Ludamar he could not venture ; the Kaartan
borders were still disturbed ; southwards, across the Niger,
was the kingdom of Kong, a land of mountains, impossible
because of language and other difficulties. He must attempt a
passage along Niger-bank as far as possible, then strike on
westwards through Manding and Fooladoo.
Begging at villages en route—here repulsed, here kindly
entertained—he pressed on through the rains. His fever
lessened. By mid-August he was deep in the land of the Niger
floods—great tracts of country seasonally swamped by the
burst banks of the Niger. At Koolikorro he earned a night’s
keep by writing charms for the headman on a board. This
the headman washed from the board into a calabash, and drank
down with many prayers. He probably needed them. Every¬
where Mungo now halted the natives warned him it was impos¬
sible to escape the Niger floods in this season. He must halt a
good three months ere they subsided.
But he could not halt. He was without food, clothing
other than the rags he wore, or money—for the Bambarran
cowries had long been spent. Still the rains held on. But for
a while, towards the third week in August, he found himself
dragging his weary horse through high and hilly country,
pleasant to the touch after the squelch and slither of the
flooded lowlands. Here, at Kooma, a lost Utopian valley of
refugee blacks, he was kindly entertained and. pressed on
westwards with a gladder heart.
His gladness was premature. That day he was halted by a
gang of robbers, stripped, robbed of everything he possessed
but his hat and a pair of trousers, and so left “completely
abandoned, naked and alone ; surrounded by savage animals
and men still more savage”.
§ 12
At that moment, so he tells in his Travels, he saw growing
near at hand a small flower. Could God, who reared this
flower for his own delight in the wilderness, abandon to perish
254 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
of hunger a creature made in His own image ? God could and
did. The bones of slave caravans were raddled in uncountable
tracks from the heart of Africa to the utmost seas. But to
Mungo the rhetorical question had only one reply : surely not!
Refreshed, he pushed on to the next village. There he met
with a kindly reception. The headman promised to attempt
the. capture of the robbers. Mungo thanked him and hasted
on into the west.
A week later, while he rested at a hunger-stricken village,
two messengers overtook him. They drove in front of them
the horse ; on its back was loaded some of the scanty belong¬
ings which had been stolen from him. Mungo gazed at the
horse forlornly. It was more an encumbrance than an aid, he
feared. His fear was justified. Next morning it fell down a
well and took the united efforts of the villagers to retrieve it.
Disgusted, he presented the beast to the village headman,
obtained a spear and sandals in exchange, and resumed his
journey to the coast.
The rains had resumed their seemingly endless pelt,
the country swam in front of his eyes, a surge of green vegetable
life, rain washed. He twisted his ankle and rested starving days
m the village of Nemacoo. Slightly recovered, he plodded on
again. But relief was near at hand. Crossing the slopes of a
mountain he came to a town, Kamalia, a centre of the slave
trade and also a centre of gold-mining. Here he fell in with
a slaver, Karfa T aura, who was preparing an expedition to the
coast. If Mungo chose to delay his departure till the next year,
and would pay to Karfa the price of a slave when they reached
the coast, Karfa in return would feed him and lodge him and
bear him with the Gambia-wards caravan.
§ 13
With a cold serenity the haggard young alien tendered his
thanks and acceptance.
Mungo never forgot that kindness of Karfa’s. In all his
subsequent dealings with the slavers, in all his subsequent
comments on slavery, that memory lingers, sometimes un¬
easily, at the back of his mind. He was weak and shelterless and
indeed had developed fever again. Karfa nursed him, fed him,
gave him a hut for his own use, and in general acted the Good
Samaritan.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 255
Meantime, and slowly through the dripping weather, the
caravan bound for the distant Gambia began to assemble.
Recovering from his fever Miungo went and inspected arrivals.
Sometimes he was hailed and recognized by pitiful slaves who
had been haughty freemen far to the north in those days when
he journeyed through Kasson and Kaarta.
Mid-December came. The rains ceased. A dry and parching
seasonal wind blew from the north-east. M^ungo gradually
recovered his strength, watching the flames of the grass-
burning light the night-time sky. Soon impatience succeeded
lethargy. Still the days dragged by. They faded into weeks.
Would the caravan never start for the coast ?
Yet this at length, on the 19th of April, 1797? t^ie caravan
did, a total of 73 human beings. Many of the slaves had been
in irons for years, awaiting this move. Africa gossiped 5 Africa
yawned j even on this march it insisted on halting every
few miles to fire muskets and make speeches. Politely im¬
patient, Mungo plodded in the rear.
Soon they came to the border of a great wilderness, the
wilderness of Jallonkadoo. Within it for a stretch of several
days there would be no villages for rest or shelter. Having
dawdled so far, Karfa’s caravan now decided on a forced
march. It plunged into the wilderness at breakneck speed.
Perspiring as he limped along in his fraying sandals, the
cold young Scot looked about him, seeing no wilderness, but
well-wooded land of hill and glen alive with game. It had
remained unsettled because of tribal wars. That night they
camped in a place where wild beasts prowled, making the night
hideous. Next day at noon a hive of wild bees attacked the
caravan and put it to flight over a wide area. One of the slaves,
a woman, proved recalcitrant and Mungo listened with sick¬
ened heart to the sound of the lash on her bee-stung flesh.
Still the wilderness continued, in spite of forced marching.
The woman again proving recalcitrant, or incapable of keeping
up with the march, was stripped and left to be devoured by
wild beasts. Pressing on through great thickets of bamboo the
caravan arrived at a village, Sooseeta, having crossed the
Jallonkadoo at its narrowest point, a distance of a hundred
miles.
Jallonka, the “kingdom” through which they were now
travelling, was the home and abiding place of great bands of
bandits. Avoiding these by stealth and stratagem, the caravan
256 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
crept on towards the coast. On the 30th of April they reached
the village of Tinkingtang. Ahead rose mountains, serrating all
the western sky.
Next day they crossed those mountains. Now they were
in lands not unremote from the coast, and Mungo began to
feel again a stir of cold joy in his heart. If he could only last
the pace of the march !
More mountains and craggy trails, the slaves groaning
under their burdens. But on the 12th of May they crossed the
Faleme river, south of a point where Mungo on his eastern
journey had crossed it long months before. They were now in
fertile, well-cultivated land, under better governance than
Jallonka, Negro-land, far south of the Arab and his afflictions.
A new wilderness, Tenda, a ragged stretch of forests and
bamboo-clumps, was crossed without casualties, if with feet-
aching weariness. Town after town, where white men had been
heard of and this poor, strayed specimen (he was generally
taken for a half-breed Moor, however) occasioned little sur¬
prise. Village on village while the west drew steadily nearer.
At last, on the 1st of June, 1797, Mungo Park lifted his face
and looked on the Gambia again. It was eighteen months since
he had last seen it.
§ H
They came to the capital of Woolli, Medina, on the
4th of June. Here it was that Mungo had been so hospitably
entertained by the ancient chief, Jatta, in the course of his
outward journey. Jatta, the explorer heard, was ill, but the
caravan pressed on before he could make inquiries. Probably
he had little urge—as always human beings meant little to
the young Scot. On the sixth Jindey was reached, on the
ninth Tendacunda, a village close to that Pisania from where
Mungo had commenced his journey.
Here he heard the news and gossip of the coast. Neither
Demba nor Johnson had returned. Everywhere it was presumed
that Mungo himself had perished in the interior. The natives
stared at him unbelievingly : this could not be the white
youth of eighteen months before. Nor, indeed, was it.
Next day one of the white traders at Pisania rode through
the woods to greet Mungo, and he himself mounted a horse
again and took his way to the coast, to white faces and food
and clothes and the blessedness of a razor again—astounding
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 257
Karfa, when shaved, with his appearance of a “mere boy”.
Laidley paid the sum Mungo had agreed with Karfa in distant
Kamalia, and Mungo waited anxiously for a ship to take
him home.
But it was no season of ships: no ships were expected for
several months. Fortune proved kind, however, an American
slaver, the Charlestown, appeared on the Gambia, and Mungo
shipped a passage via the West Indies.
The ship sailed on the 17th of June, slave-laden. It was
leaky and rotten. Soon the ship doctor was down with fever
and Mungo had to take over his work. They halted long weeks
at Goree, up the coast, under the broiling autumnal suns,
awaiting provisions and new shipments of slaves, Mungo
staring a sick distaste at the heat-hazed African shore.
Yet at length the Charlestown turned from it, putting
out across a sullen Atlantic. Steadily the ship leaked. Slaves
were brought up to man the pumps. Mungo toiled in a hell of
disease and filth and fever. In the neighbourhood of the West
Indies it became obvious that the ship would never make
America. They put into Antigua.
Here Mungo disembarked and found a ship to take him
to England. He reached it on the 22nd of December, after
an absence of two years and seven months of such journeying
as few had ever encompassed.
Shivering in the cold blow of the winter winds, he arrived
in London in a sleeting dawn and went to walk in the gardens
of the British Museum till the day should lighten and he could
search out acquaintances. So walking, he was met by his own
brother-in-law, Dickson—the same who had procured him his
commission to search for the Niger.
Dickson stared as though at a ghost.
The African Association was to stare in similar fashion.
All presumed him to have perished. Rumour of his travels and
discoveries spread abroad London, Mungo himself closeted
with the Association members and drawing up a hasty abstract
of his journeys. It was published and his full account awaited
with some eagerness. He went to Scotland to write it.
So he came back to the farmhouse where he had been
born, and found changes enough there, a strange place to one
whose eyes were still blinded with the sun-shimmer of the
Niger country. He could not forget that even a day, even while
he was falling in love with Ailie Anderson, the daughter of that
R
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
258
general practitioner to whom he had been apprenticed. He
would write his travels, marry Ailie, get him a new commission
to seek out the Niger’s source, find Timbuctoo, and live
happily ever after.
§ 15
So he planned, but his plans went agley in many ways.
His ’Travels were published, much read, much discussed,
much attacked—principally by the Abolitionists. Then, and
gradually, he was forgotten. The Government had more
pressing business on hand than equip for the Niger the kind
of expedition that the cold, haughty Scotsman demanded. He
turned from them, sick at heart, to seek out work as a doctor
in his native Scotland.
He had married his Ailie : they remained lovers and
friends all their short married life. They moved to Peebles,
where Mungo practised his profession, and was wearied to the
verge of insanity, riding the barren hills attending the ills of
the ploughmen and crofters. He had made friends with that
writer who was then Mr. Walter Scott, and with him at least
found a suitable companionship to discourse unendingly the
questions of the Niger : where did it rise, what was its outlet :
where stood Timbuctoo ?
Tormented by a dyspepsia—the result of many a horrific
African meal—bored and disgusted with an uncongenial
profession, he endured a long five years. Slowly the dream of
again seeking the Niger faded from his mind. Then events awoke
it. Presently it was no dream, but an intention and a pan.
The British Government had awakened to the advantages
that might accrue to British trade with a survey of the IWest
Coast interior. Mungo was summoned to London and
questioned as to whether he would captain such an expedition.
He replied that he would.
Innumerable delays followed. But gradually the expe¬
dition’s personnel was assembled : Mungo himself to com¬
mand, his brother-in-law, Alexander Anderson, to act as
lieutenant, and a Scots acquaintance, George Scott, to be
general assistant. They would sail for Goree, enlist there a
guard from the British garrison, strike across country to the
Niger at Sego, build a fleet of boats, and sail the Niger to its
outlet—either into the Atlantic itself or into the sands of the
interior.
nine against the unknown 259
On the 30th of January, 1805, again in quest of the Niger,
he and his companions sailed from Southampton.
§ 16
From the first this second and more ambitious expedition
met with halts and disasters. The ship took nearly a month and
a half to make the Cape Verde Islands from Portsmouth.
Here Mungo and his companions landed and purchased a
great number of asses to serve as pack-animals. Then they
sailed for Goree.
There soldiers to the number of thirty-five were enlisted,
enticed to the service by the offer of double pay and discharge
from the army at the end of the Expedition. Two sailors
came from the Squirrel frigate—future boat-builders for the
fleet which Mungo was to sail down the Niger. An artillery
officer, Martyn, also volunteered. Captain Mungo Park, tall
and cool and cold, had the expedition embarked for Kayee on
the Gambia.
But here another long delay took place while they
attempted to enlist native aid. Laidley was dead at Pisania ;
the free blacks, for some reason that Mungo could not fathom,
were chary this season venturing the interior. Nevertheless, he
succeeded in enlisting the services of a Mandingo “priest”,
Isaaco, to act as his guide, and on the 26th of April the expe¬
dition set out on its march, a long array of donkeys and soldiers
in stifling red coats—soldiers who jested blithely as they
tramped forward into the waiting east.
Mungo planned to reach the Niger by much the same route
as he had taken in returning from it ten years before. This he
believed he could do in six weeks or so. But now, with the
approach of the rainy season, the weather grew ever more
hot, the air more stifling as the soldiers plodded white-faced
down the forest-tracks. Theirs was not the stuff to make
explorers, poorly fed, of indifferent physique, like all of the
English working class of their day. Presently two men fell ill of
dysentery : Mungo came to a swift decision, a decision that was
to rule all his subsequent ruthlessness on the march. He had the
men abandoned at a village and pressed on.
They passed through Medina, while the weather still
retained its sultry stillness. On the 29th of May, reaching the
village of Badoo, Mungo halted to write his last letters before
260 nine against the unknown
he should reach the Niger. In those letters he told of the com¬
plete health of the expedition, their luck and happiness so far,
and his conviction that they would reach the Niger in less than
a month. . . . Some of the statements in the letters are
deliberate falsehoods, some—true or false—now read with a
pitiful flavour of old tragedy. It seems as though Mungo
turned his face against the obvious facts louring behind the
rain-clouds in the east.
For beyond Badoo they found the forests wilting under
the great tornadoes that heralded the seasonal rains. Long
before then the expedition should have passed through that
countryside, attaining the shelter of Bambarra. Instead, they
tramped down wind-blown forest-paths into early June, when
the hesitating rain finally came. It came in long swathes of
water athwart the dripping lines of men and animals.
Presently the paths were tracks of mud. Soldiers began to
fall out in the increase of fever and dysentery. Mungo had
them left at this village and that, and pressed on, aided by
Scott and his brother-in-law, Anderson. They came, turning
northwards to avoid the Jallonka wilderness, to the wild
mountains of Dindikoo, now shapes of quartz serrating all the
forward sky. Through and under the ledges of these they
tramped as June wore on. Each night they halted and lighted
fires, seeking to dry garments soaked with the rains of the day.
The soldiers would shiver in cold and other dreads as around
the villages and encampments with the coming of the dark
they heard the cough of prowling lions or the howling of wolf-
packs, hungry in the rains.
The rivers had swollen, sweeping away the native fords.
The hired porters stole what they would, and vanished. At one
river a crocodile almost ended the life of the guide, Isaaco ;
because he could not proceed with a guide lacking, Mungo
doctored the black with such patience as he had paid to
none of the dying soldiers. In early August they neared the
Bambarran borders.
Soldiers lay down and died in the forests; Mungo left them
to die, himself carrying out the work of a score, tireless, his
vision ever forward on the unseen Niger. But beyond the
Bambarran borders his brother-in-law, Alexander Anderson,
fell ill, and him Mungo found he could not abandon. Despite
the consequent delays to the expedition, he mounted Anderson
on his own horse and walked beside him, holding the fainting
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 201
man in the saddle. Once, so walking, they encountered three
lions. Mungo fired at them with a musket, and walked
towards the beasts standing astounded but unhurt. Ihey
growled their displeasure and took to the bush as the dour
Scot plodded past. He had no time to waste on lions.
The weather cleared as they came to a village, Koomi-
koomi. They believed that the worst of the ramy season was
over. Instead, it was scarcely begun. Recommencing, the rams
recommenced the decimation of the soldier-guard from
Goree. By the 19th of August scarcely more than halt a dozen
survived. But that day, as they climbed through mountains,
Mungo halted his stride and stared, and gave a long sigh, bar
off, flowing through the forests down to Sego, he saw the
Niger again.
§ I?
There followed interminable discussions and arguings with
the envoys of King Mansong, now from this village, now that,
on Niger-bank. For the expedition was not allowed to descend
to Sego itself. Mansong was willing to take presents and to
promise canoes, but laggard in fulfilling his promises. Finally,
early in September, he gave permission for Mungo and his
people to descend to Samee, there to await the canoes.
Mungo had his ailing brother-in-law put in a canoe (Scott
had died back in the last forests) and ordered the other survi¬
vors to march along the bank under the command of the
mutinous Lieutenant Martyn. He himself sat down beside
Alexander, and they were rowed down through rainy weather
to the shelter of a village at least a little nearer the end of his
journey. Soon the great canoes promised by Mansong would
follow them, and then  .
The river ran full and deep and strong, m flood, otiii tne
canoes did not come. Then Mungo obtained permission to hold
on to Sansanding (where, ten years before, he had been offered
raw eggs to eat), and there dispose of his trade goods. He set up
a shop and Sansanding flocked to purchase. Cheerful, Mungo
proved an admirable shopkeeper, every now and then running
out to look for the promised canoes, to glance into the hut
where Ailie’s brother lay. .
At length the promised canoes arrived—two rotten and
heat-frayed hulks. Mungo stared at them aghast. But there
would be no others forthcoming. He stared at his small store
262 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
of tools and then resolved on the impossible. He and the one
sane, unsick soldier who still survived, a man named Bolton,
must saw the two canoes in half and make of them one trust¬
worthy boat.
It was impossible. But it was done. They laboured through
sweating days at the river-front of Sansanding while the
waters slowly sank. As steadily, Alexander Anderson did the
same. On the morning of October the 28th he died while
Mungo stood beside his bed. For a moment that occurrence
wrung his heart. Then he turned to his canoe-building again.
At length all was ready. He had engaged a fresh guide,
Amadi Fatoumi, to go with them as far as the Houssa lands.
The canoe was loaded with the two surviving soldiers, Mungo,
Martyn, the guide, and a slave purchased for paddle-work.
They embarked on the Niger on the 19th of November, 1805,
and the current rapidly swung them east and south.
§ 18
Thereafter, day on day, it is a record of battle, murder,
and sudden death. Mungo had resolved to land at no point
unless he was pressed for lack of provisions. Gone was his desire
to walk the streets of templed Timbuctoo, the outlet of the
Niger now his single concern. Again and again, deep in the
country of the Moors, canoe-loads of bowmen and spearmen
attempted to stay their passage. Mungo appears to have made
no parley. He ordered his companions to fire into the brown of
the natives, and this they did, beating a way through. At
Dibbie this happened, at Kabara, the port of Timbuctoo.
Then the river swung southwards. They were now on a river
not only never before sailed by white men, but beyond the
utmost rumours of Europe.
Day on day the canoe swept down the Niger, through low
scrub land, through desert, through tracts where thin forests
sentinelled the shore. Sometimes they stopped and purchased
food. At the least sign of hostility the muskets were used,
always effectively. Finally, they found themselves in the
Houssa country. Here the guide Fatoumi must turn back.
Mungo landed him at the village of Yaour, neglecting to
send presents to the king of that country. The king, enraged,
resolved on an ambush. He despatched an expedition across a
“bend” in the land to lie in wait for the canoe of the white
men at the rapids of Boussa.
nine against the unknown
263
So the saga, the strangest and most terrible in many ways
in all the history of exploration, came to its end. The can
approached the rapids, sighted the waiting natives, and
presently the battle opened. But the aim of the white men wa
uncertain on that dancing tide above which the currents
foamed. Presently the canoe grounded At that Mungo an
Martyn consulted. Then each seized a soldier—the two
remaining soldiers could not swim—and jumped into the
water, striking out for th.e distant banks.
They were never seen again.
§ 19
News of Mungo Park’s death at the Boussa rapids took
several years to filter back to Europe. A son of his went in
search of him, and died ; another relief expedition came on the
guide Amadi Fatoumi and learned, doubtmgly, his version of
the tragedy. Even now it is doubtful what part treachery an
betrayal played towards the enactment of that last scene at
the Boussa rapids. , . . • r
Neither of the two heroic journeys settled the question of
the Niger’s outlet; but they pointed definitely enough
towards that solution which Richard Lander carried out m
1830 when he trekked from the Guinea coast to Boussa,
embarked there and sailed down the river to the spraying out¬
lets of the great Niger delta. Masked in that Delta it was that
the Niger for long centuries had attained the Atlantic, no
great and visible outrush of waters. , ,
S If his life and death contributed greatly towards the
solving of that supreme mystery of West-central Africa, his
chronicles carried to Europe from the gossip of Benowm
tidings no less startling, if disillusioning, regarding fabled
Timbuctoo. No city of magic and mystery, but a decaying,
dusty mart, mud-built, odoriferous, squalid. ... n in
such likeness indeed Major Laing found it in 1822 when he
iourneyed there from Tripoli. . , ,,
Cool, impassioned, cowardly courageous, imperturbable,
Mungo Park’s character in analysis after a hundred and forty
years” disintegrates into fragments seemmgiy irreeoncilable
enough. The Ire that integrated them was the Niger, Timb^c-
too, search of the mystery river to the mystery city ; and when
knowledge of both was in his grasp the fire burned through
from its dark shrine and destroyed him.
IX
RICHARD BURTON AND THE FORBIDDEN CITIES
WITH the exploits of Mungo Park and those explorers
who followed at his heels, Timbuctoo vanished from
the minds of men as either a Golden City or a geogra¬
phical refuge of wonder. The Fortunate Isles, long divorced
from the seas, betook themselves to those great tracts of Africa
still untouched and unexplored. The nineteenth century was
the great century of their quest in the African scene, Africa
the last of the great inhabited and unexploited continents.
In the beginning the great Central regions, apart from such
uncertain uplightings of their terras incognitas as that achieved
by Mungo Park, were still completely in darkness, the sources
of the Nile undiscovered, the great Lake District unknown
except through uncertain rumour. Abyssinia, despite the
Portuguese, was still a land of myth and rumour, the upper
reaches of the Congo a dark breeding place of tenebrous
tribes of cannibals, strange animals, and stranger legends.
Beyond the eastern sea-front lay somewhere the rumoured
Mountains of the Moon, lay—it was impossible to know what
lay there, except by actual search, and the nineteenth century
set itself to the task with a commendable vigour.
Out of the multitudes of names associated with Africa in
that century, the selection for this record of Richard Burton
as the explorer elect is inevitable, in spite of his overshadowed
reputation. Livingstone, who opened up such great areas of
Central Africa, followed by Stanley, who rescued him and
discovered even more, are both outside the count for reasons
of taste, character, and sentiment. The one was a missionary-
reformer-zealot led into exploration for the strangest variety
of reasons, but never for that essential that we glimpse as the
earth conqueror’s supreme compulsion. Stanley, of a darker
and baser persuasion, is outside the picture almost at once.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 265
With him commerce, commendation, and the acquirement of
decorations were the main urges. ...
Schweinfurth, the great German naturalist, is one who
competes in every particular except the last and the least
important; but an essential one. This was lack of success, his
mis-identification of the Welle, after those long years of
research and triumphant genius in delineation which marked
his explorations of the Upper Nile. In every other way he
might be Burton’s supplanter. Speke has claims, the unfortu¬
nate Speke, the true discoverer of the Nile’s sources, Burton’s
enemy and ungenerous friend. ... So has Keith Johnston.
But none of that multitude of hardy and strong and gifted
men who opened up the continent of Africa from the darkness
of black barbarism to the new and spreading darkness of White
exploitation and industrialism possessed that driving unease of
curiosity on the geographically unknown to such force and urge
as Burton, questing the ancient Fortunate Isles with a wry
sneer of disdain, pursuing them out of Africa and abroad four
continents, and escaping the sound of them at last in denial of
their existence.
§ 2
Richard Francis Burton was born at “9.30 p.m. on the
19th of March, 1821, at Barham House, Herts, and I suppose I
was baptized in due course at the village church”.
Many of his contemporaries would have suggested that
the baptismal font must have been left unsanctified. He himself
was to leave, through various biographers, accounts of his
childhood and its exploits which would set him in the picture
of youthful gambollings with the more objectionable carni¬
vores. All his life there was something of both the hyena and
the jackal about him : beasts assiduously cultivated.
His childhood he occupied in the more egregious and
unpraiseworthy of practical jokes, in forming gangs of youths
of a like temper, in teasing governesses, climbing tall rocks,
and playing the devil generally in the company of his brother
Edward. His father, Lieutenant-Colonel Burton, a retired
Anglo-Indian, pious, pettish, and weakly pugnacious, suffered
hideously from asthma. Asthma haunted his life and the
Burton household. Abruptly its twinges would descend on the
Anglo-Indian ; thereat he would root up his life of the moment
266 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
and fly abroad—or from abroad back to England—seeking
sanctuary from his ailments. A uxorious soul he insisted that
each of these pilgrimages in search of his Giver of Life should
also be a complete exodus. The Burtons were led captive about
the Continent and educated with a haphazard efficiency.
Small, dark, black-eyed, insolent of bearing, young Richard
was learning Greek at the age of three, Latin at the age of
four, some twist of the play of chance in his brain had made it
unusually receptive and attentive to the twist and play of
meanings in alien vocables, he was all his life to be a great
language-learner and language-user. They were means to
curiosity, ways of escape from that sense of frustration that
haunted very early the real Richard Burton behind the smooth
fa5ade of ruffian chin and godlike brow. For one so ready in
the garnering of knowledge one might almost see the quest of
the Fortunate Isles—in whatever disguise—as pre-ordained.
And in his lifetime there was still left to European curiosity
sufficient of an unexplored earth to set that quest on its
ancient geographical tracks—for him, for a time.
Barham, Richmond, Tours, Richmond, Blois, Sorrento,
Pau—marched the tale of his places of residence as a boy,
language-learning, learning fencing with great joy and skill,
a brutal, quick and destructive boy as he would have later ages
believe. The belief is difficult. There was throughout his life
an astounding harsh tenderness with the wronged, the dis¬
tressful, that gives the lie to the clownings of the young
hobbledehoy. His personality was then even less integrated
than later, he had early encountered opposition and misappre¬
hension, and then as later he acceded with a dark glee to the
imputation of scoundrelism, worked on it and played on it,
and almost achieved the imaginary likeness he had acquired in
the eyes of spectator adults.
From Pisa he went, a boy, climbing Vesuvius. The fumes
twisting slow wreathings of smoke far below his feet intrigued
him considerably. He had himself lowered by a rope to investi¬
gate and was almost suffocated. The family moved on to Pau ;
here he fell in love. It was probably calf-love, shy adoration,
that commingling of boyish idiocy and heartbreaking tender¬
ness that is first love. . . . But the contemporaries of that
adult who had been the boy at Pau found such an explanation
incredible. Burton dead, they made him entice, desire, and
fully, completely and satisfyingly seduce that dim early figure
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 267
at Pan of whom he would talk. Burton would have approved
his biographers and added masochistic details.
This wandering half-education about, the countries of
Europe in company with his sister and his brother Edward
finally came to an end in 1840. Not yet twenty years of age, he
was sent to Oxford, to Trinity College, in company with
brother Edward. Both were intended for the Church by the
asthmatic colonel; both were shocked at the idea. Trinity
bored, infuriated, and amused Burton. He purchased a fowling-
piece and would lean from the windows of his room and shoot
rooks above the donnish garden-parties. Astounded learned
gentlemen would raise their heads from gossip as blood-dripping
bird-carcases fell amidst them. . . . Burton took to rowing,
to more fencing, to anything but lectures, dry stuff out of
books delivered by old men who also appeared to have emerged,
incompletely, from books or dusty wine-bins. ... He set
about learning Arabic.
He rambled and explored the Oxford countryside, fell in
with a tribe of Gipsies—the Burtons—who claimed family
relationship, for he had their name and their dark look and
restlessness, and that outward ruthlessness that companions
the average muddled, kindly Gipsy. He was as Anglo-Saxon as
he well might have been. But in that later, self- and sedu¬
lously-acquired scoundrelism that was his, he boasted the
Gipsy strain he did not possess. It was a tribute to the one god
of the Victorian hierarchy—the Christian Devil—for whom he
had the compassion roused in him by most beings bullied and
misunderstood of the bourgeoisie.
Long Vacation came and he went down, and saw the
Colonel, and begged to be taken away from Oxford. He wanted
to be a soldier, even though there was no hope of the Guards
with its expensive commission. A line regiment would do . . .
But the retired Anglo-Indian was obdurate. Richard was to
study for the Church. Was not his father’s miserable existence
a sufficient warning of the life and fate of a soldier ?.
Burton went back to Oxford, brooded on the subject, went
to forbidden races very carefully and ostentatiously, and was
duly rusticated as he had planned. Packing cheerfully his books
on Arabic, he went home. Father Burton, with no other
option, set about the purchase of a commission for him in the
East India Company’s private army, which still governed
India.
268 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
The commission was obtained; and now he could set out
to the search for that life of wonder that lay beyond the
borders of England, this country he detested, known and
clipped, with its pale pudding faces and pale pudding
morals. He acquired the sketchy military outfit of the time,
embarked, endured boring days of heat and stench and
monotony on the journey round the Cape, and landed in
India on the 28th of October, 1842.
§3
There followed ten years of preparation in the making of
that essential Burton that found him admittance to the com¬
pany of the great earth wanderers, the great explorers in the
restricted sense that this record knows them. He learned
Hindustani; he learned Gajurati, he learned Persian, he
learned (on a holiday at Goa) Portuguese. He learned, unceas¬
ingly and avidly, languages, manners, customs, the ways that
strange peoples looked on the world and fate and time, the
manner and being of their gods and morals, the twists of hope
and fear that spun their little mists in alien brain-tracks.
He was not popular among his fellow-officers. He came
back to England in 1853 with a nickname that stuck to him
throughout the rest of his life—that of Ruffian Dick. Ruffian
Dick had been overbearing, brutal, unmannerly, uninterested
greatly in wine and dicing and the vacuous gossip of the mess;
instead, much to be found wandering odoriferous native
bazaars, more often than not himself in the garb of a native,
unclean and unashamed. He had even been admitted to a
native order of mystics as a Master-Sufi ; he was an atheist;
and, very properly, he had been forbidden active service.
He returned to England for a long furlough, a some¬
what disappointed youth, though still unembittered. Had they
allowed him, he might have done so much! Instead—well,
there was instead that second urge and obsession that haunted
all his life—to write, prolifically, endlessly, staggeringly, on all
he had seen, felt, believed, and conceived should be altered.
He set about writing a book on falconry, he wrote one on the
valley of the Indus, he wrote one on Portuguese Goa. And he
wrote a Manual of Bayonet Exercise. They read extraordi¬
narily affected and ineffective to later times, he suffered from
the ddcor and decorativeness of his era in those early books.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 269
But they have a freshness—even the bayonet exercises—much
to our taste, if little to that of his contemporaries.
Still recuperating, he went holidaying in Boulogne, and
there encountered that remarkable woman, Isabel Arundel,
who was so greatly to influence his subsequent life. The
encounter was as sentimentally romantic as only the Victorian
age might devise : Casting his eyes upon the girl and her com¬
panion met on a chance walk, Burton wrote in the sand, “When
can I see you again ?” Isabel fell in love with him from that
moment. But he was penniless, disreputable, and an altogether
impossible suitor from the viewpoint of the Arundels, this
Ruffian Dick with the Gipsy face and the scoundrelly eyes and
the scornful look that masked his impatience and his shy
awareness of an unenviable reputation. Besides, what had he
ever done—apart from ever made ?
He set about preparing an answer to that sneer. The plan
had been in his mind since those days at Oxford when he vexed
the dons on the question of learning Arabic. South Arabia was
still—though not entirely—unexplored country from the
viewpoint of the European. Mecca and Medinah existed,
they had been visited by such great pioneers as G. A. Wallin
and Burkhardt, but the lie of the country around, the real
nature of the ceremonies at the Kabba, that focus and shrine
of Al-Islam, were still uncertain. If not the Fortunate Isle for
which to search, Mecca was at least the Forbidden City. He
resolved to make the attempt of a pilgrimage disguised as a
Moslem—a Persian Moslem.
He applied for and obtained a further year’s furlough, had
his skin stained with walnut juice, obtained the services of a
halfwitted but devoted Mohammedan servant, and sailed from
Southampton early in April of 1853, duly registered on the
books of the P. & O. vessel as one, Mirza Abdullah of Bushiri,
on pilgrimage to Mecca and the Holy Cities of Arabia.
§4
The ship landed him and his scanty chattels at Alexandria.
He went to Cairo by river-boat, in a crowded tangle of other
pilgrims, performing the ceremonial genuflections night and
morning, discoursing briefly and piously with such as spoke
to him—but discoursing not too loquaciously, perfecting his
Arabic accent and his knowledge of the minutiae of Moslem
27O NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
affairs. He readied Cairo with his disguise unpenetrated and
there went into retreat with a Mohammedan friend, a retreat
in which he trained as rigorously in the knowledge of Moham¬
medan ceremonial as he had done in the grammatical mazes of
the Arabic language. His dark and heavy face looked well with
its walnut stain, he had little of the European to vex his dis¬
guise and when at last he sailed on a pilgrim boat from Suez
he did so with complete confidence in both himself and the
venture.
Nor was the confidence misplaced. The boat disgorged the
pilgrims, seasick, odoriferous, pious and pilfering, at Yambu ; a
caravan was formed ; Burton mounted on a camel; and they
trekked into Arabia, into days of thirst and sunglare, over
tracks not entirely untrod by the European. Burton was a
success as a pilgrim, they called him the Father of Moustaches,
and brought him their worst sores and boils to lance and cure.
Beyond El Hamra the caravan was attacked by Bedouins.
After a sharp engagement they were beaten off. Burton,
mentally indefatigably note-taking, behaved with a sardonic
composure during that comic warfare. But the ways were
boring and seemed almost unending.
June had gone : Arabia burned in the heats of July, the
long fall and flow of sand-nullahs unending upon the sky¬
line. But at last, on the 24th, Medina was sighted by the
dusty caravan with loud cries of praise from parched throats.
It was a parched and unpleasing village. Burton found a
shelter and increased his ostensible piety to wearying pro¬
portions. The caravan had dispersed, awaiting the arrival of
fresh pilgrims.
By the end of August a great concourse was ready for its
march on the Holy City. They marched on the 1st of Sep¬
tember, an uneventful journey of ten days inland towards the
holiest spot in Arabia, whence the Prophet had issued those
admixtures of stern admonition and hysteric invective that
founded a religion. And there at last, shining white and dirty
in the sunlight, rode Mecca itself. Burton’s heart rose high at
the sight.
The caravan entered the town of pious robbers and put up
at the caravanserais. Here, more than ever before, Burton had
to exercise skill and patience in his character of pilgrim, to
sleep with scores of the unwashed and diseased and untended,
to keep company with his skin-vermin with a pleased benignity,
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 271
to live the Arab as completely as it was possible for any
alien to do. And he seems to have done it very completely.
Long afterwards, when he was dead, the story was spread
abroad that his companions—indeed, all Mecca of that pil¬
grimage year—were aware of his identity, but allowed him
to pass on the understanding that he was a sincere English
Mohammedan. If this were the case he was left singularly to
himself, unstared at and undisturbed : had he been known as
an English Mohammedan he would certainly have drawn in
Mecca as great crowds of sightseers as a unicorn in Canterbury.
There followed days of pilgrimage to this and that site
throughout the Holy City, culminating in the visit to the
Kaaba, that centre of Islam, older than Islam itself, with the
sacred black stone much be-kissed and be-slobbered by the
crowding pilgrims. Burton, when it came his turn, knelt and
kissed with an equal piety but a sharp eye. He noted the tex¬
ture and appearance of the stone, decided that it was an aero¬
lite, stored the fact away in his mind for future use, and
passed on with praying lips and hooded eyes. . . .
But he was haunted now that he had seen the final thing
with a knowledge of the strain upon him, that some night,
some hour, his veil would slip aside, he would betray by alien
gesture or motion that un-Islamic soul of his. The succeeding
days were a.torment of straining nerves while he awaited the
slow gathering-together of a caravan seeking the homeward
road from Mecca. Slowly the Jeddah pilgrims gathered.
Burton looked back and saw Mecca shine “like a pearl” in
the after-horizon.
He reached Jeddah and the blessed peace and ease of the
British consulate there a man subtly transformed : the trans¬
formation was to mask his life. Some of the kindliness had gone :
and there was in him thereafter, reflex of those terrible days of
which he was to write with a cool skill and contempt, a deep
and enduring hatred for the savage, the Bedouin, the Moslems
of the blood-feuds and fleas among whom he had passed those
months of deliriously straining temper. If that was the alterna¬
tive to civilization, then, after all, he was civilization’s child.
... ..Memories of little indignities suffered on the Mecca
pilgrimage haunted that sensitive mind till its possessor began
to bear truly enough in outward act and demeanour a fit like¬
ness to the Ruffian Dick of contemporary reputation.
Meantime—one Forbidden City the less !
272
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
§5
He went back to service in India ; he wrote a book on his
Mecca pilgrimage ; he wrote letters to his Isabel; and he be¬
came very bored before more than a few months were passed.
He had a hatred of civilization and discipline which were some¬
times frantic. His exploit in penetrating Arabia had gained
him some notoriety ; it even forced its way into recognition in
the slow brains of the British overlords of India. For some time
—over a score and a half of years, indeed—the Indian Govern¬
ment had toyed with the idea of the exploration of Eastern
Africa, particularly Somaliland. The African and Indian con¬
nections existed from the days of Pliny when Somaliland itself
was conceived to join on to India and the Pacific to be no more
than an Indian lake. Curiously, this tradition of continuity of
interest and association had grown up with the Honourable
East India Company. But it was averse to risks and responsi¬
bilities : it wished to know the population of those regions,
their habits and appearances, it wished to know the exact
locale of the mysterious forbidden city of Harar, far inland ; it
wished to ascertain the possibilities of establishing suzerainty
in the south-Abyssinian borders.
Various adventurers—Cruttenden the most notable—had
landed and investigated and suffered from fevers and native
hostility, and received little or no support from the cautious
and unimaginative souls who ruled the Indian destinies. . . .
Now the latter wakened to receipt of a fresh communication
from a fresh restless fool, this Burton whose fellow-officers had
nicknamed Ruffian Dick, this swashbuckling outsider who
had penetrated, somewhat indecently, to Mecca on pil¬
grimage.
Burton’s proposal was that he be landed on the East
African shore, with suitable provisions and money, and in
company with two others. Thence he would march across
country, visit mysterious Harar, pass on to Gananah, and so
reach Zanzibar. Lieutenants Herne and Stocks had volunteered
to accompany him.
The Bombay Council recommended the expedition in a
letter to the Court of Directors of the East India Company :
Burton, impatient of a reply, sailed to his base, Aden, in
company with Herne, Stroyan and Speke, all Indian Army
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 273
officers seconded for service with him in this attempt to
penetrate East Africa.
Aden greeted them with jeers. Penetrate the country of
the fierce and insolent Somalis, achieve, what no other had
ever done, Harar, the Last Golden City, with its own language,
its own coinage, its own army ? . . . Ruffian Dick swaggered
through Aden, greatly cheered. Harar sounded more fasci¬
nating than ever.
As a Haji, one who had made the pilgrimage to Mecca,
Burton considered that he could travel in the disguise of an
Arab merchant and reach the notorious city with comparative
ease. He would take none of his companions from India :
instead, he now proceeded to scatter them up and down the
East African coast at various points of vantage where, return¬
ing from Harar, he might debouch. They were instructed to
conciliate the natives, study the local flora and fauna, and keep
a sharp eye upon the west.
On the 29th of October, 18545 Ruffian Dick sailed from
Aden, his henchmen two Arabs from the Aden Police and a
half-witted renegade Moslem mullah. Guled and “El
Hammal , the two policemen, were to prove fervid partisans
of Burton’s; Abdy Abokr, the ex-mullah, was an ingenious
scoundrel nicknamed the End of Time, he had so much the
appearance which one of the Moslem priesthood would surely
bear in that cosmic day of corruption that was foretold ere
the end of the world. Burton himself was clad as a merchant:
outside Aden, civilization being left behind, his companions
and the crew of the boat proceeded to divest themselves of all
the garments they had, and to indulge in a feast and the
singing of improper songs. Burton joined in these refresh¬
ments, young still, dark, scoundrelly-looking, soft-hearted,
muddle-headed, exhilarated at this his second venture out on
the road to the Fortunate Land, to a second Forbidden City,
Harar, there somewhere in the dim west behind the louring
African shores, the home and fount of the slave trade, black
and concealed and unfriendly, the Dragon awaiting the
coming of its St. George.
§6
Zayla Creek was entered on the 31st of October; the
governor of Zayla, a placid, benignant, and murderous indi¬
vidual who took an instant liking to Burton, was a pensioner of
s
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
274
the Aden Government; he provided every facility for the
march into the interior. Unfortunately, this provision was
very small. His power extended but a short direction up into
the bush. Burton spent an impatient three weeks gathering
together his caravan and perfecting himself in the rumours
and legends of the surrounding countryside. Particularly he
studied all that could be read, seen, overheard or smelt about
the Somali, that remarkable race among which he now found
himself, the compeers, opponents and old-time friends of the
vaguely Christianized Abyssinians of the North.
He considered them a vain and somewhat cowardly people,
their civilization an odd hotch-potch of the unsavoury ele¬
ments of most of the ancient and modern cultures; and recent
research has done nothing to disprove that mid-Victorian
estimate. But Burton, though he looked on those scrofulous,
quarrelsome, under-fed souls with no great favour, was unique
enough in the travellers of that era in his complete lack of
disgust or contempt. He accepted them as human beings,
rated them and their achievements, and passed on : he had
none of the white man’s belief in innate superiority, he had
little care to either reform or suppress. He was, in fact, the
typical earth conqueror unfolding in embryo.
Two routes connected Zayla with Harar : the direct one,
taking between five and ten days; and a winding one, south¬
wards along the coast and then branching tentatively in
through the hills, west. The first route was closed by tribal
feuds. The second Burton prepared for and on the 27th of
September departed from Zayla with a small caravan, five
camels and various mules, foot-followers and guards to some
number, and the blessings of that polite scoundrel, the Hajj
of Zayla.
It was a day of blistering heat. They travelled over a hard,
stoneless, alluvial plain, across boggy creeks and along warty
flats of black mould for hour on hour as the day-heat rose and
intensified. The caravan would have liked to rest. The genial
merchant-ruffian pressed them on. Night came at last, and
camp was made, dates eaten, and Burton betook himself to his
blanket, reflections on his Isabel, and a rapid and undisturbed
slumber.
Next day they came in more populous parts, and halted
for a day at an encampment of Bedouins who flocked to stare
at Burton, to finger his raiment, to plan his end : imperturb-
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
275
ably he pointed to a flight of vultures and lifting his gun killed
one. Cries of amazement arose. The Somali were still in the
spear-throwing, bow-and-arrow stage. It was evident that the
merchant—no one believed him a merchant—was a notable
and uncanny being. Burton was left in an awed peace for his
sketching and note-taking.
On the 30th of November, still following the line of the
sea-shore, they came on a tribe in trek, thousands of sheep and
cows and camels driven forward by a couple of hundred spear¬
men, women and the sick loaded on to camels, dysentery very
prevalent, dust rising like a thick and blinding fog, and all the
landscape pervaded with a dreadful stench. Burton rode wide
of them, coming to the village of Kuranyali. More egress of
astounded natives, more begging, stealing, muttering of vague
threats. Dark and scowling and imperturbable outwardly,
inwardly still exhilarated at the feel and being of those days
and journeyings, Burton took to his notes.
On the 2nd of December they left the sea and at last
commenced the direct—more or less—trek upon Harar. Very
soon it was evident that it was less than more. The way
straggled and halted and debouched and paused and yawned.
The Somali porters, feeble folk, sweated and panted under
their loads ; even the mounted Somalis could hardly bear the
weight of their spears “and preferred sitting upon them to
spare their shoulders” ! Halting at night, it became intensely
cold, and Burton’s Aden companions shivered and complained
very bitterly. They were passing up through country where it
was considered dangerous to light a fire, what of prowlino-
raiders. Burton disdained the tabu: they crouched and
thawed themselves and slept, amidst the teeth-chattering of
the guides, the sleep of the reckless.
Lions infested this new country into which they pushed 
these and a miserable, warlike population which gazed with
longing upon most of the accoutrements, arms and possessions
of Ruffian Dick. These were the Eesa, degenerate Somali, or
perhaps members of an autochthonous race. Republicans, they
owed a nebulous loyalty to an equally nebulous potentate—one
Prince Roblay the Rain-Maker. Drought of all things was
feared in those parched hills.
The hills grew ever the more striking, day on day, piling up
great granitic masses on the forward horizon. Rain and mists
were encountered here. Halting in a lion-haunted village on
276 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
the evening of the 6th of December, Burton cast eyes on the
one prepossessing individual he had encountered in the course
of the expedition—a charming girl. Undiplomatically, his
poet’s heart moved at the sight, he presented her with a few
necklaces and toys in gratitude for her good looks. Her hus¬
band stood by: it was a tense moment. But the husband
merely nodded a drowsy approval. That night the din of the
lions round Burton’s hut was exceedingly vexatious: he could
find little sleep because of the continual commotion.
Now and again, in the hill-tracks, they passed great cairns
erected against the sky—the tombs, these, of the men of old
time, saints in Moslem or local theology, or perhaps ^ ante¬
dating Mohammed. Sometimes entire and deserted villages
littered the hillsides. Continually as evening fell a cold and
piercing wind arose. Food and fodder were both scarce:
presently the camels grew so weak they could hardly walk, and
Burton’s mule displayed a spine like a ridged hump borrowed
from the neighbouring hills.
They were now at an altitude of 3350 feet. Halting be¬
neath a sycamore of such great age that there were carved on
its trunk words in the script of a pre-Arab race, Burton found
buttercups growing in a khollow and heard a woodpecker
tapping. These homely sounds moved him a little, but only for
a moment. Harar was still far.
He had been attacked by dysentery, but rode on uncom¬
plaining. On the 23rd of December, after various negotiations
with minor chiefs who attempted to bar the way, to raise
tribute from the caravan, to marry Burton off to their relatives
and otherwise impede his progress, he rode his caravan forward
across the fertile prairie of Marar and placed himself under the
protection of the Gerad Adan, a powerful, unscrupulous and
warlike chief who dominated the forward road to the forbidden
city.
Harar itself, and at last, was undistant.
§7
Fresh difficulties arose here. The Gerad Adan was on bad
terms with the Amir of Harar : no “Arab” friend of his would
be allowed inside the Forbidden City. Neither, of course,
would any infidel hitherto. But times, as Burton guessed
burton’s journey to harar
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 277
shrewdly enough, were changing. The ruler of Harar might be
as glad as other princelings to receive the friendship and the
frequent subsidies of the Government at Aden. Accordingly,
he sat down and wrote a letter ostensibly from the Political
Agent at Aden, addressed to the Amir of Harar, and intro¬
ducing himself as the accredited representative of the British
Government ! With this precious and audacious forgery in his
possession, he mounted his caravan next morning and took the
road to Harar. His. friends at the Gerad Adan’s village
assembled and bade him the farewell given to the dying.
Surmounting a hill-top shortly afterwards, they saw “thirty
miles away, and separated by a series of blue valleys, lay a dark
speck upon a tawny sheet of stubble—Harar”.
It took two days to reach it, days of camping and debating
with hesitant border guards, suspicious fellow-travellers and
the like. But at length the walls of the famed Forbidden City
rose in view long and low, a dirty white, unimpressive they
seemed to Burton s disappointed eye. At the main gate he sent
a message to the Amir stating that he had come on a mission
from Aden ; and sat and waited the reply, wondering if it
would be in the shape of a knife in his neck.
Instead, he was presently led in in company with his
companions. If Harar had looked disappointing from the out¬
side, it looked worse from within. There were tortuous, narrow
and stench-laden streets; there were straying pariah dogs;
there were lacklustre children in great abundance. But of the
gilded colleges of learning, the towers and temples, not a
glimpse. Somali legend and Somali lies had decorated a miser¬
able townlet in East Africa with the odours of a sanctity it
never possessed, the luxury of a wealth it had never visioned !
A bored and chastened man, Ruffian Dick allowed himself
to be led within the courtyard of the “palace”—it had acute
resemblances to a great cluster of cowsheds—doffed his shoes,
and came into the presence of the dreaded ruler of Harar!
This was almost coping stone to the shocks of the day. The
Amir was a small, scrofulous individual with yellow, claw¬
like hands, an appearance in general of a small Indian Rajah
inadequately nourished and looking upon life with a myopic
disfavour. He permitted Burton to kiss his not over-clean
hand, listened to the ingenious lies which Burton had to tell of
his reasons for visiting Harar, and then graciously gave him
permission to retire.
278 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
I was under the roof of a bigoted prince whose least word was
death ; amongst a people who destest foreigners; the only European
that had ever passed over their inhospitable threshold ; and the fated
instrument of their future downfall.
§8
He spent ten days in Harar, computing its position as
90 20' N, 42017' E, wandering its decaying streets and studying
its decaying population. Once it had been the capital of the
great Moslem Empire of Hadiyah which through long centuries
had waged unceasing war against Christian Abyssinia. But it
had fallen from its ancient glories to a dun dullness, a popu¬
lation of a few thousands, an all-pervading stench of decay and
no-life ; it had still its own tongue, neither Arabic nor Amharic,
incomprehensible to the stranger without its walls ; it had three
Moslem teachers of a crude and introverted theology. . . .
And there was little or nothing else of interest in the place !
Burton created interests during his short stay. He collected
—secretly, for he was closely watched and dare not write—
materials for compiling a skeleton Harari grammar and vocabu¬
lary ; inspected, surreptitiously, the Harari army—fifty ragged
and depressed-looking souls armed with matchlocks ; and
assessed the unimportant ivory trade. But slaves, captured in
the surrounding regions, were the principal export, though
Burton saw little of them. A tall, dark-browed figure, he strode
to and fro the streets, dined with the mullahs, listened with a
contemptuous disregard of royalty to the complaining suspi¬
cions of the Amir, and resolved to depart from Harar seeking
the coast by way of Berberah.
So this second venture passed, as did the first in which he
had sought Mecca. On the 13th of January in the new year he
looked from the mountain-top to see the last of Harar, nestling
deceptive, mysterious again in distance, in the heat-hazed
African valleys ; and turned to the dust and din and the
unceasing dangers of the coastward ride. On the 30th of
January Berberah was sighted. Burton rode into it, and halted
to rest after the excitements and peril of the passage from
Harar. But rest was foreign to his nature. Hearing of numerous
ruins in the neighbourhood, he rode out and spent several days
in inspecting them, brooding upon their genesis and fate.
Finally, however, he resolved to depart for Aden by sea.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 279
Even yet he might not hold there by any straight route.
There were islands on the way with further ruins, great wells
long disused and guarded by a surly populace. Burton had the
boat moored, leapt ashore, pacified the inhabitants, inspected
the wells, and then allowed the boat to resume its slow passage
up the coast.
So, with halting and delays and quarrels innumerable
with the boatmen, they passed up the African coast, once
encountering a terrible storm which Ruffian Dick alone
enjoyed, until on the morning of Friday, the 9th of February,
1855,
we hove in sight of Jebel Shamsan, the loftiest peak of the Aden crater.
And ere evening fell, I had the pleasure of seeing the faces of friends
and comrades once more.
§9
He had accomplished much : indeed, as earth-conqueror,
he had accomplished the most significant journey of his life.
But that was inapparent to him. He thought of the conquest
of Harar as a mere prelude to a still greater drive into the heart
of unknown Africa. In Aden he set about raising and equipping
a large expedition to penetrate directly inwards from Ber-
berah. On the 7th of April the astounded inhabitants of
Berberah looked out to see disembark on their shores the tall
Infidel, come again, this time with a bodyguard of forty-two,
impertinent intentions, and a disposition to resist both imposts
and queries.
Berberah endured it for a little. But the local Fair was on,
the town was filling up with wild Somalis who had as little
respect for the white man as they had a keen desire to sample
his goods. Burton had camped his host at a little distance from
the town while he collected guides and information about the
forward route. Between two and three o’clock on the morning
of the nineteenth he was awakened by the sound of pistol-shots,
and rushing out from his tent found a Bedouin raid in progress.
Over three hundred and fifty natives had attacked the
encampment. A very confused and for a little while indetermi¬
nate fight raged amidst the tents. Burton and Speke and
Stroyan defended the central tent until it was plain that that
course was merely folly, and then attempted to cut their way
280 nine against the unknown
through to the shore. So doing, Burton became separated from
his companions. A Somali rushed up and thrust his javelin into
Burton’s mouth, lacerating his lips and cheek. He beat him
off and staggered away into the darkness. A servant found him
and guided him away from the fight, towards that sought-
for shore. But again a stray eddy from the looting battle
caught them and they became separated. Now and then Burton
lay on the ground and rolled in agony, what of his lacerated
face. But at last he managed to stagger to a boat and make the
ship.
Meantime Stroyan had been clubbed to death, and Speke,
attempting to break through, was captured and had his hands
tied. Sitting so, he was several times assaulted and wounded.
He managed to work his hands clear and run, dodging a hail of
missiles. Some of them, nevertheless, found mark. Desperately
wounded, he also succeeded in making the ship . . .
So ended the Third Attempt upon the Fortunate Land.
Most unfortunate of all, in the opinion of Burton’s admirers
in later years, was the fact that Stroyan died, not Speke. But
pf the latter’s salvation as disaster Ruffian Dick, tight-mouthed
in pain, had no glimpse as he ordered the ship to put out for
Aden. Soft-hearted, grief-stricken at memory of Stroyan’s
fate, he had still one resolve strong upon him.
He would return to Africa.
§ io
There ensued a long hiatus before that Fourth Attempt
could be put in operation. Speke, wounded, departed for
England, and apparently out of Burton’s life. Burton himself,
having settled the last details of the Third ill-fated Expedition,
followed. At home he wrote his First Footsteps in East Africa,
and was greeted with a little fame in consequence. And he
met again his Isabel, though in a stilted and somewhat unen-
thusiastic greeting. The Arundels were still obdurate against
the consummation of the passion of their remarkable daughter
and this remarkably suspicious-looking adventurer. They tem¬
porized. When he had made a name in his own profession 
Burton was more than willing. But he was a soldier of John
Company, India was at peace, and he was too little liked for
there ever to be much chance of peace-time promotion. At
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 28l
this hour of indecision the Crimean War broke out with an
obliging readiness.
So, evidently, it appeared at first to Burton. He had little
belief in the sanctity of human life, he was a child of his era in
most matters military and imperial, he hungered for a com¬
mand, the disposal of men, the sight and sound of great guns
at dawn lifting blunt mouths against massed ranks of infantry.
He saw these things as poetry.
He volunteered assiduously, continually, and for a while
ineffectively. The War Office had other things on hand than to
provide commands and pickings for tall and reputedly scoun¬
drelly persons from India or Africa—unorthodox officers were
anathema in that Army which went out to battle in bear¬
skin helmets and dolmans, with few doctors and no sanitary
equipment at all. Burton grew desperate. If the mountain
would not come to Mohammed, he remembered, the Prophet
had obligingly journeyed to the mountain. He resolved to sail
for the Crimea on his own responsibility.
He did so and again appeared to arrive at a fortunate time.
Beatson’s Irregular Horse had just been raised for the benefit
of such as himself. Burton enlisted, became adjutant, drew up
elaborate plans for new modes of cavalry attack and general
tactics, and impatiently awaited action.
He waited in vain. The Crimean War dragged on, by now a
war of siege and sortie and repulse, having little or no need for
gay irregulars in cavalry uniform. Burton sank to a quick
despondency. The horrors and filth of the war appear to have
affected him little—or at least he kept an air of ruffianly
bravado in face of that which perhaps he found sickening
enough. When the whole ill business was over he returned to
England with his fortunes as regards Isabel no further advanced.
But another plan had risen up, slowly perhaps diminishing
her image in his mind. When the war finished (he had planned
in those Crimean nights) he would make Africa again, lead a
stout expedition up from the East Coast—Zanzibar, perhaps 
and seek out the sources of the Nile in that debatable land
vaguely rumoured of as the Mountains of the Moon.
Back to England and the arms of his Isabel. She consented
to marry him when he returned from the new expedition. It
would probably last several years, but those were unhasting
days ; our wonder over that long and dragging courtship on
the part of two such ardent souls as the combative Isabel and
282
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
the reputedly Ruffian Richard are probably unwarranted.
Neither was very deeply sexed, their interests were men and
women and belief and thought and the magic of the geogra¬
phically unknown and—disastrously, finally, for both of them
—religions and the gropings of the human mind in those
tenebrous regions of near-thought whence first arose in some
antique Egyptian brain the dream of the Fortunate Isles.
Burton laid his plans before the Royal Geographical Society.
The Society proved agreeable. It debated the matter, remem¬
bered Harar, and remembered also the news of Livingstone’s
discoveries in the Southern parts of Central Africa. Burton
had proposed the ascertaining of the limits of the Sea of Ujiji
—a great sheet of water of which the rumour had travelled
down to the East Coast—as the primary object of the expe¬
dition. Financed, he would also make investigations on “the
exportable produce of the interior and the ethnography of its
tribes”.
Agreeing, the Society raised a thousand pounds, appointed
Burton to lead the expedition, and laid down his instructions
in this his final assault upon Terra Incognita :
The great object of the expedition is to penetrate inland from Kilwa
or some other place on the east coast of Africa, and make the best of
your way to the reputed lake Nyasa. . . . Having obtained all the
information you require in this quarter, you are to proceed northward
toward the range of mountains marked upon our maps as containing
the probable source. ... You will be at liberty to return to England
by descending the Nile, or you may return by the route by which you
advanced or otherwise, always having regard to the means at your
disposal.
Burton had obtained a leave of a further two years from
the Indian Army, and had also secured Speke as his lieutenant.
He made a sentimentally tender farewell to his Isabel—she
urged him “with flashing eyes” to go “and win greatness”—
and set out, as he himself might have phrased it in one of those
odd lapses to pedestrianism that occur in his writings, on the
Fourth Lap to Fortune.
§ ii
It was a large and well-equipped expedition which disem¬
barked at Zanzibar on the 19th of December, 1856. Burton
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 283
had expended the thousand pounds of the Royal Geographical
Society with his usual flamboyant efficiency, he had ample
provisions and arms to arm the guard he proposed to raise ;
and he had as his chief assistant the quieter, dourer Speke.
The two men seem always to have been strangers to each other,
neither liking nor disliking. Their mental habits and con¬
ditions were poles dissimilar, Speke a commercial traveller of
exploration, it might be said, but that would be in a measure
an unfair assessment. He was something more. Almost he
verged upon that scientific accuracy and fine judgment that
were to follow him as the hallmark of the explorer in the next
century. He had few of Burton’s enthusiasms, none of his
swashbuckling certainties.
Speke might have thought the immediate objectives the
rumoured Sea of Ujiji and the sources of the Nile. But Burton,
as ever ready to halt and inspect the milestones on the road to
fortune, to brood above them and speculate on their shape and
origin, insisted on exploring the island of Zanzibar with detail
and attention, piling up in a great and stupefyingly impene¬
trable mound of erudition all he could learn of the geology,
botany, metallurgy, zoology, ethnology, culture waves and
racial migrations that bore even remotely upon the famed
island. Month after month went by in these pursuits, and
towards the end even Burton’s interest may have begun to
flag. He turned towards the West.
Meantime Speke and he had been gathering information
enough on the Sea of Ujiji. There was a definite caravan-route
thither, but in the way a multitude of tribes of varying degrees
of culture but an unvarying degree of unpleasantness. So the
rumours went, and judging from various brushes with the
coastal tribes, Burton judged them unexaggerated. He felt no
qualms. On the 27th of June he set his caravan in motion for
the interior.
In eighteen days he covered a hundred and eighteen miles.
There had never, in his opinion, been such travelling in the
world. He either knew little then of Mungo Park—whom
later he was to rate so low—or honestly believed the privations
of the march greater than those of the eighteenth century
Scotsman’s. Tribes haggled with him for passage : ferocious
tribesmen clung on the skirts of the march of his fever-stricken
caravan—it had been struck with marsh-fever very early.
Horses died and porters deserted. Speke struggled on at the
284 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
head of the caravan, as ill as the ferocious Ruffian Dick who
brought up the van. Forward, slow plodding day on day, a
jungly, river-sected land, sometimes dry and parched in long
stretches, sometimes broken with the jagged shapes of hills.
And at night the expedition lay down in this and that kraal,
in verminous filthy huts, and haggled wearying hours with
this and that potentate on the price of chickens, on the amount
of backsheesh to be paid for the privilege of being allowed to
exist. . . .
It grew warmer and warmer. A long halt was made and
Burton retired into the delirium tremens of fever. Speke, in
not much better case, prospected the country ahead through
the agency of rumour and gossip. Ujiji was near. Burton
roused himself to the dizzying tracks again.
The tracks were those of the Arab slave-traders who
dominated all this countryside. Sometimes the blacks along
the track had revolted, and naturally identified Burton and
Speke with their oppressors. Sometimes the Arabs, trade-
jealous, put all in their way possible to stop that slow ant-
crawl, like a sick centipede, into the west. But at last, on the
9th of November, 1857, Kazeh on its high plantation was
reached, the home of the Arab traders, the great trade-centre
of that part of Africa.
Burton was very ill and the welcome—the somewhat
surprising welcome—of the Arabs even could not arouse him.
They were still afar from their objective. Again Burton
dragged his way back to health, reorganized his disintegrating
caravan, doctored Speke, bribed, bullied and coaxed the
Arab overlords of Kazeh to his assistance. And again, through
bush and forest and under the craggy overhang of the hills of
the African winter, seeping in great rains, they took the road
towards that lodestone of the Fourth Expedition, the Sea of
Ujiji.
On the 13th of February, marching into Ujiji, Burton
lifted swimming eyes and saw a great sheet of water spread
before him in the evening light—the great lake of Tanganyika,
himself the first white man to look upon it.
It was the greatest day and date of his life, but he was too
sick and irritated to realize that. It was here that ended his
greatest search into the mysteries of the geographically un¬
known, here that he was to touch most closely the fringes of
that bright land that had fled the explorer’s feet for nine long
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 285
centuries. We see in the event a drama that even Burton,
with all his powers of self-dramatization, could not envisage.
From there, that point of Tanganyika’s first glimpse, he might
have called, with the Greeks of the Anabasis :
“Thalassa ! Thalassa !”
§ 12
He was then thirty-seven ; he had accomplished three conspicuous
enterprises; he was still free from the sense of public neglect; and he
was not yet married to the remarkable woman whose influence was, on
the whole, unfortunate.
At this peak of his career, ill though he was, Burton set
about plans for a thorough exploration of the lake region. He
believed Tanganyika the source of the Nile, and despatched
Speke, ill as himself, to explore the northern shores. He him¬
self made a short voyage from Ujiji, following all the while
his usual passions—topographical and ethnological predomin¬
ated—to the utmost limit. Finally, as might have been said
in the phrase of that day, outraged nature intervened. Both
he and his lieutenant were worn out. He resolved to seek the
coast.
This meant the abandonment of the attempt to reach the
rumoured Lake Nyasa, and meant with it the abandonment
of making certain (for Speke had been unable to fulfil the
task) whether or not a river—the presumptive Nile—entered
or left Tanganyika to the north. Another expedition, Burton
resolved buoyantly even in his sickness, would see to that.
That he himself would neither command it nor be on its staff
never entered his head.
The homewards journey was as toilsome as most home¬
ward trekkings of the great earth-conquerors. Speke recovered
considerably ; Burton steadily grew worse. Rain pelted the
retreating caravan, they were vexed with fever and famine.
At Tabora Speke was summoned by Burton and a tentative
plan laid before him. This was to strike northward and see
what truth there was in the existence of a rumoured great
lake in that direction. Speke agreed to accept a half of the
command and set out on the mission.
The caravan straggled on towards the coast. When Speke
—the uncommunicative Speke—rejoined the caravan, he had
286 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
news of a sort to impart. Yes, he had discovered the Lake—
he had named it the Victoria Nyanza in honour of the Queen.
Yes, a greak lake . . . Burton irritably gave up questioning
him, longing in a sick despair for the coast.
At last, early in March of 1859, Zanzibar again came in
sight, shining across the sea. Burton had a ship chartered, and
his men and surviving goods, his sick self and his lieutenant
Speke, loaded into it. It made an easy voyage to Aden, that
depot of dust and sunglare redeemed for Burton by the
blessings of a hospital, attention, a clean bed and clean faces
to look on again. He sank to sleep the first night with a thank¬
fulness in his heart he had never known before, the returned
earth-conqueror as weary as he was triumphant.
Speke hastened to England, leaving Burton in hospital,
published an account of the expedition, stressed his own
discovery of the Victoria Nyanza, made no mention of Burton,
and affirmed his opinion that the Nile rose in the Victoria
Nyanza. He was greeted with great acclaim, honoured every¬
where, and funds raised to equip under his command a new
expedition.
Burton arrived in England a man robbed of his fame as
surely as though Speke had stolen his purse.
§ 13
So Ruffian Dick as the earth-conqueror passed from the
scene. He lived many years thereafter ; he did many things,
both of an ill repute and a good, but it would seem that some¬
thing died in him when he found out the treachery of Speke.
That something was certainly nothing in the nature of a
“broken heart”, he had never trusted Speke greatly, or cared
for him greatly ; nor had he had any great affection for either
the British public or its servant, the Royal Geographical
Society. Neither they nor Speke killed any faith that he held
in human-kind or in human decency. It was a subtler slaying.
There died in him then, it would seem, that flaring conviction
in himself as the geographically invincible, the predestined
conqueror of the Fortunate Land.
He wrote bitter polemics against Speke; and he looked
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 287
around for a fresh means of livelihood, that “life of an explorer”
which he had envisaged being denied to him. He went off to
America to inspect the Mormon territory and the Mormons at
close hand ; the reputedly scoundrelly Brigham Young he
fled to for consolation from the decencies, the truly scoundrelly
decencies, of a more normal theology and civilization. From
that he returned to write the usual and—in his case—the
unescapable book. Then he married his Isabel, at long last.
On his marriage day he “looked a wreck”, though not with
apprehension. He loved Isabel very completely and truly all
the days of his life ; he remained tall and dark and scowling of
appearance, cherishing that pathetic desire to shock the world
if he could not make it happy. He was appointed consul to
Fernando Po, and explored vaguely and ineffectively in the
Cameroons. He wrote seven books in those four years, with
volcanic energy, but diminished vision. He was transferred
(he and Isabel) to Brazil, to Damascus, to Trieste, and in each
of these consulships played his reputedly scoundrelly part.
Gradually his character because as undermined with the
mystic Christianity of his wife as his body was undermined
with the continual privations which, well over fifty, he loved to
dare, riding out in search of the Gold Mines of Midian from
Damascus, holidaying with vigour in Iceland, writing and
writing and writing with a kind of unstayable passion, an
unstayable escape.
Finally, between 1885 and 1888 he set to the translating,
the literal and unbowdlerized translating of the complete
Arabian Nights. Humanity had refused him his destined life
of the earth-conqueror, earth-wanderer, and he had accepted
instead the mission of shocking it. This work he intended as the
final and complete shock.
Humanity was scandalized, horrified—and enthralled. It
purchased Burton in great quantities, volume after volume of
the sixteen volumes as they came from the press. It made of
Burton a rich man. And finally it drew about him the luscious
indecencies of the sheets of the Arabian Nights and smothered
him in their folds.
X
FRIDTJOF NANSEN SEEKS THE POLE
§ i
IN the quest of those Fortunate Isles that first awoke in
men’s imaginings with the burial of the dead on Nile Bank
five thousand years before the birth of Christ we have seen
profoundly affected the characters and actions of eight of the
great explorers in the second Christian millennium. The ninth
was born into a world that had narrowed considerably the
geographical outlet to the quest: beyond Amazonia and
Africa and thin little tracts of Arabia and Indo-China there
remained only the great white stretches of terra incognita about
the Poles when the last of the great earth conquerors touched
with the wings of that ancient quest was born in Oslo in 1861.
Arctica had haunted the fringe of the Norse consciousness
for many centuries. Arctic exploration ante-dated the Vikings.
Pytheas, who came from the Mediterranean in the third
century before Christ, circumnavigated Britain, and pene¬
trated perhaps as far as Iceland, was the first of the Arctic
explorers on record, followed in a long train by those wandering
dispossessed farmers and fishers who quested with Eirik Raude
for new homes out of Iceland. Whales laired in the northern
waters and were hunted with harpoon and boat, and led the
hunts up long craggy lanes overshadowed by fringing mountains
of ice. Beyond those lay lands of snow as untrodden for the
European as the moon : and quite as debatable.
Questing the North-East and the North-West passages in
search of the Fortunate Isles of the East Indies had come the
seventeenth and eighteenth century Dutch and English,
naming the fringing territories, garnering in bitter experience
some knowledge of the rigours and risks of the Arctic as a
field of exploration. The eighteenth century looked elsewhere
for trade-routes to the East than through those Northern
passages. But with the coming of the nineteenth century the
quest of the North-West sea passage (at least) awakened again
into favour.
28S
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 289
It was Ross’s expedition in 1818 to Baffin Bay which opened
the question of route anew, Parry’s expedition of 1820 sailed
its ships six hundred and thirty miles up Barrow Strait through
what had previously appeared as land on the charts and maps.
Thereafter expeditions were almost an annual affair to the
bleak straits and islands that fringe northernmost Canada—
leading to the tragic expedition of that unfortunate and un¬
forgettable soul, the resolute Franklin, wrecked and lost and
vanishing with his starving thirty into the wild lands on the
fringes of the world, to be stared at by Eskimo, curiously, as a
man at a starving spider ; holding south, the sun in the
memory of their faces, on a road to food and lights: and so
vanishing and perishing between Adelaide Peninsula and the
Great Fish River. Beyond the night of their attempt followed
Rae and McLintock, equipped by Lady Franklin, searching
out and charting eight hundred miles of sea and shore along
that route that ultimately, long years after this subject was of
fame, found its triumphant way across America by sea—the
voyage of Amundsen’s Gjoa in 1903-5 which crossed the roof of
America from East to West for the first time and (it is likely)
the last in history.
But still the true Arctic remained barely limned. From
the searchings for the North-East passage came Novaya
Zemlya, a long tale of journeyings carried out now from the
east (utmost Siberia) now from Norway and European Russia.
There both tale and occasion are simpler than in the lands
beyond Greenland—unexplored Greenland. For in 1820
Wrangel heard rumours of high lands to the extreme north
of the Kolyma river ; and for another half century it was the
search for that land that drew all the travellers up and around
the lands north of the storm-driven Bering Straits. It was
supposed to be a great Arctic Continental mass—Gama Land,
the Fortunate Isles, reappearing undiscouraged. De Long
in 1879 sailed north with Jeanette in search of it. He found
no land mass, his ship was crushed and sunk, he tramped back
to the north coast of Asia with the news and died before help
came to succour his exhaustion from those leagues of frost and
desolation, silence and the cry of strange storm-birds. Thereon
the Fortunate Land betook itself to the regions about the Pole.
In 1876 A. E. Nordenskiold, leaving Novaya Zemlya,
reached the mouth of the Yenisei, in the Vega, halted there a
while, and in July of 1878 started on the second lap of the
T
29O NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
voyage through that North-East passage of myth and high
hope that had beguiled so many of the heroic Dutch explorers
of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. On 19th of July,
1879, he rounded the utmost peninsula of Asia and steered
the Vega into the North Pacific.
But beyond still lay the true Arctic, barely touched.
Franz Josef Land and Spitzbergen had been discovered, their
coasts were known vaguely, vaguely mapped. Beyond the bulk
of Northern Greenland lay great glacial tracts in which almost
anything was possible, almost any country might exist.
Remotely into this unknown (though known at its base since
the days of the Iceland Vikings), stretched Greenland, shining
high and resplendent its snow jokulls in summer as the whaler
crews stood off and watched for the bubblings of the great
mammals they came to hunt. It tailed off out of human recog¬
nition and mapping into a seeming jumble of ice-lands and
passages that were suspected of being culs-de-sac, impassable
and unpenetrable in their extremities.
Inglefield, Kane, Hall, and Nares worked up this coast in
the early half of the nineteenth century : in 1853 Rink began
his series of inland explorations in Greenland—South Green¬
land ; in 1870 the redoubtable Nordenskiold, that conqueror
of the North-East Passage, attempted to cross Greenland
from Disko Island. But he found it a tougher task than even
the sailing of the bitter Siberian coasts, and turned back.
Thirteen years later he made a second attempt, crossing all
but a last seventy-five miles, and again being forced to retreat.
Beyond still lay the unknown Arctic.
In 1827 came the first direct attack upon it—an authentic¬
ated first attempt to reach the Pole. This was Parry’s, turning
back at 82° 45' N. Nordenskiold and Koldeway carried through
major expeditions, neither of them reaching so far as Parry.
The Polar regions remained thick-strewn with imaginary
continents and catastrophic geographical phenomena—even,
in the less responsible mind, with lost cities and tribes, those
residua of the romantic imagination that is itself the religious
imagination softened. It was a last refuge of the unknown.
What lay there ?
§ 2
Although it is unlikely he would have answered in so many
words, the boy born to Baldur Nansen and his wife on the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 29I
small estate of Store From near Oslo in 1861 was to grow and
answer in very clear accents indeed : “The Fortunate Isles.
A strange wealth of deep and irrelevant knowledge is there,
experiences and curious sensations, cold winds to bring you to
the edge of consciousness till the human reason stands aghast
at its own existence, silences so deep you can hear the
Galaxy turn, the edge of the Eternally Unknowable, North,
the Fortunate Isles.”
Baldur Fridtjof had been Reporter to the Supreme Court,
a descendant of Danish merchants and seamen. In spite of that
descent, heredity might have made him the last to father
Fridtjof (Peace-Scarer), he was a cool and precise and method¬
ical man, he had the world and fate and time docketed and put
in place, one gathers the impression of a Victorian father very
fully and completely realized indeed, repressed, grave, taciturn,
tyrannical, uxorious and generous in a bourgeois tradition of
gentlemanliness as Norwegian as it was American or English.
His wife, Fridtjof’s mother, was indeed of different quality,
strong and self-reliant, a great ski-er for her time and sex, apt
at churning and baking and choring as at correction of the
misdemeanours of small and ebullient youth, efficient and
strong. Fridtjof found her very lovely.
He learned from her, perhaps, to think of women as his
equals as well as remote and delightful and mysterious persons.
He found himself in a world of great if frugal fun, with a
sister and a brother, hard and bright and boisterous children
like himself. Behind Store From rose the forests and hills,
rich with the green of the Norwegian woods: long summer
nights the sun never went to bed, hardly Fridtjof or his
brother. They swam and hunted and sometimes were let loose
in the Forest for days on end in search of their own sustenance,
building fires and shelters, sleeping under trees into the
breathless hush of those summer mornings discovered in youth
alone, Fridtjof a grave and wide-eyed lad staring at those
fleckings of saffron on the wind-breaks at dawn. His feet very
early were set on a path more Aryan than any other ever listed.
He was a great and terrible bore to the grown-ups, the
stray elder encountered in forest and wood, cornered visitors
in the rooms of Store From. For he wanted to know, in detail,
exasperatingly, the why and becoming of all things under the
sun. It was more than the normal aimless inquisitiveness of
childhood as he grew on in years: it was a definite cast of
292 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
mind moulded wonderfully and mysteriously by the play of
the innumerable chances and encounters which mould us all
so differently from the same human clay. Coupled with that
unending curiosity, record the biographers (generally disap¬
provingly, for their ideal of Nansen remains that of a foolish
adventurer, a hardy viking of romance, not reality) were
occasional long moody fits, abstractions from which Store
From would seek to shake him roughly enough. Whatever had
come on the boy ? . . . One visions Fru Nansen, tall, efficient,
a medicine bottle and spoon in hand, mounting resolutely the
wooden stairs to young Fridtjof’s bedroom.
But the occasions were not too frequent. Instead, he was
normal in sport and fun and frolic throughout boyhood ; at
seventeen, however, beyond normal. He won in that year the
Norwegian distance skating championship, next year the
world’s skating record for the mile. He discovered abruptly
the wonder of human nerve and muscle fine trained to hair¬
breadth accuracies, he discovered the wonder of his own
body with a certain scientific eagerness, a commingling of
coldness and excitement exceptional enough in such dis¬
coveries. He took to ski-ing the year following the second
skating triumph, trained vigorously if slightly unlaboriously,
and won the national cross-country race at the first attempt.
He paragoned at sport easily enough: but at Oslo
University from 1880 onwards he was very bored. But Natural
Science, a wide-reaching branch of study in those days, covering
almost as many sins as subjects, gradually drew him out of a
sportsman’s yawn at the whole affair of education. Here were
intriguing things, beasts and birds and the wherefore of the
rocks. He began to specialize, earnestly, ski-champion-like, in
“science”. But which Science. Physics ? Chemistry ?
Every day as he walked home for dinner from lectures he
would encounter a burly-looking being with heavy brows and
eyes to match, an immense moustache and the touch of a roll
in his gait. The student grew aware of this phenomenon passing
so continuously across his vision. Idly, he asked who the man
was, and learned he was Axel Krefting, a sealing skipper, a
famous Arctic skipper.
And at that news it seems that Nansen’s imagination
suddenly turned north for the first time, the imagination from
his studies, the imagination from his sports. Sealing ? The
Arctic ? . . . Crouching behind hummocks watching the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 293
beasts creep from the air-holes. Crouching on board a flying
ship and seeing pile on the horizons the great ice mountains
of the true roof of the world. . . . Abruptly, hearing that
Krefting was sailing out a new sealer, the Viking, on her
maiden voyage, Nansen introduced himself, had himself
enrolled as student supercargo, told Store From and the
university he was off to study the life of the Arctic animals,
Zoology was his irrevocable choice: and on the nth of
March, 1882, looked back on Arendal fading hull-down on
the horizon.
§3
He was over six feet in height, tall and burly, with a frank
open look belied by a certain quality in his eyes, a brooding
quality of a certain darkness and stillness. He found the life on
the Viking shocking at first, perhaps, it was as crude and
comradely and equalitarian as it well might be. But he entered
it soon with the zest of youth, climbing the crow’s nest during
a storm, wrestling with the captain, beating him badly, staring
at the lift and play of the sails at night on a lightless sea as
they drove north in haste for the sealing grounds between
Iceland and Spitzbergen ; strangely moved at the drummle
and hiss of the living ship in that wild waste of darkness and
water at night, unstarred, with flying spray . . . Then he
would turn back from those glimpses—those glimpses that were
to haunt his soul—to the life and smoking lights and horseplay
of the cabin.
He saw his first ice on the 18th of March, a tremulous
white-blue line on the horizon, and stared at it with a mixture
of exultation and sickness, as long afterwards he recorded. The
sensations were surely premonitory. Then father Baldur’s son
recollected that he was a scientist. He made careful observa¬
tions of the drift-ice, theorized on the currents, carried out
tests on the sea-water, took readings of the ocean’s temperature
with a physician-like gravity. The crew laughed: young
Nansen was a lanky favourite, somewhat puzzling.
Not till mid-June did they come on profitable sealing
grounds. Nansen was a good sealer : he killed and skinned with
an ease and celerity and a cold-blooded lack of imagination
that astounded Krefting : he considered his pupil would be¬
come “a good vet”. That imagination which could let itself
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
294
loose on the pale tintings of the Borealis or the quest of
Nothingness beyond the rim of the Ice Continent controlled
itself readily enough in this matter of death and blood that was
the sealing industry : he was as yet, indeed, no more than a
half-awakened hobbledehoy, a hobbledehoy who could kill
seals all day and then, while the rest of the crew dragged them¬
selves to their bunks in sheer exhaustion, could sit up all night
catching Greenland sharks. . . . Steadily he grew something
of a legend; he has left, or others leave of him, innumerable
tales and legends in the Norse tradition of those months—
encounters with Polar bears, swimming feats in freezing
waters, stuff of a like matter that gave little promise of his
future except that they verified the magnificent physical
stamina necessary to carry out the feats of the last seeker for
the Earthly Paradise.
Early in July, from the crow’s nest of the Viking, he
caught his first glimpse of the Greenland coast, and was duly
and reasonably thrilled. It would be more than fun, thought
the hobbledehoy, to cross the interior of that unknown land,
for what was there no one knew. Some day . . .
But the sealing season was ending. The Viking turned
home. Nansen had been blooded with blood and hardship and
imagination. Almost it seems he had received a surfeit. He
secured appointment as Curator of the Zoological Museum at
Bergen. For six years he was curator there. But for rare
vacations when he crossed the Central mountains on ski and
hunted and explored the wilder parts of Northern wild
Norway he abandoned the enthusiasms of the Viking for the
wonder kingdoms of scientific research. That other self whom
in later years he was to refer to, with a kind of childish whimsic¬
ality, as “Master Irresponsible” was severely in leash.
I went in, body and soul, for Zoology, and especially for micro¬
scopical Anatomy. For six years I lived in a microscope. It was an
entirely new world, and Master Irresponsible kept fairly quiet during
those years, and we were well on the way to becoming a promising
zoologist. ... I wrote some works, especially on the microscopical
anatomy of the nervous system. They contained some discoveries of
value, I believe, but still more important were perhaps the new prob¬
lems which they raised. We were full of ambitious plans for new
investigations to solve these problems. Most of these investigations have
later been made by others, but some of the problems are still waiting
to be solved, I believe.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 295
There is a naive vanity in the last sentence, characteristic
of the man, and plus it a kind of dullness that haunts all his
writings and sayings, a kind of blindness to his own ephemeral
quality (as all mankind are ephemeral), which go strangely
with the broodings of the lonely figure in the remote Arctic
that was not yet his. One may think of those lapses into the
pedestrian as his refuge from both himself and the appalling
visionings of time and space that were yet to hold strange hours.
§4
He had never forgotten that glimpse of the Greenland
shore. Yawning over a newspaper at Bergen in 1883 he read of
the failure of Nordenskiold’s attempt upon the Greenland
interior—an attempt in which he had employed two Lapps,
skilled skiers. The item stuck in his mind. Skilled ski-ing—might
not that solve the entire problem ?
Meantime his scientific work went on. He published various
papers on subjects such as the Myzostomida and the Central
Nervous System and the like—papers over which father
Baldur, with no training in anatomy or chemistry, confessed a
puzzled pride. He had soothed out into a strange applauding
shadow, the stout and grave bourgeois of Store From : he died
in 1885, and Nansen was very deeply moved by the passing of
that being so alien to himself in all but a few essentials. He
took a holiday to Naples to escape Norway and that memory
for a time. In the Marine Biological Museum there he found
escape; a tall and burly and moody young man the Italians
found him, apt at times to dance all night and sing the moon
into morning, at others to retreat to the seashore and into the
shell of himself for hours on end, staring across the warm
Italian sea at the smoking summit of Vesuvius.
Because the thoughts of those days are for ever beyond the
pryings of others they invite that interpretation that he him¬
self might have encouraged. . . . He was looking out into that
remoteness of the human spirit that is man’s terrible heritage,
seeing man himself a lonely figure in the wastes of a little
planet wheeling about a little sun, without guide or light or
surety or safety, uncompanioned by God or devil, hope and
fear but the staves that he carves for himself. ... So Baldur’s
death had left him, though presently—else he would not have
296 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
survived it—that mist went and he went back to Norway with
its passing.
But a new restlessness had made Bergen distasteful, even
after he had met and fallen in love with the singer Eva Sars.
(Their encounter was such as we should expect of Nansen.
He was ski-ing in the woods near Oslo when he saw two feet
sticking forth appealingly from the snow. On investigation,
they proved to belong to his future wife—he seems to have
decided almost at that moment that they belonged to his
future wife.) The planning of an expedition to cross Greenland
froin east to west began to occupy all his spare hours. He
published the plan in Naturen of January 1888.
The main reaction to the plan was horrified incredulity.
Nansen proposed to attain as close to the eastern coastline as
a ship could carry him, abandon ship, seek the ice floes with
boats, attain the shore, climb the interior mountains, reach the
presumed interior ice-cap, and from there slide carelessly down
on skis to the western coast. It showed, said the critics—
travellers, not writers—an insanity, a recklessness, a hobble¬
dehoy presumption which placed it outside the sphere of
criticism. They were very bitterly firm on its presumption to
claim a critic’s attention at all. He “betrayed absolute ignorance
of the true conditions”. A Bergen newspaper came humorously
to his aid with an authentic advertisement:
NOTICE : In the month of June next Curator Nansen will give a
ski-ing display, with long jumps, on the Inland Ice of Greenland.
Reserved seats in the crevssaes. Return ticket necessary.
All previous attempts at the crossing of the misnamed
Greenland of Eric the Red’s fancy had been made from the
West, with bases and rest camps pushing up into the interior.
Nansen s daring was in his resolve, Rubicon-like, to burn, or
rather, abandon his boats when the east coast was attained,
and then push through the unknown country till he reached
the thinly inhabited western coast. There would be no
going back, for return would mean certain starvation. The
expedition’s only salvation would be to hasten steadily west.
He went and consulted the aged hero Nordenskiold, old
and cynical and sceptical, but not refusing his aid and advice
in pack and trek and sledge equipment. Finances were the
next consideration. Nansen applied to the University of
Norway, an enlightened institution, but itself unwealthy even
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
297
to the extent of collecting the less than £300 which the reck¬
less young man required. It recommended a grant to the
Norwegian Parliament, the Storting. Sensible and bourgeois,
the Storting refused. Then a Copenhagen philanthropist came
to the rescue. Peace-Scarer’s expedition was assured its
finances.
There was no special technique of Arctic exploration in
those times: Nansen perforce perfected his own in matters
of sledges, cookers, sleeping-bags, and the like, the cookers
odd and complicated instruments made to his own exclusive
design and seldom copied by his successors. On the skis was
his main reliance : they were specially made for the peculiar
footings in Greenland snow.
Only Scandinavians in that era were ski-ers, so limiting the
personnel of the expedition to the three North countries.
From a host of applicants—that cheerful awaiting fringe on
the verge of every new adventure—Nansen made his selection
of three Norwegians and two Lapps, Sverdrup—the great and
gallant Sverdrup with whom he was to be so long associated—
Dietrichson, Trana, Balto, Ravna. Trana was twenty-four
years old, which gave the leader of the expedition some doubts
as to his suitability. He himself was an aged twenty-six.
§5
On the 4th of June, 1888, the Jason, Captain Jacobsen,
a sealing steamer with a sealing crew, groped its way out of
Isafjord in Iceland and turned west. On board were Nansen
and his expedition, his famous cookers, his collapsible boat, his
skis, and a pony he took as an experiment, a forlorn hope.
On the 1 ith of July, after much cruising, in fog, the Green¬
land coast was sighted and Nansen stared at the awakening of
the first of the two great epochs of his life, in his eyes the same
hope as had led Leif Ericsson long centuries before, Columbus
to the Bahamas, Magellan round the Cape. Pack ice swirled
dangerously down the rugged and forbidding coast; it was
very evident the Jason would never draw inshore in safety.
Fogs descended and rose with an exasperatingly regular
irregularity, the Jason cruised offshore blindly, fodder grew
scarce and the pony had to be shot: in all, unpropitious
beginnings. The crew ailed from various diseases, mostly filth.
Nansen, that sardonic doctor, suggested scrubbing as he
298 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
turned to stare at the pack-ice’s drift. This proved a surprising
cure.
But on the 16th Cape Dan at the head of Sermilik Fjord
was sighted, guarded by the broken ice-belt. Nansen
determined to attempt the coast. He had his specially con¬
structed boat lowered, borrowed from the captain a small
sealing boat, packed in his expedition and its equipment, and
set out for Greenland. Presently the Jason vanished from sight.
Ensued hours of toil, blisters, vain hopes and rising dismays.
The boats had to be dragged over stretches of ice from one
channel of clear water to another. The ice belt cruised steadily
south, plain they would never make Cape Dan. A storm
gathered, rain fell, darkness came and in the darkness the crash
and grind of the bergs sounded all about them. Nansen had
the tent pitched, they crept into it and slept with sheer
exhaustion, soaked to the skin.
They were on a floe, grinding and drumming southwards
along the Greenland coast. On the 18th and 19th they sought
in vain to cross the intervening ice to the land. The floe turned
about malignantly and sought the open sea. The Lapps took
to reading the New Testament: Nansen, with Old Testament
hardness, evicted them from this pursuit in the shelter of the
tent and set them again to attempt dragging the boats to a less
uncertain floe. Thereat the seawards making floe, with a bland
surprise, turned about and made cautiously towards the land
again.
For eight more days the floe kept them prisoners, about
them the infernal roar and upheaval of the Arctic ice seas.
Nansen filled in his diary and sketched and calmed his soul
with staring moody exultation at the roll and pour, south¬
wards, of the long billows of the Greenland coast. Then, on
the morning of the 28th they saw the shore at length close at
hand, launched the boats again and attained solid land,
Kekertarsuak Island.
Nansen’s original plan had been to cross from Sermilik
Fjord, about 66° N. They had drifted south a long three
hundred and fifty miles, and to cross from the spot where they
landed would have been a comparatively short hundred miles
or so, a poor and heartbreakingly easy substitute for the
rigours and attractions of the original plan. Nansen decided to
row up the coast as far as time would allow : the Greenland
summer was passing.
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
299
They set out. Two toilsome days brought them to Cape
Bille where they fell in with a tribe of Eskimos, simple and
kindly and unwashed folk who stank very abominably, had
stone weapons, and astounded Nansen. For in spite of their
stenches they were unsavage, unspoilt, Christians it seemed to
him without Christianity. They were, in fact, a last Northern
reside of that primitive kindly stock of the Golden Age that
had once endured all over the planet. Nansen researched in
their huts and beliefs a long evening, then pushed north again.
Mount Katak came in sight on the nth of August. They
had come north a hundred and thirty-eight miles, and to
attempt a further northing would be merely foolhardy. They
camped under the towering cape, set to overhauling their
gear, stacked the boats in a cleft to astound the straying Eskimo
in after years, and on the evening of the 15 th of August
marched out across Greenland to Christianshaab.
§6
Days of arduous and painful travel followed, dragging the
sledges over rough and crevassed ice. On the 20th a storm of
such violence descended that they had to make camp and seek
shelter in the tent. The storm raged for three days, great
howling blasts sweeping across the deserted face of the unknown
country, rising shrill and fierce in the hummock shapes while
Nansen and his companions, stretched in their sleeping-bags,
turned to light literature for amusement—the Nautical
Almanac and the Logarithmic tables. The storm died in a
whisper on a cold grey morning. They crept out and set out,
still climbing into misty heights they might not discern far
ahead.
Now they found themselves in a great waste of giant
crevasses, cracks that yawned down into cavernous depths,
blue and cold-green far down towards the earth foundations
of this immense ice-house amid the roofs of which they
stumbled and fell ever west and up. Ice and ice, no land to be
seen, though far below them Nansen knew that land rested,
once green and verdant in long past ages, now covered with
the last residue of the shrinkage of the Fourth Glacial Age.
By the 21st of August they had climbed 3000 feet. Peaks
rose above the surface of the snow, snow that curled in frozen
billows up to those craggy peaks, under the low shimmering
3°°
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
sun of the Greenland night—they travelled always by night,
overhead the glory of the low Greenland stars when the sun
went and the Northern Lights resumed their play. Nansen had
never been so well. He dragged his sledge untiringly, staring
at that splendour upon the sky, staring almost appalled at the
great Arctic moons that came and seemed to refuse a setting;
close to the earth they hung so that the conviction of the earth
as a tiny globe in space amidst strange kin wanderers sunk into
the naked consciousness like a frozen knife. Sometimes Nansen
found himself humanizing that unearthly terror—or did so
in his record long afterwards—into stillness and peace where
indeed there was only negation.
They changed to day-trekking. The way remained toil¬
some, now amidst the great peaks of the Greenland mountains.
Nothing moved or cried or had its being in that desolate land,
except the unceasing wind driving frozen snow in their faces.
Each morning they dug out the sledges and unroped the tent.
They had food in plenty, though water had to be secured toil¬
somely from melted snow. Except for sprained knees and
touches of snow-blindness, all kept their healths magnificently.
Sails were erected on a smooth stretch of the ice and the
sledges fled west with heartening rapidity and frequent
capsizes till on the 29th the wind dropped and vanished.
It was late in the year. Even though they attained
Christianshaab in safety the last ship for home would long have
left. Nansen determined to shorten the journey and make for
Godthaab, south-west, that settlement founded long before by
Eirik Raude.
7930 feet up, a distance of 240 miles travel: and still they
climbed, though the peaks had now vanished, the snow world
remained unspecked by alien matter but themselves, that waste
of snow a frozen and terrifying thing. The wind awoke afresh, a
chilling and dreadful wind that speedily developed into the
worst storm yet met. They took to the tent for two long days
and nights, every moment expecting the canvas above their
heads to levitate north into that inferno of storm and leave
them unsheltered. But ropes and canvas held as they lay and
listened and cooked with difficulty and much oil and soot,
their faces and hands and bodies by this time deep-caked in a
protective layer of filth.
The storm passed, they trekked forward and up again.
But on the nth of September it came on Nansen that they
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 3OI
climbed no longer. Instead, the slope led imperceptibly down¬
wards in front of their weary feet. Things grew more easy
and their spirits rose, all except those of the old Lapp, Ravan,
terrified and depressed in the lifeless deserts of no-colour. They
hoisted sails on their sledges again and the going was good for
some little while. On the 19th land, distant and smoky in
the mist, was sighted ; then the easy going ceased. Crevasses
appeared, cliff-edged and terrible, and after one of their most
arduous days they crawled into the tent and into sleep like
men revived from drowning.
But awakening in the morning Nansen looked out and saw
a sight he was never to forget—the long, storm-beaten Western
coast of Greenland about and below Godthaabsfjord, black
canons and high peaks glistening under new-fallen snow.
It seemed near at that first glimpse, then he realized his
height and his distance yet from that objective. He roused
the others to an exceptional breakfast and exceptional marching
endeavours.
It took them three days to attain the shore of that Earthly
Paradise that had led them across the Inland Ice—the first
crossing in the history of the white races, perhaps of any race.
The ice was unsafe, great boulders barred their way, they
came to canons that might not be crossed but must be skirted
in long and toilsome detours. By this time the Lapps were
almost finished, though the three Norse plodded on grimly
without complaint. They had come much further north than
they had calculated : Godthaab, even when they should
attain the shore, would be distant in the south. For only
blessing, the weather kept unstormy.
And at length, on the 23rd of September, they descended
the last steep, snow-sheathed shelves, and
like boys released, ran wildly about the shore. Words cannot describe
what it was for us only to have the earth and stones again beneath
our feet, or the thrill that went through us as we felt the elastic
heather on which we trod, and smelt the fragrant scent of grass and
moss. Behind us lay the Inland Ice, its cold grey slope sinking slowly
towards the lake; before us lay the genial land. Away down the valley
we could see headland beyond headland, covering and overlapping
each other as far as the eye could reach.
He had crossed the Inland Ice of Greenland. A month later,
voyaging and trekking down the coast, they came to Godthaab,
302 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
and there made an encounter that cannot be better told than
in Nansen’s own words :
“Presently a European appeared. He came up to us, we exchanged
salutations. . . . ‘May I ask your name ?’ ‘My name is Nansen, and
we have just come fron the interior.’ ‘Oh, allow me to congratulate
you on taking your doctor’s degree.’ This came like a thunderbolt from
a blue sky, and it was all I could do to keep myself from laughing out¬
right. To put it very mildly it struck me as comical that I should cross
Greenland to receive congratulations upon my doctor’s degree.”
§7
Not until the 30th of May of the following year, 1889, did
Nansen and the rest of the expedition return to Norway, so
long they had to wait a ship at Godthaab of the Good Hope.
They had spent the weary months of the winter unwearied
enough, Nansen had betaken himself to the communities of the
Eskimo, living the Eskimo life, sleeping in their snow huts,
eating their food, staring in their faces, listening to their tales.
He came back with memory of them profoundly impressed
in his mind, the Nansen discovery of the Eskimo was one of the
great turning-points in anthropology, for his observations of
that life of the remotest North brought additional facts to
verify the beliefs of the school of historians that was soon
to arise—that school which claimed man as a free and un¬
diseased and happy animal in the day before civilization
dawned on the world, that school that was to dispose once and
for all of the theories of animism, totemism and the like
muddled guessings on the origins of religion and social life
called forth by misapprehension of the processes of biological
evolution, mistakenly applied to human affairs. In that
discovery, and fittingly as the last of the great earth- conquerors
under the ancient spell, Nansen glimpsed that Earthly Paradise
that had once been all mankind’s.
But the world to which the tall and broad-cheeked youth
returned at first knew little of this primary discovery of his,
it was a world that had pored with some excitement over
the map of Greenland, and now collected its honours to shower
upon the first white man to traverse that unkindly Interior.
Nansen was met by a fleet of steamers in Oslo Fjord, he was
bemedalled and bedecorated by most of the learned societies
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 3O3
of the world, in his account of the expedition, The First
Crossing of Greenland, there creeps in a certain flattish note
of complacency that is oddly displeasing. But Eskimo Life, the
revolutionary account of his native hosts, had lost the naivety
of the adulation-surfeited. He had glimpsed a permanent and
unsubduable surprise in the Eskimo : behind them loomed the
greater wastes no feet had trod, the Arctic that now began, in
the easy honours of his new position as Museum Curator of
Oslo University, to haunt his leisure hours and his quiet
nights.
He had married his singer, Eva Sars, and taken her to
a home at Lysaker at the head of Oslo Fjord. He loved her with
a deep and strange and lovely love that few of the earth
conquerors, Mungo Park apart, had known or practised. Fru
Nansen was a worthy mate for the tall, strange boy—he was
little more—who could not forget the Arctic. He and Fru
Nansen went winter expeditions into the mountains, ski-ing
and mountain-climbing ; they lost themselves in snowstorms
and were romantically rescued and applauded and recognized ;
they lived very full and happy and complete lives, physically
and mentally ; and deeper and deeper Nansen immersed him¬
self in the plans for an expedition to strike right at the heart
of that mystery that surrounded the ultimate abiding-place of
the Fortunate Isles, the Northern Pole itself.
Long before, as he tells, the root of the plan had formed in
his mind: it formed when he read of the fate of the Jeannette
expedition of De Long in 1879. Something of that expedi¬
tion, in quest of a mythic Polar continent north of Siberia,
has already been related. Now the sequel to the wreck of the
Jeannette is pertinent. She was crushed in the ice off Bering
Strait, in 770 15' N. 1550 E. And three years afterwards, at
the thither side of the Americas, relics, undisputable relics of
the Jeannette, were discovered off Julianhaab on the West
Coast of Greenland.
How had they drifted there ?
A Professor Molm had investigated the relics, collated
all the relevant data, and enunciated a startling theory that
was long forgotten when Nansen broached his project to the
world. The theory had been that the relics had been ice-drifted
across the Polar area itself.
If relics, why not a ship, deliberately frozen into the ice, to
be carried by the ice-drift over the Polar regions—perhaps the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
304
Pole itself—from Siberia to Greenland ? If a ship of sufficient
strength could be made, if no land were encountered through¬
out the drift, it was—to Nansen—the sane and only way to
attempt the reaching of the Pole.
He delayed, perfecting the defence of a scheme already
determined in his mind. Then he went to England to address
the Royal Geographical Society and lectured it on his plan,
inviting criticism. He received it in bulk. . . . There was no
Arctic current. His ship would be crushed to matchwood. He
himself and his crew would perish. It was folly to fling away his
life so in defiance of all the rules and conventions of Arctic
exploration. The Royal Geographical Society admired and
liked him and bade him good-bye regretfully. He went home,
unperturbed, and published his plan.
There blew up such storm of opposition as he had expected.
From America, from A. W. Greely, there came caustic and
even spiteful comments on “Dr. Nansen’s illogical scheme of
self-destruction”. But there was some admiration too, and no
lack of volunteers for this expedition in quest of the Earthly
Paradise in the mists and long fogs of the North. He found
a great shipbuilder to construct for him the unique Fram,
uniquely strong and felt-lined, baulked against the crushings
of the ice ; he found encouragement and help in Fru Nansen,
though it wrung him a bitter moment, the thought of parting
with her and his only child, Liv ; he found the Norwegian
Government subscribe £15,000 to the expedition—£25,000
in all was subscribed. He was young, strong, tall and immensely
healthy and cool, with a fanatic look in his eyes, a Viking of
romance if never such as reality had previously known. He
sailed for the Siberian ice on the 24th of June, 1893.
Few of the orthodox shipbuilders, even when they heard
of the Frames unique specifications, believed she would survive
her deliberate embedding in the Arctic ice. Her builder has
left a note on the expedition’s chances as generally viewed :
Nor were the accounts of previous voyages in high latitudes
encouraging. Many a fine ship had been tried and found wanting,, thus
adding strength to the general belief that the pressure of the ice is
irresistible. When therefore the Fram was fitted out and ready for sea,
it was undoubtedly still the prevailing opinion among those who had
seen her while being built, that we might see Nansen and his men again ;
but the ship—never.
NANSEN S VOYAGE IN THE FRAM
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
305
§8
The Fram, that famous Argo, is worthy a short description,
to herself. From stem to stern she measured only 128 feet, the
extreme breadth was 36 feet, the sides were inclined, saucer-
wise, in a fashion so that pressure would tend to elevate the
ship. The outside timbers were paper smooth so that the
crushing ice would, find no grip in its task of elevation ; and
those sides, of Italian oak, were from 24 to 28 inches thick.
T. he ship was rigged as a three-masted fore-and-aft schooner ;
under steam.it was calculated her engines could attain for her
a speed of six or seven knots ; wells were provided for both
screw and rudder so that they could be hoisted on deck in
emergencies among the cruising ice. Between them, Nansen
and Archer had evolved a vessel as unique in construction as
she was to prove in performance.
Of the crew Sverdrup from the Greenland venture had
inevitably been appointed commander, the others are a listing
of. very gallant names of whom only Hjalmar Johansen, the
ship s stoker, need be mentioned here. Nansen had promul¬
gated and was to enforce a strict enough discipline, but little
on military or naval models, it was a discipline imposed by a
directing equal upon fellow equals, eating, sleeping and
working were much in common, there was little of ward¬
room and forecastle spirit in the ship that saw Vardo, the last
of Norway sink behind on the 21st of July.
Through free running, foggy seas the Fram, built for
endurance, not comfort, held a lurching way north eastwards.
Presently ice was encountered and twisting amidst its channels
the ship behaved to admiration. Nevertheless, Nansen became
worried even thus early. Such ice argued ill for the condition
of the Kara Sea.
But. the icy waters slipped off and about the Fram with
an admirable ease : on the 29th of July they put in at Tront-
heim, collected the dog-teams of the expedition, great brutes
on which Nansen looked with displeasure, for most of the males
had been gelded and he had planned to breed litters of puppies
during the polar drift. However, it was too late in the year
to collect other beasts. They were tried out on the ice, to
the hilarity and danger of the sledgers, Nansen, according to
himself, sitting dumb with fright” while the teams tangled
u
306 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
and fought. They were disentangled, whipped to obedience,
bidden recognize their masters and shipped aboard the Fram.
They sailed again on the 3rd of August, on the fourth crept
into the dreaded Kara Sea, veiled in great fog banks. Here they
anchored, and Nansen went ashore, staring anxiously at the
twining mists that made further progress momentarily
impossible. They must lift soon or the easterning he planned
would be seriously curtailed.
They lifted on the 9th. All about the Kara drifted loose
cakings of ice, a sea dangerous and inadequately charted
over which the Ftcwi began to creep. Islands rose black peaks
out of the blue green of the sailing ice, day on day, as they
made good speed, sunshine presently coming, the weather
awaiting their passing.
On the 20th of August, still in that sunshine, they reached
the Kjellman Islands, and anchored to refit the boiler and go
ashore in search of fresh game. They had ample food and
supplies, but Nansen’s great legs longed for the land. He
sighted a herd of reindeer and hunted it, he and Sverdrup,
complicatedly. The deer ran : so did Nansen. The deer hid .
so did Nansen. Finally, several reindeer were killed, then a
polar bear encountered and also slaughtered. Rejoicing, the
hunters returned to their boat and found it awash and most
of the goods in it ruined. The tide was running against their
return to the Fram, and they reached it exhausted. Arctic
sport had its risks.
Winter was near. The ice closed in about them, seemingly
in an impenetrable block as the Fram cruised to and fro in
search of an eastward channel. They landed and hunted again
and stared at the sky and the ice in a foreboding hopelessness,
as Nansen was to tell. Should they be forced to winter here and
explore this meagre neighbourhood instead of attempting the
great venture of the drift f But on the 5 th of September a
great storm arose, howling in the rigging of the Fram. Next
day they looked out and saw a channel winding eastwards,
ice-clear. It had opened for them, miraculously, and for five
days they made good speed through it. Cape Cheluskin was
made on the 10th, the northernmost point .of land. Beyond
that point they must seek the chances of the ice-drift.
Now, far south, in Central Asia, in the black tropic lands
of Siberia, rises the Lena, flowing north into tundra and
gold-field and emptying its yet warm waters by the New
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
307
Siberia Islands. Around that outlet the water is clear and
unimpeded for many leagues. The Fram found itself again
sailing an open sea. But on the 20th of September the ice-
belt was again sighted, “long and compact, shining through
the fog”. They were in 770 44' N. latitude.
Here came the fogs again, curling carded from the grind and
uproar of that strange mass of ice which swayed on the hinter¬
lands of the warm Lena currents. Cruising its verge, it seemed
to Nansen that verily it moved. But a doubt of himself and all
his enterprise came upon him. Was that movement continuous,
wide and deep over the shallow sea he had postulated as a
necessity for the trans-Polar drift of the Fram ? Or merely a
delusion ?
There was nothing to do but put it to the test, to attempt
the strangest venture yet made in quest of the Fortunate
Isles, those impossible Isles lying back and beyond that blanket
of the dark to the North. September was nearing its end and
there was no sign of a fresh channel through the ice to lead
them further into the drift and make assurance doubly sure
of the position of the Fram in that drift. They sailed up within
reach of a great ice-block and made fast to it with anchors.
Monday, September 25th. Frozen in faster and faster. Beautiful
still weather ; 13 degrees of frost last night. Winter is coming now.
§9
They made themselves fast for that winter to the berg,
foreknowing the long while—perhaps a stretch of years—that
the Fram must anchor there. Workshops were fitted up, a
windmill erected to drive the dynamo for the electric plant,
arrangements made for the taking of regular observations. It
was a little community established in the ice, awaiting the
northing of the drift.
And very speedily there came doubts of that northing.
Between the 20th of September, when they moored them¬
selves to the ice and the 7th of November, a month and a half
later, the wind shifted them to and fro, and on the seventh they
found themselves back in the original latitude of the ship. There
was no sign of that continuous current, Pole-sweeping, that
Nansen had calculated would drive the ice from the warm
mouth of the Lena across the shallow Polar sea. Instead,
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
308
month after month the soundings proved the sea the reverse
of shallow : soundings of two thousand fathoms were recorded.
To appearance the orthodox in their calculations had been
right, Nansen himself deplorably wrong. There seemed no
more than an outward drift (were the wind in good position)
from the Siberian shore, and cessation of that drift, and then
a slow and uncertain backwards wash towards the shore again.
To and fro, fast in the grip of the ice as the old year waned
and the new came in went the Fram ; Christmas Day and New
Year’s Day were celebrated with much feasting and genial
clowning, but Nansen turned to stare again at the chart-
markings with furrowed brows. About was the grind and clash
of the ice under the unlifting Arctic night, sometimes broken
by the crying of a far coyote, the bowlings of the dogs on
deck as they scented raiding bears, the sound of the wheeling
arms of the windmill, now droning deeply, now laggard and
hesitant as the wind currents ebbed and veered and died.
Before the first of April 1894 they had crossed the 80th parallel
three times.
One degree in five months. If we go on at this rate we shall be at
the Pole in forty-five, or say fifty, months, and in ninety or one hundred
months at 8o°N. lat. on the other side of it. . . . At best, if things go
on as they are doing now, we shall be home in eight years.
The Fram was provisioned for five. But was his calculating
backed by the evidence at all ? . . . And then he would remem¬
ber the relics of the Jeannette, and, undisputable, the only
theory that could account for their drift from Bering to
Greenland. A drift there must be.
Bears came killing the dogs in their kennels on deck and
were hunted away and killed in their turn. Birds were seen
now and again as the winter night lessened ; Nansen ordered
out all the crew for two hours ski-ing practice daily in case of
a raid on the Pole or the chance of the Fram being crushed.
But the ship was as steadfast as Nansen wished he himself could
be, looking at that zigzagging of the chart around and over and
over yet again the line of the 80th parallel.
With the spring the big floes about them took to titanic
gambollings, breaking and smashing and rearing great masses
one upon the other—masses that sometimes overtowered the
Fram in threatening attitude. The din of the ice was con¬
tinuous, the Fram quivered and groaned unceasingly ; but the
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 309
Italian timber was seasoned and strong, the calculations and
architecture of Colin Archer unimpeachable. Sometimes the
violent quiverings of the ship, hours’ long, was as agonizing as
extreme toothache, and Nansen would escape in the sport and
exercise on the ice.
Summer came and the ice cracked away into innumerable
channels, too small to be worth the trouble of attempting to
force the Fram through. The drift continued confusingly
about the Both parallel and Nansen was slowly tempered in
that time of adversity to an austereness of outlook that had
never been his before in all his sanguine life. He tasted of the
bitter wine of unfulfilment that had wetted the lips of many
another of the earth conquerors in their quests—the same
quest as his. Then the summer, even the unending summer,
waned at last. Birds left them. The ice-groaning ceased as the
bergs froze up again. And with that happening came a strange
and (by this time) unlooked-for miracle. The slow drifting and
counter-drifting ceased. A consistent north-west drift set in.
By the 1st of November the Fram had crossed the eighty-
second parallel, and high hopes rose in Nansen’s heart. Then
the speed of the drift lessened. Still the northing held. At
New Year’s Day, 1895, they were beyond the 83rd.
But that winter was long and terrifying in moments when
a man was alone as Nansen was often alone, with the full
responsibility of the expedition on his shoulders. And some¬
times that burden slipped aside and another took its place, till
it seemed in the frozen silences of the Arctic night that all the
burden of the strange adventure of humanity was borne by
him under the white, cold, unfriendly stars. He would walk out
on the ice alone and stand and look at that great arching of the
Galaxy above him and realize again the loneliness of Man, what
a little adventure in truth was his, how strange the puny aims
and hopes and fears he had in this brief flicker of light betwixt
darkness that he called life. And he filled the space of that
flicker not with ease and peace and sustenance and friendship
and lust, but with a wild debating and crying and adventuring
in quest of—he knew not what ! . . . Till at last, all over
the world would descend again when the sun cooled great
ice-sheets even as those that cased the Fram ; and Man and
his strange adventure cease for ever, that Earthly Paradise
unattained.
Yet—it had been attempted. . . .
310 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Such the mood in page on page of his journal, the modern
Stoic’s acceptance of the terror and beauty and ultimate
tragedy of all life. It left an enduring mark in Nansen, even
in that subsequent inconsequent career of his. That it was
justified either by science or hope we may question : that it
was the mood proper to the last earth conqueror the artist at
least can appreciate. . . .
And down through the night the howl of a fox.
Oh, at times this inactivity crushes one’s very soul; one’s life seems
as dark as the winter night outside ; there is sunlight upon no part of
it except the past and the far, far distant future.
§ 10
Early in the dark winter-night of 1895 the Fram took a
list to port under the enormous pressures of the ice. Nansen
feared that it would be necessary to abandon the ship and gave
orders for stores to be carried out on the ice, together with all
the necessary gear and sledges for a retreat on foot. But even
under the enormous pressures, and a ridge that rode over the
rest of the ice-surface and capsized over and about the Fram
till it half-buried the vessel, the ship held. Then the pressure
stopped and slowly the ship began to right herself.
As the spring of the new year came Nansen perfected a
plan that had been slowly shaping to being throughout the
previous year. He now was certain of the Polar drift, but almost
equally certain that that drift would never carry the ship
across the Pole itself. And, though he had set out with the
avowed intention of exploring the Polar area, not attempting
theatrical risks to attain that “actual mere mathematical
point” it was the mathematical point more than anything else
that had really drawn him, though all his life he refused to
confess it. . . . If the Fram might not make the voyage, men
on foot could surely make the journey.
He decided to take two kayaks, three sledges, all the service¬
able dogs, and only one human companion on this dash for
the Earthly Paradise. The Fram he was to leave under the
command of Sverdrup, with instructions to the latter to con¬
tinue all observations and scientific work possible, to abandon
the ship only at the direst necessity, and when at length it
freed from the ice to take it back to Norway from whatever
point in the Arctic Circle clear water was attained. He gave
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 3H
much careful thought to provisions and training for the
attempt on the Pole, planning to march the 450 miles in fifty-
days and then turn back and attempt the Seven Isles, north of
Spitzbergen, a distance of 720 miles.
It would be a trek of eleven hundred miles over unknown
country, or rather ice.
He discussed the plan with Sverdrup and finally chose as
his companion Hjalmar Johansen, a genial, strong and healthy
man with whom he was to keep the best of relations through¬
out their long months together—a task not too easy for pne of
Nansen’s sanguine and impatient temperament, which so
easily took on the appearance if not the reality of domineering.
The rest of the crew appear to have viewed the chances of this
fresh expedition with a commendable warmth. It was planned
to start in mid-February.
But various reasons delayed the plan. After a false start
they returned for additional sledges, finally setting out with
six in all; again they halted and returned to the ship to
rearrange the loads. So it was as late as the 14th of March
before the two men finally took last leave of the ship, with
three sledges, looking back at the Fram ensconced amidst the
towering hummocks. She was in latitude 84° 4' N. 102° E. long.
They were three hundred and fifty miles south of the Polp.
At the calculated rate of travelling they should reach it in
fifty days, leaving four months for the retreat to Spitzbergen—
a race with the closing in of the winter night.
The cold grew ever more intense as they marched north¬
ward throughout March, over ice level and pleasing. They
hoped it would keep in like condition till they reached the
Pole. But towards the end of March the ice grew hummocky,
great pressure ridges serrated all the forward horizon and travel
record dropped from fourteen miles a day to sometimes half
that amount. It grew even colder. At night they slept frozen
in their clothes, eating painfully and exhaustedly with frost-
encrusted lips. Still the progress was slow.
The dogs tired, fought, bit through their traces; some
escaped. A north-east wind added its quota of discomfort for
both dogs and men ; the former were bitterly over-driven,
lashed to death, and then abandoned. Their fate—their unes-
capable fate—was to haunt Nansen with moments of bitter
self-reproach in after years. But now, in quest of that ultimate
hope, he was ruthless.
312 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
Pressure ridges, snowstorms, and intersecting lanes of
open water met them in April with their barriers to quick
advance. The two fought on through and over difficulties
like men possessed till Nansen found they were making less
than four miles a day. Suddenly the insanity of a further
pressing forward into those desolate regions of ice came upon
him. Unless conditions improved 
They did not improve. Instead, they grew worse. Lanes,
ice-ridges, endless cakings of ice-blocks piled up in front of
their stumbling feet; the dogs pattered with bruised and
swollen pads. Continually they had to stop and drag the
sledges up and down the hummocks; continually free the
teams from this and that angle. Forward, in that unknown
North, the vision of the Pole grew fainter and fainter in
Nansen’s eyes. Even were they to keep their health and attain
it at last, sometime in June it might be, it would be impossible
ever to return. And as the vision faded and common sense came
in its place, commendable, the triumph of the scientist over
the earth-adventurer, there closed down finally the second
great phase in Nansen’s life. He was never quite again to attain
to those heights of sublime and hopeless hope he had known in
the long winter nights of the Fram, never to such high vision
as in the early days of the dash on the Pole. On the 7th of
April he decided to turn about, if the next day’s trek proved as
difficult.
The ice grew worse and worse and we got no way. Ridge after ridge,
and nothing but rubble to travel over. ... It was a veritable chaos
of ice-blocks stretching as far as the horizon. There is not much sense
in keeping on longer ; we are sacrificing valuable time and doing little.
They halted at the furthest point attained, 86° 14/ N. lat.
within 235 nautical miles of the North Pole, having covered a
hundred and fifteen miles in twenty-three days’ sledging.
Turning about with the last Fortunate Isle still unglimpsed
and untrodden (as indeed, it still remains untrodden, for
Admiral Peary’s claim to have reached it is of as doubtful
authenticity as Dr. Cook’s) they set out on the long trek for
Spitzbergen.
§ 10
On the 21 st of April they came on a huge piece of timber,
mysteriously erupting from the face of the ice. They carved
their initials upon it and went on. Was land near at hand ?
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 3I3
But they never sighted that land (if such land there is)
though the trails of foxes crossed theirs now and again. They
were again in a region traversed and retraversed by open water
lanes which made the dragging of the sledges a vexation and a
weariness to the flesh and spirit. Week on week they fought
their way southward, killing the dogs as they abandoned the
sledges, feeding dead dog to live dog which on the morrow
would itself be dead. The dog-killing Nansen found a grisly
business—he had softened from the joyous young butcher who
helped to man the sealer Viking. Mid-May brought them to
even wider lanes, filled with narwhals, unchancy beasts which
they hunted, slew and devoured. Then they held south again.
There came no sign of land and sudden and devastating
hopelessness assailed Nansen as he stared south at those rifting
lanes in the ice—“we do not know where we are and we do not
know when this will end”. Summer though it was, and Arctic
birds now common, food had run perilously short till on the
22nd of June Johansen shot a seal. Kayaks were launched and
they took to the opening lanes.
But they had opened insufficiently to allow for a hurrying
progress. The two men camped and waited for a wider dispersal
of the ice. June passed while they waited, the ice showing no
sign of widening its rifts. Bear came and were shot and skinned
and provided thick furs on which to squat inside the smoke-
blackened tent. At length, in mid-July, in desperation they
took to scrambling south again.
So doing, they came in sight of land. They had drifted little
for the good reason that land blocked the drift. While they
made the black peaks rising from the surface of the ice they
encountered a bear which bit Johansen and was with difficulty
killed by Nansen, an heroic encounter in true old style. Then
they took to the kayaks and so reached the unknown islands
which Nansen christened White Land, landing on the solid
ground for the first time in a fantastic long two years.
Good hunting conditions kept them alive and they sought
a way south with the kayaks. But again and again they were
driven back, and finally, with the rising of the August storms,
it became plain to Nansen that they could not attempt the
journey that year. The prospect was appalling, but they must
stay in those islands if they were to live..
They set about building a house with loose stones and
earth, in sight of astounded Arctic foxes.
314 NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN
_ On the 15th of October they saw the last of the sun. Their
third Polar night was upon them, to be spent in the darkness
and stench and chilly unease of a badly made stone hut.
Beasts came and dragged away and devoured the carcases which
they had stored for food. The grease and sweat and soot
hardened to thick layers on their faces, it was impossible, even
on such occasions as they achieved boiling water, to wash the
filth from their clothes. The boredom was maddening : they
would leave the hut alone and stalk the ice and Nansen glower
south with that almost facile despair that came to him now so
comparatively readily. Would they ever escape this dreadful
life, ever again see the lights and the kindly faces of Norway,
ever meet his Eva and his Liv again ? Memory of his child was
alternate hope and torture. Magnificent as a specimen in so
many ways, the last of the earth conquerors was no less magnifi¬
cent as the typical and splendid monogamist, a great lover and
writer though he had turned his back on the Fortunate Isles
and was never now to attain them.
Johansen snored of nights, an exasperation which drove
Peace-Scarer to kick him violently. Placidly, Johansen shook
himself and snored on. Their hair and beards grew long and
matted—they grew them for the sake of warmth. Unending
night unending unease, with bodies never properly dry, never
clean, never free. Would the winter ever pass ?
Yet even it at last was over. In March, just as the daylight
came and their provisions were exhausted, a considerate bear
put in an appearance. He was instantly killed and feasted upon.
With April, loading the kayaks with their gear, they prepared
for the journey south. On the 19th of May they began the
journey, but with sledges. A running wind led them to hoist
sails, as once Nansen had done in Greenland, and they made
good progress for a time. Then face-biting snowstorms awoke
and plagued the dragging treks of a long June.
In mid-June they took to the kayaks, fighting off walruses,
obstreperous beasts which feared man not at all, but were
filled with immense desire to gaze on the two scarecrows with
the paddles. Once the kayaks were upset and they spent a day
drying their goods. In a kayak a hole six inches long had been
ripped. That was on the 15th of June.
On the morning of the 17th, rising and emerging from the
ragged tent to set about the preparation of a meagre breakfast,
Nansen was startled to hear far in the south a noise which he
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN 315
took to be the barking of dogs. Johansen came out and listened
beside him. Nansen set off to investigate, his hands trembling.
“Suddenly I thought I heard a shout from a human voice,
a strange voice, the first for three years.” His habitual control
left him. He stumbled up a shelving mass of hummocks, crying
aloud, crying he knew not what, seeing behind that voice
salvation, Norway again, the lights of Oslo, security from that
awful darkness in the North that shrouded the unattained
Earthly Paradise, seeing his Eva Sars again. ...
And amidst the ice-ridges, towards him, came hurrying
a man, shaved and clean and welcoming. A white man. _
It was Jackson of the Jackson-Harmsworth Expedition to
Spitzbergen.
§ 12
So he was freed and the great adventure accomplished. The
Windward of the English Expedition took him and Johansen
home to Norway, to Hammerfest where an intelligent cow was
the only being that appeared to recognize him as he walked up
the public street—the cow stared a bovine astonishment—to
the arms of his Eva again. And at Hammerfest came the news
that the Fram itself had won safely clear from the ice, after
being frozen in a long three years, and also was on the way
home to Norway. It put in at Skjeervo on the 20th of August,
and Nansen made for it, and kindliness pulls down a veil on
the gladness of the meeting with Sverdrup and his gallant
Argonauts.
So we passed from town to town, from fete to fete, along the coast
of Norway. It was on the 9th of September that the Fram steamed
up Oslo Fjord and met with a reception such as a prince might have
envied. The stout old men-of-war, Nordstjernen and Elida, the new
and elegant Valkyrie and the nimble little torpedo boats, led the way
for us. Steamboats swarmed round all black with people. There were
flags high and low, salutes, hurrahs, waving of handkerchiefs and hats,
radiant faces everywhere, the whole fjord one multitudinous welcome.
There lay home and the well-known strand before it, glittering and
smiling in the sunshine. Then steamers on steamers again, shouts after
shouts; and we all stood, hat in hand, bowing as they cheered.
The whole of Peppervik was one mass of boats and people and
flags and waving pennants. Then the men-of-war saluted with thirteen
guns apiece, and the old fort of Akershus followed with its thirteen
peals of thunder, that echoed from the hills around.
316 nine against the unknown
In the evening I stood on the strand out by the fjord. The echoes
had died away, and the pinewoods stood silent and dark around. On
the headland the last embers of a bonfire of welcome still smouldered
and smoked, and the sea rippling at my feet seemed to whisper : “Now
you are at home.” The deep peace of the autumn evening sank bene¬
ficently over the weary spirit.
I could not but recall that rainy morning in June when I last set
foot on this strand. More than three years had passed ; we had toiled
and we had sown, and now the harvest had come. In my heart I sobbed
and wept for joy and thankfulness.
The ice and the long moonlit Polar nights, with all their yearning,
seemed like a far-off dream from another world—a dream that had come
and passed away. But what would life be worth without its dreams ?
So he passes from our vision, the last of the great earth-
conquerors, to that life that surely sometimes was to seem
dimly irrelevant to the great quest of the Pole that had
once been his: to a mean squabbling on home politics, to
helping Norway attain her nationhood and all the prides and
prejudices that went with that attainment, to minute dredg¬
ings and weighings in Northern seas, to a long, puzzled
neutrality during the War—for even the eagle grows old ; to
that ten years’ spurt of energy in Russia and at Geneva which
awoke for the world again the magic of the earth-conqueror’s
name—this time the conquest of pity and compassion, perhaps
the truest conquest of all, the strait and undeniable way to
those Fortunate Isles that his countryman Leif Ericsson first
set forth to seek nine hundred years before.
THE END
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
I
Human History. G. Elliot Smith. 1930.
Social Organization. W. H. R. Rivers. 1924.
Ancient Hunters. W. J. SoLlas. 1924.
A he Origin of Magic and Religion. W.J. Perry. I923*
The Children of the Sun. W.J. Perry. 1926.
First Player. Ivor Brown. 1927.
The Golden Age. H. J. Massingham. 1927
11
Discovery of America by Northmen. E. N. Horsford. 1888.
The Landfall of Leif Eiriksen, A.D. 1002. E. N. Horsford. 1892
Leifs House in Vineland. E. N. Horsford. 1893.
Leif Erikson. M. A. Brown. 1888.
The Northmen in America. G. M. Gathorne Hardy. 1924.
In Northern Mists. Fridtjof Nansen. 1911.
La Saga d’Eirik le Rouge, version du Flatey B6k. 1924.
(In La Dhouverte de VAmirique par les Normandes. Langlois.)
hi
The Book of Marco Polo. Trans, and comment. H. Yule. Three
vols. 1903.
317
318
BIBLIOGRAPHY
IV
Columbus and His Discovery of America. H. B. Adams and H. Wood.
1892.
Tmago Mundi . . . Cardinal P. d’Ailly. 1930.
Cristobal Colon y Cristdforo Columbo. R. Beltran y Rozpide. 1921.
The Geographical Conceptions of Columbus. G. E. Nunn. 1924.
The Voyages of Christopher Columbus. Cecil Jane. 1930.
Historia della vita e dei fatti di Cristoforo Colombo. F. Colombo.
1930.
v
Relacidn de los naufragios y comentarios de Alvar Nunez Cabefa de Vaca.
M. Serrano y Sanz. 1904.
The Narrative of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca. Trans. T. Bucking¬
ham Smith. 1907.
The Commentaries of A. Nuftez Cabeza de Vaca. Trans. L. L.
Dominguez. 1891.
VI
La Primera Vuelta al Mundo. Relacion documentada del viaje de
Hernando de Magallanes, etc. V. Llorens Asensio. 1903.
The Life of Ferdinand Magellan. F. H. H. Guillemard. 1925.
VII
Bering’s Voyages. F. A. Colder. Two vols. 1922-25.
VIII
The Travels of Mungo Park (Everyman Library).
Niger: The Life of Mungo Park. Lewis Grassic Gibbon. 1934.
bibliography
3X9
IX
First Footsteps in East Africa. R. F. Burton. Two vols. 1893.
The Lake Regions of Central Africa. R. F. Burton. Two vols. i860.
Life of Captain Sir R. F. Burton. Lady Burton. 1889.
Fhe Real Sir Richard Burton. W. P. Dodge. 1907.
x
Fhe First Crossing of Greenland. F. Nansen. 1892.
Eskimo Life. F. Nansen. 1893.
Farthest North. F. Nansen. Two vols. 1897.
F he Saga of Fridtjof Nansen. J. SSrensen. 1932.
MESSRS. JARROLDS’
List of General Literature and Fiction
for AUTUMN 1954
A selection of Authors represented
HERBERT ASBURY
H. C. ASTERLEY
STANLEY BARON
ARNOLD BENNETT
WALTER BODIN
R. V. C. BODLEY
CHARLOTTE M. BRAME
MARGARET M. BRASH
FRANK BUCK
J. C. CANNELL
“CHEIRO” (Count Louis Hamon
HENRY COCHET
DOROTHY COTTRELL
RUPERT CROFT-COOKE
RICHMAL CROMPTON
JAMES OLIVER CURWOOD
HERMAN DAREWSKI
CATHERINE I. DODD
WINIFRED DUKE
JAMES HENRY DUVEEN
Col. P. T. ETHERTON
J. S. FLETCHER
SYDNEY FOWLER
PETER FREUCHEN
WILLIAM GERHARDI
LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
SUSAN GLASPELL
GEORGE GODWIN
DENIS GWYNN
JOHN S. HECHT
BARBARA HEDWORTH
JAMES B. HENDRYX
BURNET HERSHEY
ARTHUR E. HILMAR
SYDNEY HORLER
LIONEL HOUSER
RUPERT HUGHES
EDGAR JEPSON
CHARLES R. JOHNS
MARGARET JOHNSON
SAMUEL E. KANE
FRANK KING
HUGH KINGSMILL
Dr. HELMUT KLOTZ
MARGERY LAWRENCE
FANNY HEASLIP LEA
WILLIAM LE QUEUX
RICHARD A. LOEDERER
HUGH MACDIARMID
MARTHE MCKENNA
SIR GEORGE MACMUNN
ETHEL MANNIN
Lt.-Col. WALTER S. MASTERMAN
JOHN METCALFE
R. J. MINNEY
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
OLIVE MOORE
E. B. OSBORN
COLLINSON OWEN
FREDERICK PALMER
MARGARET PETERSON
G. WARD PRICE
Mrs. VICTOR RICKARD
MARSHALL SAUNDERS
NELLE M. SCANLAN
EDGAR SNOW
NICHOLAS SNOWDEN
ANDREW SOUTAR
H. HESSELL TILTMAN
ARTHUR TORRANCE
LOUIS TRACY
SELDON TRUSS
JO VAN AMMERS-KULLER
J. VAN DYKE
LOUIS JOSEPH VANCE
J. H. WALLIS
FRANZ WERFEL
ALEXANDER WERTH
Mrs. STANLEY WRENCH
S. FOWLER WRIGHT
CURTIS YORKE
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON Limited
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
{Founded 1770)
AUTUMN, 1934
3
General Literature
FOREVER WANDERING
By Ethel Mannin
Author of “Confessions and Impressions” (lyth Impression),
“All Experience” (jth Impression), “Hunger of the Sea”,
“Pilgrims”, “Sounding Brass”, “Green Willow”, “Linda
Shawn”, “Venetian Blinds”, “Men Are Unwise”, etc., etc.
“POR EVER wandering with a hungry heart, much have
I seen and known,” Tennyson makes Ulysses declare,
and Miss Mannin borrows aptly from this quotation for her
new book of travel-sketches and impressions. Miss Mannings
wanderings take her to the Criminal Court of the Old Bailey,
to the Swiss Alps, to the Vienna woods, to Czecho-Slovakia ;
to the West of Ireland, and numerous other places both on
and off the beaten track; they involve her in an encounter
with an imitation Charlie Chaplin in Leicester Square, and a
romantic taxi-driver in Vienna ; they end in trouble with
the Viennese Socialists for writing about the poverty
existing under the Socialist regime. The book was written
in response to the many people who wrote to her asking her
to write another All Experience, and it is dedicated to them.
The book will certainly not disappoint the many admirers of
that entertaining volume, and will undoubtedly make new
friends for its author, for it has that freshness and unconven¬
tionality of point of view, and that verve and vitality, associ¬
ated with all Miss Mannin’s work.
Demy Kvo lor. C>d. net
THE LAST STRONGHOLDS
By Colonel P. T. Etherton
Author of “Across the Roof of the World”, “In the Heart
of Asia”, “Adventures in Live Continents”, co-Author of
“First Over Everest”, “Manchuria : the Cockpit of Asia”,
“Japan : Mistress of the Pacific ?” etc.
'pHIS is a travel book full of colour and vivid impressions
-*• of the world’s highest mountains—the far-famed
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
JARROLDS’ LIST
Himalayas—and adjacent ranges, the land of weird evasive¬
ness and mystery. The stories of the strange peoples who
live there : of monasteries and monks whose lives are dedi¬
cated to the worship of Everest as the Goddess Mother of the
World : the curious rites and customs : the inner story of the
Himalayas and the wonderful wild life to be found there, are
presented to the reader by a revealing and descriptive pen.
The narrative is enthralling to a degree in its description of
the region itself—that land of lofty heights which no Czesar
of India could cross, forming an almost impenetrable barrier
between Hindustan and Tibet and full of age-old romance
and history. The Himalayas have been written about before,
but few traveller-authors are so well qualified to write on
the subject as Colonel Etherton, who has lived in that land
for many years and who in this book tells a very great deal
which is new. Readers will recall that Colonel Etherton was
Honorary Organising Secretary of the Houston-Mt. Everest
Flight.
Not the least attractive feature of this distinctive book is
the number of superb illustrations.
Large Demy %vo Lavishly Illustrated About i8j\ net
MELODIOUS MEMORIES
L>y Herman Darewski
HERE is a volume of piquant and entertaining reminis¬
cences. Mr. Herman Darewski, the well-known
composer of some three thousand songs, has written for most
of the leading vaudeville musical comedy and film stars and
can probably claim to have scored a record number of popular
“hits”.
Few people have seen so much of life from unusual angles
or have travelled so widely as Mr. Darewski, and in his book
he shews himself to be a shrewd and witty commentator on
life as he has met it. There is a host of intimate stories and
anecdotes of social leaders, eminent people in the professions
and politics, as well as of the great stage favourites of yester¬
day and to-day. Melodious Memories is a book of great
charm and will please alike the “moderns” and those who
remember the stage in its heyday.
Large Crown %vo Illustrated About iBr. net
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
5
AUTUMN, 1934
THE ART OF TENNIS
By Henry Cochet
HENRY COCHET’S victorious career is familiar to tennis
players throughout the world, and here, at last, is a book
on his own subject written by the famous champion himself.
This work is not just a series of generalizations by an expert,
but a detailed discussion of the Art of Tennis from the
awkward preliminary stages to the coveted triumphs of Paris
and Wimbledon.
M. Cochet is convinced that no one need despair of be¬
coming a good tennis player—but that the style and tactics
of the player should be modelled upon his personal charac¬
teristics and temperament. This is distinctly encouraging
news—to many of us, at any rate—and, as explained by
M. Cochet, it seems amazingly simple.
Each chapter in the book deals with a particular stroke or
position on the Court, together with some useful suggestions
on keeping fit both in and out of season. Cochet’s advice,
carefully followed, will be found more valuable to the novice
than a summer’s faulty playing, and will come as a revelation
to the average player whose backhand has always been a
bugbear, or whose smashing service so often sends the ball
into the wrong court. And the tournament player, cherish¬
ing a vision of the Centre Court, cannot do better than to
read and profit by the author’s experience. Finally, whether
you are interested in Tennis or not, it is impossible not to
become an enthusiast when you have read this book.
Crown %vo Profusely Illustrated About 5/. net
IT’S A SMALL WORLD : All About Midgets
By Burnet Hers hey and Walter Bodin
/TVHE subject of midgets has aroused the curiosity of man-
kind since the dawn of time. The midget appears in
history two thousand years before the Old Testament records
the appearance of Adam and Eve. For thousands of years
kings and princes prized them as wise counsellors or diverting
fools: they presented them as royal gifts.
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
6
JARROLDS’ LIST
There are three types of midget—infantile midgets, who
never attain maturity : primordial midgets, whose dwarfism
exists at birth and who develop more or less normally : and
true midgets, who are normally born children of normal
parents and whose physical growth ceases at an early age, and
who, apart from their size, are normal in all respects.
This is the first factual account of these fascinating and
extraordinary folk, and the authors, who spent many years in
collecting their material, here present an abundance of curious
data concerning them. It tells in detail the intimate lives
of midgets from birth to death. There are Casanovas and
Jezebels in this little world, and there have been midget kings,
painters, actors, musicians, statesmen and warriors. Principally
their battle is the battle or adjustment to an oversized
world.
Demy Sw Profusely Illustrated About izs. 6d. net
VOODOO FIRE IN HIATI
Dry Richard A. Loederer
/TVHIS is a travel book of peculiar and extraordinary charm
^ by a Viennese writer and artist of international renown.
No other writer has better succeeded in portraying the sinister
fascination of the island of magic and mystery which is
Haiti.
Although the tropics have been described often enough,
Loederer has much to relate that is unknown or little-known.
Here we have an artist who seeks adventure and finds it,
and absorbs everything with eye and soul and mind. With
his crayon and pen he reproduces every aspect of the exotic
scene, living and plastic, as variegated as tropical nature, and
tragic and serene like the stirring life that is depicted.
As the author roams the jungle with banjo and easel,
with revolver and machete, he sees and feels much that other
travellers have missed, and both the jungle and its denizens
reveal to him their closest secrets, their soul. Perhaps the
most unforgettable episodes of this memorable book are the
amazing anecdotes of Voodoo, the blood-cult of the negro
and his orgies, and the graphic sketch of the titanic career of
King Christopher, the Black Napoleon. The author also
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
tells of the first conquerors and of the gold-seekers, and many
other weird and startling incidents from the past and present
of the Black Republic.
The volume is illustrated from a series of superb woodcuts by the author which
have already attracted considerable attention at numerous Art exhibitions
Demj 8m? About 1 zs. Gd. net
THE BARBARY COAST : The Underworld of
San Francisco
Herbert Asbury
Author of “The Gangs of New York”, “The Crimson
R.ope” {a novel), etc.
CTHE BARBARY COAST—the underworld of San
Francisco—was for some seventy years the scene of
more viciousness and more depravity—but at the same time
possessed more glamour—than any other area of vice and
crime on the American continent. From its beginnings in
the gold-rush days until its abolition in 1917, it was a byword
for wickedness and earned for San Francisco a well-deserved
reputation as the most sinful city in the world.
Mr. Asbury has traced its entire scarlet history. Here are
stories of the gambling-houses, the melodeons, the peep-shows,
the cribs, the concert saloons, the houses of prostitution,
and the murderers, shanghaiers, dive-keepers, politicians,
and courtesans that made San Francisco a stench in the
nostrils of reformers and spread its ill-fame throughout the
seven seas. It is an amazing record of iniquity practised
on the grand scale.
Mr. Asbury’s is the first complete account of the Barbary
Coast, and it is done with the same skill and scholarship
that made his previous book, The Gangs of New York,
such an important work in its field, and a best-seller too.
Demy 8 m? Illustrated iSj-. net
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
8
JARROLDS’ LIST
THE CASANOVA FABLE : A Satirical Revalu¬
ation
By William Gerhardi and Hugh Kingsmill
ASANOVA’S life and personality are here presented,
for the first time, in their true perspective. Was
Casanova successful with women ? What method did he
pursue ? Was Henriette, “the great love of his life”, only a
gold-digger ? Was M , the famous nun, a nun in any
reasonable sense of the word ? Why did the Italian Casanova
fail with La Charpillon, when a mere Englishman, John
Wilkes, succeeded ? What did the great Frederick think
of Casanova ? And the greater Catherine ? These are some
of the questions to which the authors supply or suggest the
true answers.
Demy Svo Illustrated from numerous coloured and black-and-
white drawings and an etching by Philip Youngman-Carter ijr. net
Limited Edition on Hand-made Paper Bound in half vellum
Copies numbered and signed by authors 25s. net
THIRTY YEARS WITH THE PHILIPPINE
HEAD-HUNTERS
By Samuel E. Kane
AAR. KANE served as a young man in the ranks of the
-*■ * American Army which was landed in the Philippines
to achieve the final conquest of the islands, and fought
throughout the campaign. After the capture of Aguinaldo,
the Filipino leader, he decided to stay on in the country—
chiefly to fulfil a boyhood ambition to prospect for gold—
and remained for over thirty years, living among the highland
tribes and leading a wildly adventurous life full of extra¬
ordinary risks and hardships. From the first he was the
friend of these fierce and strange people : fought for—and
occasionally against—them : taught them and learned from
them : and came to be regarded as a Chief of Chiefs. Finally
he was appointed Governor of the Bontoc Province.
A shrewd observer, with a sympathetic and understanding
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
9
mind, Mr. Kane has here given us an account of the Filipinos
which no other man could have written. His chapters on
head-hunting and its final suppression, trial marriage and the
rites, manners and customs of the natives between birth and
death, are remarkably interesting.
Large Demy Illustrated i8j\ net
MEMOIRS OF A SPY: Adventures along the
Eastern Fronts
jBy Nicholas Snowden
IN September 1914, at the age of nineteen, Nicholas
Snowden entered the Austro-Hungarian Secret Service.
The young agent’s first important commission was the bear¬
ing of a code message through the Russian lines into be-
leagured Przemysl. He repeated this difficult feat, had
some exciting experiences with a woman counter-spy, was
decorated by the Kaiser, made a prisoner-of-war in Russia,
where he escaped and continued his operations, returned
home, and soon again was active—this time along the Italian
front.
After the Red Revolution in Hungary, Snowden became a
Bolshevik army officer. By birth a citizen of the newly
created Czechoslovakia, he was now captured and sentenced
to death as a spy by the Hungarian government, but eventually
released, after many months in prison. This authentic
record of a spy’s daily life and adventures during the entire
period of the War and for several years after is as thrilling
and full of suspense as the most breath-taking mystery story.
Demy %vo With frontispiece izj-. 6J. net
WITH MY OWN EYES : A Personal Story of
Battle Years
By Frederick Palmer
THIS is the autobiography of America’s most famous
War Correspondent. Colonel Palmer saw many wars
before the World War : when he was twenty-four he reported
the Greco-Turkish war in 1895 : he was with the American
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
10
JARROLDS’ LIST
troops throughout the Philippine conflict: saw the Spanish-
American War : accompanied the Allied contingents on their
march to Peking during the Boxer rebellion: endured the
hardships and dangers of the unwelcome observer during
the Russo-Japanese war: and watched, understood and
described that usually insoluble mystery—warfare in the
Balkans. He knew the World War from an angle open to
no other man—that of Chief Censor of the A.E.F.
There are remarkable pen-pictures of men and things ; for
this is exceptionally well written. Frederick Palmer knew
everybody: brother correspondents in the drum-and-bugle
days : generals and admirals ; kings and ministers : national
heroes and international scoundrels. There are notable
portraits of Admiral Dewey and Theodore Roosevelt: a
thumbnail sketch of Hoover worth yards of words : a dis¬
cerning view of Japan and the Japanese character revealing
that inscrutable nation emerging from almost contemptible
obscurity into a high and menacing place among the powers.
With My Own Eyes is not only an absorbing story, to
be commended as on a par with the memoirs of von Blowitz,
but a valuable contribution to the history and understanding
of our times.
Large Demy %vo Lavishly Illustrated i8j\ net
JUNGLEMANIA
By Arthur Torrance, M.D.
ATAHESE are the experiences of an adventurous scientist
A in the jungles of Africa and Borneo. Dr. Torrance is
a Fellow of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and
in this book tells the story of two important tropical expedi¬
tions which he conducted at the request of the British Medical
Research Institute—one into the depths of Africa, through
Abyssinia and the black Sudan into the Congo and East
Africa : and the other into the interior of Borneo. His
accomplishments were awarded the Achievement Medal of
the International Adventurers (a similar medal was awarded
Byrd for his Polar Expedition).
But his story is very much more than a scientific record.
For ordinary readers it offers as fine and engrossing a tale
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
11
of adventure as they will find in many a day, and in the
main it recounts, one after another, weird, fantastic and
breathless experiences. During the African journey his chief
guide was a man known as Zambesi Jack, later to become
world-renowned as Trader Horn. Dr. Torrance gives many
interesting anecdotes about him, his quaint personality and his
jungle lore.
Junglemania is a book of rare fascination, shot through
with human interest and made tense with the thrills of
adventure, peril and daring courage. None should miss it.
Large Demy %vo Vrofusely Illustrated iSj-. net
THE “STAVISKY” CRISIS
jBy Alexander Werth (Paris Correspondent of the
Manchester Guardian)
'T'HE “Stavisky” Crisis shows how the French Republic was
shaken to its very foundations in the early part of 1934
and that the immediate cause of it was the Stavisky affair—
at first sight a mere financial swindle but one in which, as
France discovered only too soon. Cabinet Ministers, Members
of Parliament, Police Officials and Newspaper Editors were
deeply involved and without whose help a vulgar crook like
Stavisky could never have succeeded.
There is no English writer who is better qualified than
Mr. Alexander Werth for writing on the present crisis in
France. He not only has an exceptional knowledge of
French affairs, but also an intimate first-hand knowledge of
the events he describes and analyses. He was on the Con¬
corde bridge, outside the Chamber, during the shooting
on the tragic night of February 6, and was in the middle of the
Communist riots a few days later. He knows personally
most of the French political leaders and has had exceptional
opportunities for examining the Stavisky affair in every detail
and in relation to its political, historical and psychological
background.
Besides being the first authoritative account of the Stavisky
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
12
JARROLDS* LIST
business and its repercussions, the book contains valuable
information on French domestic and foreign affairs : the
alleged conflict between “Fascist” Paris and democratic
provincial France : the singular role played by the French
Press ; and on the various political forces—Fascist, Mon¬
archist, Republican, Socialist and Communist—from whose
present struggle another France may emerge.
Demy %vo Dully Illustrated About 12s. 6d. net
E.B.O. : On and Off the Pavement
By E. B. Osborn
TN the past, a number of Publishers have tried to secure
the reminiscences of the famous journalist and man of
letters whose initials are as widely known as L.-G.’s. At
last he has been persuaded to record in book form his in¬
numerable adventures both in and out of Fleet Street.
As Literary Editor for many years of the Morning Dost,
Mr. E. B. Osborn has seen as much as any living writer of
what has been called the “literary scrimmage”. He served
his apprenticeship to letters under W. E. Henley on the
National Observer with Barrie and Wells, and ever since has
been celebrated as a maker of prose and verse of delicate
distinction.
But literary activities have been only a part of his singu¬
larly full and varied life. He has had his wander-years, and
readers will enjoy his authentic stories of “wicked” cities,
gold-seeking, and hunting and trapping in the Far West and
High North. The chapter entitled “Lays of the Klondike”,
with its humorous verse narratives, is a unique feature.
This unusual book is the record of a life every moment 01
which has been lived and enjoyed, and the author’s joie de
vivre will be found contagious.
Demy Kvo Illustrated About 12s. 6d. net
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
13
GERMANY PREPARES FOR WAR
By Dr. Helmut Klotz
Author of “The Berlin Diaries”
PRESENT-DAY Germany has already shown its hand in
domestic politics and in international finance, but its
intentions in the sphere of armaments remain a dark enigma.
On the one hand, Herr Hitler professes peace while, on the
other, Germany is re-arming.
What is the extent of this re-armament ?
In this book, Dr. Klotz, an ex-officer of the German
Navy and an ex-Member of the Reichstag, considers German
preparations for the next war from every relevant point
of view. He deals with the intensive cultivation of the
militarist idea in schools and youth organizations, considers
the preparations for land, sea and air warfare with statistics
derived from the files of the German Ministry of War. He
discusses the plans of aggression prepared by the General
Staff and the preparations already well under way for their
realization. He reveals the new and terrible weapons already
under mass production in specified German factories, the
new gases and bacteria and their methods of dissemination.
He discusses the financial aspects of these preparations and
the unexampled psychological pressure exerted to secure the
total mobilization of all Germany’s energies for the prose¬
cution of military conquest. The key position of England in
the Nazi plans is dealt with at length.
This is a book which no person concerned with the safety
of his country and the survival of civilization can afford to
leave unread.
Crown Zvo About js. net
SOME ADVENTURES WITH A SCHOOL
By Margaret Johnson
Foreword by Ethel Mannin
AS a result of her experience in various large secondary
schools. Miss Johnson became convinced of the futility
of trying to educate children by the recognized system of
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
M
JARROLDS’ LIST
marks and examinations, and decided to start an ideal school
of her own—“where the children would be perfectly happy,
rejoice in lessons, become exceedingly clever, and, of course,
no trouble.”
The author describes the initial steps with quiet humour
and her later experiences with difficult pupils are depicted
with sympathy and understanding. She reviews the ten
years history of the school and at the same time gives her
views on all aspects of child-rearing and education under
the headings of Religion, Tidiness, Punishment, Sex, Pets,
etc. Miss Johnson’s aims and methods are sane and simple
and parents cannot fail to derive much valuable help from
a perusal of her book.
Crown Zvo About jr. net
COLLECTIONS AND RECOLLECTIONS: A
Century and a Half of Art Deals
JBy James Henry Duveen
TT is very rare indeed that one can peep behind the scenes
of world-famous art deals and be present at the secret
conclaves of equally well-known collectors and dealers.
Mr. Duveen, brother-in-law and cousin of the present Lord
Duveen of Millbank, has written a chronicle of the most
world-famous deals which in many places reads like pages
from the Arabian Nights.
Not only is there chapter and verse for each of his state¬
ments, which makes the book valuable to the connoisseur,
but there is also a silver thread of romance. There is un¬
written history in this book, details which have never before
appeared in print. Mr. Duveen traces the steps by which he
became a collector, speaks of the advice and guidance received
from his uncles and others of the Duveen family, and recounts
his early struggles against the giants of the art-dealing world
and the members of the “Knock-out Ring”.
Through the whole tale runs an authentic note. It is a
story which could be written by only one man in a thousand.
Fact is here proved more amazing than fiction, and the book
will inevitably attract wide notice.
Large Demy %vo Strikingly Illustrated 18/. net
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
15
AUTUMN, 1934
FAR EASTERN FRONT
By Edgar Snow
ApHE epochal events in Japan, China and Manchuria
-*■ have long demanded an interpreter and a writer who
has a complete knowledge of his subject and of the person¬
alities involved. Until the appearance of this book most
of the literature on the subject has tended to bewilder the
reader with an inextricable web of tangled political events.
Mr. Snow writes lucidly and with remarkable descriptive
powers. His book will be found to be dramatic and exciting,
as it tells of the events on the plains of Manchuria and south
of it in the heart of ancient China, and reveals in graphic
sequence the long-projected expansion of Japan towards the
beginnings of an Empire in Asia. But it is a human and
not a political book.
Mr. Snow cleverly uses three methods in telling his story
—clear and brief narratives of actual events ; the record of
his own adventures during many years’ stay in China as a Press
Correspondent; and his personal opinion of the generals,
bandits, spies and statesmen involved in this drama of con¬
quest. His chapters dealing with Japan’s tragic and mis¬
taken attack on Shanghai and the campaign in Manchuria, are
reporting of the highest order, while on the other hand his
accounts of Colonel Dohihara, whom he aptly labels the
Colonel Lawrence of the Orient, of the fantastic former
War Lord of Manchuria, and of dozens of other men strange
to Western eyes, give his book a vitality and dramatic quality
rarely to be found in this kind of literature.
Large Demy %vo Profusely Illustrated iSj-. net
A SPY WAS BORN
By Marthe McKenna (Marthe Cnockaert)
Author of A Was a Spy” (y*,th Impression) {Filmed), “Spies
I Knew” {4th Impression).
{Mrs. McKenna received the Iron Cross, was mentioned in
British Despatches, and was awarded the French and Belgian
Orders of the Legion of Honour.)
/TVHIS work is a thrilling and dramatic presentation of the
German occupation of Belgium, every bit as full of
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
16 JARROLDS’ LIST
^ AA.A. JL. -A. A., A -A.-A. A.^. A.
action, suspense and human interest as I Was a Spy. Mrs.
McKenna has woven the many incidents which came within
her experience, or of which she had reliable information, into
a fascinating narrative of terrorism and espionage. Even if
she may seem to stress the militarist spirit of the German
invaders, she does not impute more vices to the Prussian
officers than they possessed, and shows the German troops
to have been as human in the midst of their lust for conquest
as could have been expected.
The central figures in the narrative are a Prussian with
soldiering in his blood, and a Bavarian officer of gentle
instincts. In spite of the former’s brutality and ruthlessness,
they remain comrades to the end. Their destiny is inter¬
twined with the fate of a Belgian family which is one of the
first to fall under the heel of the German occupation. Mrs.
KcMenna, as hospital nurse and spy, meets the Bavarian and
introduces him to the Belgian master spy, who seduces him
from his allegiance.
The atmosphere of the period is successfully re-created,
and the reader feels he is living in the midst of the stirring
and dreadful events. Mrs. McKenna’s personal touch lifts
the work well above the ruck of spy books, and her strong
feelings and wide sympathies, which include even the in¬
vaders, enable her to relate the story without animosity
towards her country’s late enemies.
Demy Svo 10s. 6d. net
THE MYSTERY OF FINGER-PRINTS
By J. C. Cannell
Author of “The Secrets of Houdini” (fth Edition), “A
Hundred Mysteries for Arm-chair Detectives”, “When
Fleet Street Calls”, etc.
IN this book, Mr. Cannell, who as a Fleet Street journalist
is well known for his crime investigations, writes about
finger-prints—one of the most fascinating subjects in the
world—and other criminal matters. He has been on the
scene of the most outstanding murder cases in recent years.
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
17
The average person knows comparatively little about
finger-prints, and here for the first time technicalities are
turned into lucid and interesting facts. Mr. Cannell has been
able to obtain the finger-prints of famous people, including
those of Mr. Bernard Shaw, and photographs of these will
prove of absorbing interest. Also, the author tells how,
with only the slightest trouble, you may take impressions of
your own finger-prints. How many people have seen their
finger-prints ? Apart from criminals, only a few.
In another part of the book, the author talks intimately
and frankly about various criminal types he has met in
London and elsewhere.
Demy ivo Profusely Illustrated About izs. 6d. net
HOW THE FOREIGN LEGION WON
MOROCCO
Pry G. Ward Price (The famous Journalist and War
Correspondent)
T)EST known of British War Correspondents, Mr. Ward
Price gives for the first time a detailed and undistorted
picture of life in that much libelled and highly sensationalized
corps, the French Foreign Legion. He has been with the
Legionaries on what is likely to be their last active service
in Morocco, and describes with a graphic pen the campaigns
by which they have gradually pacified that picturesque land.
He has shared their life and talked with men of all ranks and
nationalities among them. He has had the unique privilege
of access to their archives in the French Ministry of War.
This story of the best known and yet most mysterious fighting
force in the whole world is a true tale of romance and adven¬
ture which proves that in the Foreign Legion fact can be
stranger than either film or fiction.
Darge Demy ivo Illustrated i6j\ net
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
i8
JARROLDS’ LIST
THE BERLIN DIARIES : The Private Journals
of a General in the German War Ministry
Edited by Dr. Helmut Klotz
Foreword by Edgar Mowrer {Author of “Germany Puts the
Clock Back”)
THIS is the secret record of a General in the German War
Office, covering the events of 1932-33 which led to the
triumph of Hitler and the National Socialists. There are
intimate conversations, both actual and reported, with
Hindenburg, Hitler, von Papen, Schleicher, Goering, Goeb-
bels, and many other leading figures, and a vivid description
of the astonishing and intricate intrigues that ended in the
establishment of the Nazi dictatorship.
By virtue of his high position, the diarist had an inside
view of all these political moves. He did not approve
them; on the contrary, they seemed to him to be leading
Germany itself and the rest of Europe along the road to
ruin. The diary is Pepysian in its piquancy and frankness,
and illuminating to a degree. The writer is neither a
Socialist nor a Pacifist, but simply a highly placed German
officer possessed of wit and intelligence. This fact makes
his revelations and criticism of Germany’s present rulers all
the more objective and valuable. Not only is the story
which he tells of thrilling interest in itself, but it describes
in a unique way one of the most important developments in
contemporary history.
Large Demy %vo Illustrated iSr. net
INDISCREET TRAVELS EAST
By R. V. C. Bodley
Author of “Algeria from Within”, etc.
DURING the past four years Major Bodley has been
travelling in the Far East as Press Correspondent for the
Sphere and other papers and in his new book he first of all
takes his readers with him to all the places which he visited.
The Dutch cities of Java, the rubber and tea estates, the
impenetrable jungles, Borneo, the Celebes and the Philippines
are entertainingly described.
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
The second part of the book is about China, and here again
the author does not confine himself to any particular aspect
of life in this chaotic country, but shows his readers the
business men in the Treaty Ports, the real Chinese in crumb¬
ling Peking, and the superstitious, ^simple peasants of the
“interior”. * j
Major Bodley was in China at the time'of the Manchurian
incident of 1931 and, as a result of what he witnessed, went
to Japan in order to see the other side of the question.
The Japanese section of the book tells of all that has been
happening in the Japanese Empire since the proclamation of
Manchukuo as an independent state. There are several
pen-pictures of Japan’s leading statesmen and of Pu Yi, first
Emperor of Manchukuo, as also some amusing anecdotes
connected with diplomatic life in Tokyo.
Although, generally speaking, the book is of fight and
humorousf texture, some of the chapters are deserving of
serious'attention by readers interested in international politics
and the problems of the Far East, notably those which deal
with the disorder of China and the role of Japan as the
dominant race in Asia.
Large Demy %vo Illustrated About i8j-. net
THE CONQUEST OF THE EARTH
By Lewis Grassic Gibbon
Author of “Sunset Song”, “Cloud Howe”, “Grey Granite”,
“Niger : A life of Mungo Park” and {in collaboration with
Hugh MacDiarmid) “Scottish Scene”.
^pHE thesis of this work is that a great number of the
explorers of the pre-scientific age were urged out on their
quests by the search (sometimes unknown or unapprehended
by the searcher himself) for the Fortunate Land, the Isles of
Youth, the Golden City—all legendary lands rising originally,
in the dawn of history, from a Mediterranean myth.
Linking them together on this central theme, Mr. Gibbon
writes brilliant studies of ten of the great explorers who in
their search for the Fortunate Land achieved the greater
measure of man’s conquest of the earth. He tells of Leif
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
JARROLDS’ LIST
Ericsson and his coming to America four hundred and eighty
years before Columbus : of Marco Polo’s great land journeys
to Cathay and beyond : of Columbus, led by a dozen rumours,
sailing across the Atlantic : of Cabeza de Vaca, that enigmatic
Spaniard who searched North America for the Golden City
of Ciboa : of Magellan, the first to reach the East Indies from
the west: of Vitus Bering, the discoverer of Bering Strait,
and his search for Gama Land in the North Pacific : of Mungo
Park’s tramp through jungle Africa in quest of the Niger and
Timbuctoo : of Richard Burton’s innumerable quests in three
continents for the golden unknown land : of Nansen’s great
drift in the Fram : and of Peary, the reputed discoverer
(though he did not attain within a hundred miles of it) of
that last refuge of the Fortunate Land, the North Pole.
This is not only a book of great journeys and great deeds,
but an “omnibus” of ten great lives—each biography, within
its limits of size, as definitive as it is acutely penetrating.
Large Demy Zvo Illustrated About iSs. net
BELOW THE SURFACE IN INDIA: During
the Great War and After
By Sir George MacMunn, K.C.B., K.C.S.I., D.S.O.
Author of “The Romance of the Indian Frontiers”, “The
Underworld of India” (^th Impression), “The Lure of the
Indus”, etc.
W/HILE the War in the West was tearing its way to its
W end, India, below the surface, was a constant mael¬
strom, of which neither England nor the world have any just
idea. German intrigues in every village and bazaar, the Turk¬
ish propaganda based on the Caliph’s proclamation of a Holy
War, intense seditious attempts in Bengal and the Punjab,
the infamous Ghadr rebellion planned in fomenting plague
spots in the Pacific coast of America, are all new stories to the
general reader. Added to these are the “Silk Letters”, Ger¬
man missions to Afghanistan, Bolshevist hatreds, and the
bomb and the bile of student Bengal. All the while Viscount
Hardinge, the Viceroy, and Sir Beauchamp Duff, the Com-
mander-in-Chief, stripped themselves of troops to furnish the
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
21
AUTUMN, 1934
vast armada that sailed into Marseilles to the joy of the French
—troops for the Defence of Egypt and the Anglo-Persian
oilfields, even troops to attack the Germans in Africa.
General Sir George MacMunn presents these events in
definite sequence for the first time, with also the story of the
aftermath, the rebellion in the Punjab in 1919 ; Amanullah’s
treacherous attack on his ally : the Moplah rebellions and for¬
cible circumcisions that so marred Lord Reading’s Vice¬
royalty ; and the anarchical bomb-worship which still pre¬
vails in Bengal and so dims the glasses with which the more
hardy Briton gazes on the White Paper.
Woven into all are stories of Secret Service and strange
adventure which read oddly about a part of the Empire in
which we once prided ourselves on the Pax Britannica.
Large Demy %vo Illustrated About i8r. net
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
22
JARROLDS’ LIST
A. Selection of
Recent Important Books
THE LURE OF THE INDUS
By Sir George MacMunn, K.C.B., K.C.S.L, D.S.O.
Large Demy %vo Illustrated i8t. net
ARCTIC VILLAGE
By Robert Marshall
Large Demy 8vo 64 Illustrations i8t. net
SCOTTISH SCENE : Or the Intelligent Man’s
Guide to Albyn
By Lewis Grassic Gibbon and Hugh MacDiarmid
Demy %vo -js. Gd. net
WESTWARD HO ! From Cambria to Cornwall
With Stanley R. Baron and Reg Gammon
Large Crown Kvo With 32 Lull-page Illustrations from
Drawings by Reg Gammon, and Decorative LLnd-papers -js. Gd. net
PEASANT EUROPE
By H. Hessell Tiltman
Large Demy %vo 48 Illustrations i8j. net
THE O’GORMAN MAHON:
venturer and Politician
By Denis Gwynn
Large Demy %vo Illustrated
Duellist,
1 Sr. net
Ad-
'r ▼ •
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
23
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
By ]. Leslie Mitchell
Large Demy %vo Illustrated i8j\ net
INDIAN INDIA
By C. W. Waddington
Large Foolscap Folio, Sumptuously produced, with Frontispiece,
Large Folding Map, and 29 Full-page Reproductions of Pencil
Drawings by the Author 18/. net
CRUCIBLES : The Lives and Achievements of
the Great Chemists (New Edition)
By Bernard Jaffe, MA.
Winner of the International award of £1,500 and Gold
Medal for the Humanizing of Knowledge.
Large Demy %vo Illustrated i8j\ net
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
24
JARROLDS’ LIST
Cheaper Editions of
Important Books
I WAS A SPY I (15th Impression)
(Tie Book of the World-Famous British Film)
By Marthe McKenna (Marthe Cnockaert)
With a Foreword by The Rt. Hon. Winston Churchill,
P.C, C.H., M.P.
Demy %vo Illustrated ^s. net
THE UNDERWORLD OF INDIA (5^ Impression)
By Sir George MacMunn, K.C.B., K.C.S.L, D.S.O.
Demy 8vo Illustrated jj-. net
JAPAN : Mistress of the Pacific ? (4/^ Impression)
By Col. P. T. Etherton and H. Hessell Tiltman
Authors of "Manchuria: The Cockpit of Asia" (nth Imp.), "The
Pacific : A Forecast”, etc.
Demy Svo Illustrated ~]s. Gd. net
MANCHURIA: The Cockpit of Asia (jth
Impression)
By Col. P. T. Etherton and H. Hessell Tiltman
Demy Svo Illustrated -js. Gd. net
THE TERROR IN EUROPE (yrd Impression)
By H. Hessell Tiltman
Large Demy Svo Illustrated iol Gd. net
CONFESSIONS : Memoirs of a Modern Seer
(jth Impression)
By “Cheiro” (Count Louis Hamon)
Large Demy Svo Illustrated -js. Gd. net
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
25
YOU AND YOUR HAND {^th Impression)
By “Cheiro” (Count Louis Hamon)
Crown 8vo Profuselj Illustrated with Diagrams and Plates
js. net
CLIVE (On which is based the famous Play and
Film Clive of India)
By R. J. Minney
Crown %vo Illustrated 6s. net
KING HENRY THE RAKE (HENRY VIII)
By Clement Wood
Crown %vo Illustrated ~js. 6d. net
UNSOLVED PROBLEMS : National and Inter¬
national
By John S. Hecht, F.R.Econ.S.
Author of “The Real Wealth of Nations”, etc.
OUR leading scientific journal, Nature, describes
Unsolved Problems as “an invaluable contribution to
the elucidation of the vital problems which now seem to involve the
very existence of the British nation”.
Barge Demy %vo 6s. net
CONFESSIONS AND IMPRESSIONS
{zfth Impression)
By Ethel Mannin
Author of “Hunger of the Sea”, “Pilgrims”, “Sounding Brass”, “Green
Willow”, “Unda Shawn”, “Venetian Blinds”, etc.
Demy %vo Frontispiece jr. net
ALL EXPERIENCE {jth Impression)
By Ethel Mannin
Large Demy %vo net
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
26
JARROLDS’ LIST
JAMES RAMSAY MACDONALD:
An Authentic Life (jth Impression)
By H. Hessell Tiltman
LORD RIDDELL: excellent biography. A. most
valuable book. It tells the story of Mr. MacDonald’s life
in a graphic, accurate, attractive fashion. Mr. Tiltman has per¬
formed a national service.”
Demy 8vo 16 Full-page Illustrations -js. Gd. net
BRING ’EM BACK ALIVE {Filmed)
By Frank Buck (with Edward Anthony)
Author of “ Wild Cargo”
Large Demy 8vo Profusely Illustrated -js. Gd. net
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934 27
Fiffion
THE JAY NOVEL LIBRARY 7s. (>d. net
THE Publishers’ object in founding this Library was to establish a series
of modern novels especially distinctive by virtue of literary excellence and
artistic production. The volumes are large crown octavo in si%e, printed in
choice type on best-quality paper and attractively bound in cloth with gold
lettering. They are eminently fitting for the collector’s library. “Beauti¬
fully designed and printed.”—Spectator. “Printed and bound in a
fashion to delight the bibliophile.”—Outlook.
CACTUS
By Ethel Mannin
Author of “Confessions and Impressions” (z-jth Impression)y
“Hunger of the Sea”, “Pilgrims”, “Sounding Brass”,
“Green Willow”, “Crescendo”, “Children of the Harth”,
“Linda Shawn”, “Venetian Blinds”, “Dryad”, “Men are
Unwise”, etc.
IT is possible that this novel is Miss Mannin’s literary
“coming of age”—the novel which in its varying inter¬
pretations every serious novelist of the generation now in its
middle thirties must inevitably write.
In telling the story of Elspeth Rodney it sets forth the
tragedy of a generation of women whom the war cheated.
When she was a child, Elspeth’s old “Uncle Andy” was always
quoting “After Blenheim” to her—“For things like these you
know must be, after a famous victory.” Elspeth grows up
with her uncle’s “subversive” views concerning War and
Imperialism. Refusing to do war-work or subscribe to Hun-
Hate during the war, she is accused of being “pro-German”,
though that is the least of her sufferings during those bitter
years.
The first part of the book, which ends in Berlin on the eve
of war, is significantly entided, “North Sea, or German
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
28
JARROLDS’ LIST
Ocean” ; the second, which covers the war years, “North
Sea ? Or German Ocean ?” ; the third, which begins after
* f North Sea”. Elspeth finds herself being
asked by a child the same questions concerning war which
she as a child asked Uncle Andy; the only difference being
that whereas Uncle Andy talked of the Boer War, she talked of
the Great War.
The story itself presents several acute problems of human
relationships controlled by the War, and takes the reader from
the days of militant Suffragism through the advances and
retreats of the Great War, up to the days of Fascist and
Communist riots and Hunger Marchers.
As a social document”, as well as for its sincerity and
humanity, it will commend itself to all intelligent readers, and,
we are convinced, greatly enhance Miss Mannin’s reputation
as a serious novelist.
THE FORTY DAYS
By Franz Werfel
Author of “The Class Reunion”, “Verdi”, “The Pascarellr
Family ’, “The Hidden Child” {\\th Impression), etc.
Translated by Geoffrey Dunlop
/T'SHE FORTY DAYS is without the slightest doubt the
greatest work Franz Werfel has written, and will, in
the opinion of the publishers, achieve lasting fame.
Homeric in scale and treatment, it challenges comparison
with Tolstoy’s War and Peace and Zola’s The Downfall.
Its theme is the extirpation of the Armenian nation by the
Turks in 1915 and 1916, and the story centres round the
defence of the Musa Dagh (Mountain of Moses) by a few
thousand Armenian men, women and children—under their
leader, Gabriel Bagradian—who were determined to fight
rather than go into captivity in the deserts of Mesopotamia,
which’ as they well knew (and the Turkish Government
intended) was equivalent to a lingering and horrible death.
Franz Werfel’s genius and great qualities of heart and mind
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
29
have at length found real scope in this epic story of the
incredible fate of a nation.
Dewy 8vo Nearly 600 pages lor. Gd. net
SHOULDER THE SKY
By Rupert Croft-Coo ke
Author of “Picaro”, “Release the Lions”, “Cosmopolis”,
“Night Out”, “Give Him the Earth”, “Troubadour”,
“Some Poems”, etc.
RUPERT CROFT-COOKE has in this novel written
the book his admirers have urged him for years to
write—a big and moving story of English life. In the
middle of the mauling and desperate stampede of unemploy¬
ment and want, he has set the rather pathetic figures of young
Dick Neil and his “girl friend”. It is a case of “the weakest
to the wall”, though Dick’s weakness is neither of body nor
of mind. The story of their struggles is not only a tense
but a significant one, for it is an authentic picture of a side of
contemporary life which few writers can claim to have the
experience or the knowledge to depict.
A small dock-yard town is the background, and its squalor,
and the humour and pathos of it, are as vivid as we expect.
But though there is feeling, and tragedy of a sort, in the book
it is not gloomy, for the hero, through all his vicissitudes,
has a smile for the silliness, the pretensions of the people
about him, and the author enjoys himself as much with the
eccentricities of Victoria Lunn, the garrulous Bert, the
refined Miss Ritchie, and all the shabby gentility of Dick’s
town, as he did with the Italian Contessas and South American
millionaires of former novels.
Shoulder the Sky, in fact, marks a turning-point in this
writer’s work. Hitherto his novels have been distinguished
by the keenness of their satire, their bitter impatience with the
modern attitude, and the brilliance of their portraiture. In
this, the unkindness has given place to friendly admiration
and the story is conceived and written with a deep and
honest humanity. Shoulder the Sky should have a far
wider appeal than anything that Rupert Croft-Cooke has yet
written.
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
30
JARROLDS’ LIST
THE HOUR GLASS
Bj Winifred Duke
Auth°r of “Tfose are They . . ”, “Magpie’s Hoard”,
Finale , The Sown Wind”, “The Dark Hill”, “Bastard
Verdict”, “The Drove Road”, “The House of Dei Ivy”
“The Wild Flame”, “The Laird”, “Scotland’s Heir”,
‘Continuing City”, etc.
TF Harold Fieldend s childhood had been happier, much
sorrow in his later life might have been averted. As it
was, when his daughter Iris married a poor man when she
might have had a millionaire, he refused her an allowance.
Later, when she became possessed of means, her wild
extravagance broke up her home, and before she and her
husband could repair the rift, a swift and terrible death
overtook them.
Harold was left with his grandchild Anne, who from the
outset became a sore trial to him in consequence of her way¬
wardness. But later on his world gradually began to shape
itself and in the end there was kindled the spark of childish
affection which altered his whole life.
Apart from its powerful plot, which deals with fundamental
emotions and is thus true to reality, the story is remarkable
as a masterly piece of character-drawing. Miss Duke’s skill
compels the reader to love and understand her people, and
their joys and sorrows linger on in the memory long’after
the tale is finished.
ESKIMO (New Edition) zoth Thousand
By Peter Freuchen
Author of “The Sea Tyrant”
(Firstpublished here in the early Autumn of 1932, this remarkable novel
long continued m steady demand, edition after edition being called for. It
has been out of print for some time, and in consequence of repeated requests
added to the fact that the novel has now been filmed, by Me tro-Goldwyn-Mayer,
under the title of Mala the Magnificent, the Publishers have decided
to reissue the work in its original and unabridged form)
TT is a strange, frozen world—the world of the sub-arctic
—inhabited by a simple and inarticulate people. But
beneath the icy bite of this land, there is the joy and sorrow,
the passion and pain that is visited on all human beings.
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS^
(LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
3i
Mala, his wife Ivan, and his children were of these people.
But Mala was also a hero to these people; a great hunter,
a resourceful provider, a happy man. Even the white men
with whom he traded his fox-skins saw Mala’s worth. Yet
the white man did most to ruin Mala’s life, to make this
primitive hero a hunted criminal through a law he could
not understand.
Freuchen shows the gruesome yet fascinating customs of
the Eskimos, the cunning of their struggles with Nature,
their amazing manner of living, in a singularly gripping
story. To call this work a story is not enough ; it is a saga ;
it is the swan-song of a dying people.
CARESS AND FAREWELL
By Lionel Houser
Author of “Lake of Fz're”
THIS is the strange, exciting history of Lily Parrance, who
considered herself too wise for mortal love, but who was
far too beautiful not to be ensnared in the meshes of the
tender passion. Lily is a tragic figure—and an alluring and
frightening person. She sought to rediscover love neither
within marriage nor without it, and passion and bitterness
were her ultimate reward.
Mr. Houser here writes magnificently of a magnificent
character. His prose has the same virility and glamorous
quality that marked Lake of Fire, and an added poignancy
that makes the work even more sure in its appeal.
ANN OF CARTHAGE
By Margaret M. Brash
Author of “Jannock,\ “The Roof tree Rides'”, “The Gatei
are Mine”, “Over the Windmills”
THE problem that Alice Gale tried, but failed, to solve
was a problem that so many modern women have to
face to-day—the choice between a career and marriage. There
are compromises life will not brook, as Alice, with her
brilliant powers and her too-possessive love, was to discover.
It was just when John Varley was feeling the drag of a too-
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
32
JARROLDS’ LIST
long engagement that young Ann came home from Carthage.
Ann, with her supple grace, her vital, nameless charm,
resenting, even before she came, the fact that she was virtually
engaged to her cousin, Noel Stavely.
The three protagonists, however, do not monopolize
the entire stage. There are curiously attractive minor
characters skilfully drawn. There is Korner, a drunken,
lovable old wastrel; and Dorn, too, with his bitter railing
jeers at all women; as well as that erratic, immoral genius,
Steiner, pathetic in spite of himself. Life is richer for know¬
ing them.
The play and interplay of scenes shift from North Africa
to Germany, though the book begins and ends in Garfield,
that grimy manufacturing town with its sturdy, clannish
Yorkshire folk of the West Riding. In every way the story
maintains the tradition this writer began with Jannock,
her first great success.
PRINCE INCOGNITO
By jo van Ammers-KOller
Author of “The Rebel Generation”> “Tantalus”y “The
Apple and Eve”, “No Surrender”, etc.
JULIA VAN ASVELD, spoiled wife of an industrial mag¬
nate, has a “breakdown” in consequence of the necessity
of economizing in her luxurious household and of suffering
her husband’s temper, and goes to a famous Swiss sanatorium.
There she meets Peter Scheffer, a handsome but not over-rich
philanderer who is recuperating after a painful love affair,
notwithstanding the existence in the background of a pretty
wife and two charming children.
In the lovely setting of an Italian landscape, aided by the
hot-house atmosphere of the Kurhaus, and far from the
realities of home and marriage, these two romanticists fall
deeply in love, and each sees in the other the ideal partner,
dreamed about and longed for during all the years of married
life. Neither of them knows the real name and circum¬
stances of the other, and when the idyll comes to an end
Peter promises to meet Julia later on and Julia consults a
lawyer about a divorce. Fate, being even more romantic
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
33
than the lovers, brings Julia, who is in search of a temporary
home, to the pension of her lover’s wife. Her ultimate
discovery of Peter’s married state, and the affection she has
developed for his wife and children places Julia in the most
awkward dilemma of her life.
The author’s delightful handling of the plot shows her to
be as skilful an artist in the writing of romantic novels as she
is in the field of serious fiction.
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
34
JARROLDS’ LIST
New ys. 6d. net
Library Novels
THE CROOKED SMILE
By Margery Lawrence
Author of “Madam Holle”, “Madonna of Seven Moons”,
“Snapdragon”, “Bohemian Glass”, “Silken Sarah”, etc.
LAWRENCE makes good use of her frequent
^travels. Her new story, a vivid tale of passion, tragedy
and romance, is set in modern Greece—a background little
used by novelists of to-day. The social life of the English
colony in Athens, where Stella Marlowe, cool and aloof,
moves like a shadow among strangers, is amazingly well
drawn, as also are the characters Con and Peter, the brothers,
who in their respective ways play such a large part in Stella’s
life in Greece; Nicky the child, Tim Shenstone, and “Turps”
the antiquary, and last but not least, Lili Vlasto, that lovely
creature tossed like a fragment of weed on the relentless
storm of her own passions.
How Stella came, against her will, to be drawn into the
whirlpool of these tangled lives, and of what came of it all,
is dramatically worked out in brisk and realistic style.
THE HOUSE OF SLEEP
By Frank King
Author of “The Ghoul” {Filmed), “Greenface”, “The Owl”,
“Night at Krumlin Castle”, “Green Gold”, “Mr. Balkram's
Band”, “Cagliostro .*3 The Last of the Sorcerers”, etc.
SUPPOSE that on a dusty summer hike you called at a
lonely house with forbidding notices all around it, to
ask for a drink ; and you found half a dozen people, includ¬
ing a lovely girl, fast asleep in the house.
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
35
AUTUMN, 1934
What would you do ? Henry Downes, remembering
nursery days, tried to waken the sleeping beauty with a kiss
—and found himself whirled into a maze of mystery and
danger that kept him gasping.
Not since The Owl have we had a story of that most
lovable of investigators, Paul Grendon. In The House of
Sleep, The Owl is back, sinister as ever. You’ll gasp with
Henry as you live through every moment of the tremendous
struggle between old enemies—which must end in death.
CHINESE CHAPTER
By J. van Dyke
Author of “Chinese Dust” and “Chinese Nights”
A N English girl sets out for China to marry the man she
has not seen for several years. But . . .
Mr. van Dyke has, surprisingly, given to this his latest
story a happy ending. In doing so, he has probably made a
host of new friends. But those who have previously admired
Mr. van Dyke’s outspoken treatment of the white woman’s
contact with the Far East need have no fear. He shews us
the same paradoxical China—lovely, pathetic, humorous and
cruel in turn—the same sophistry and glitter of the white
people who must make their living there. In fact, because
he has now proved that all is not dross in this far land where
the moral degradation of the white man is the accepted
rule, the background of his scene stands out in even more
vivid relief than before.
Janet Scott, the daughter of England’s most famous
playwright, goes to Peking to marry a man whom she has
not seen for several years. But marriage and happiness
do not come to her as easily as she had imagined. Such are
her subsequent sufferings that they would have been possible
in few places other than that strange and distant China.
Yet they carry always the ring of truth.
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
36
JARROLDS’ LIST
A1
HUSBAND TO ANNA
By Barbara Hedworth
Author of “The Woman in Possession”, “A Man Without
Armour”, etc.
NNA KARSLOV, beautiful and ambitious, but humble
in origin, gradually forces her way up the social scale.
A milestone in her career is her marriage, whilst still a shop
girl, to Jimmy Garden, which, by their strong passion for each
other, might have proved successful but for Anna’s
insistent craving for position and wealth.
It is proof of Barbara Hedworth’s clever handling of her
plot that Anna, for all her relentless scheming, arouses
sympathy by her fierce protective maternity towards the child
of this unfortunate marriage and by the great-hearted devotion
of which she is capable, even while the reader feels strongly
for the disillusioned Jimmy, whose happiness is ruined and
whose career is threatened by Anna’s headlong course.
The climax of this dramatic story again reveals Barbara
Hedworth’s dexterity and keen understanding of human nature.
JUNGLE LEECH
By H. C. Asterley
Author of“Kon>ena Goes Too Far”, (<Tale of Two Murders”
{Filmed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer), <(Land of Short Shadows”,
etc.
Fa remote, inaccessible clearing of the Malayan jungle
lives Guy Cawbin, a young and ambitious doctor,
together with his wife—Mary—and his three-year-old daughter.
Guy Cawbin is the “jungle-leech” of the title; that phrase
being a Malayan colloquialism for any member of the medical
profession whose duties take him into the wilder, more
uncivilized territories. During Guy’s prolonged absence on
duty, a wandering prospector, sick and needy, is given shelter
by Mary. Their isolated life and mutual loneliness foster a
close intimacy, and eventually they elope. Guy determines
to avenge his wrongs, but four years elapse before he traces
the man who wrecked his life. He takes, under an assumed
name, the position of medical officer in a remote tin mine
of which his enemy is superintendent. An outbreak of
cholera places his enemy at his mercy. Does his ingrained
> ,,y ■<r T y*
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
37
professional instincts to outwit death gain the upper hand ?
Does he remember his Hippocratic oath, with its solemn
implication that he will tend and care for his bitterest enemy-
should that enemy ever stand in dire need of his humane
ministrations and skill ? Or does his still more deeply ingrained
natural instincts prevail ? It is a fascinating problem;
and the scenes and situations leading up to it are packed
with drama and poignancy.
Jungle Leech is a powerful story of white folks’ hopes
and disappointments, loves and hatreds, lives and deaths,
enacted against the colourful background of romantic Malaya’s
savage jungle.
THE HOUSE OF MURDER
Bj J. H. Wallis
Author of “Murder by Formula”, “The Capital City Mystery”,
“The Servant of Death”, “The Mystery of Vaucluse”, etc.
THE House of Murder which is the scene of the mystery
in this book is depicted in such a masterly manner that
the reader, in addition to being plunged into a strange mystery,
will actually get inside the house and feel its dark silence, its
uneasy atmosphere weighted down with heavy tapestries,
black walnut furniture, and shrouded paintings.
In this eerie place Miss Fannie Bristow, eighty-four, and
the last of the many sisters, was found dead—murdered in
a fiendishly ingenious manner. And she left a huge fortune
in a curious and inexplicable will. What happened when
the four next-of-kin moved into the mansion to setde affairs
forms the climax of dramatic suspense in this most power¬
fully realistic mystery story.
WHO ELSE BUT SHE ?
By “Sydney Fowler” (S. Fowler Wright)
Author of “The Bell Street Murders”, “The King Against
Anne Bickerton”, “The Hanging of Constance Hillier”,
“The Secret of the Screen”, etc., etc.
THE county police were on the point of arresting Lady
Denton for the murder of her husband, when Scotland
Yard took a hand in the investigation, without, however.
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
38 JARROLDS’ LIST
carrying it much further. It was doubtful whether it was a
case of suicide, as the result of which Lady Denton would
have forfeited a large slice of her inherited fortune, or whether
it was murder, in which case it did not seem clear how any¬
body but Lady Denton could have committed the crime.
But circumstances provided a solution. An inquest fastened
the murder on another, and whether he was really the guilty
party or merely a scapegoat the reader must decide for him¬
self. For Mr. Fowler keeps his secret up his sleeve until the
very end—and a surprising end—of this most fascinating and
thought-provoking murder mystery.
THE STREET OF STRANGE FACES
By Louis Joseph Vance
Author of the famous “Lone Wolf” Stories, “Encore the
Lone Wolf”, “Speaking of Women”, “Detective”, etc.
''PHIS mystery novel has all the skilful ingenuity of the
author’s famous “Lone Wolf” stories. John Palmer,
a budding young author, takes a room in an old, once-
fashionable house in Queer Street. Mrs. Fay, his landlady,
has as her star boarder sinister old Mr. Machen, who peers
at all the passers by from his first-floor rooms. Lovely young
May Wilding, who types by day and taxi-dances by night,
has the room above John. They meet, and May types John’s
manuscripts. A gangster leader sees May and pursues her.
Again the sinister figure of Machen enters the picture, and
John has to bring all his wits into play to circumvent the
gangsters and the police.
FLESH POTS
By Mrs. Victor Rickard
Author of “Spring Hill”, “Young Mrs. Henniker”, “Up¬
stairs”, “Sorel’s Second Husband”, “The Young Man in
Question”, “Sensation at Blue Harbour”, etc.
"pLESH POTS deals with the character of a man whose
^ chief attribute was “charm” and who beggared the lives
of those around him in his absorbing selfishness. Had it
not been for the timely intervention of Professor Marzy, a
mysterious savant who came to live in the village of Blynd
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
39
as a resident in the local haunted house where, it was believed,
he practised magic, “charming” Colonel Heronby would
have ruined the lives of his wife and sister-in-law.
The story is full of Mrs. Rickard’s usual detached and
humorous observation of life, and can be strongly recom¬
mended as reading for the sick, sad, or sorry.
ERIKA, MY DAUGHTER
By Arthur E. Hilmar
'pHE love of a father for the daughter of his divorced
A marriage is the theme of Arthur Hilmar’s unusual story.
John Kolzen returns from India after an absence of seven
years to find Erika grown into a beautiful girl of nineteen.
The scene of their reunion is a small watering-place in the
Austrian Tyrol, where they are to spend a fortnight’s holiday
together. John’s fears that he may face another such dis¬
illusionment as her worthless mother made him suffer are
happily dispelled, for though Erika soon becomes the centre
of attraction at the hotel she proves to be a girl of unusually
fine character and sweetness of heart.
A bond of affection springs up between the two, and soon
ripens into a singularly deep emotion. Then a chance word
from one of the hotel guests rouses a train of fearful doubt in
John’s mind. Is Erika really his own daughter ? And if
she is not, then their love for each other has a greater signi¬
ficance than the love of father and daughter. In an interview
with his former wife John learns that his suspicions are true.
Though he tries to keep the knowledge from Erika, she too
learns it, and they are faced with the problem of a future
which their love for each other complicates rather than
illumines. This problem is the climax of a beautifully
conceived and strongly written story.
THE YUKON KID
By ]. B. Hendryx
Author of the famous “Connie Morgan” Stories, “In the
Days of Gold”, “Corporal Downey takes the Trail”, “Raw
Gold”, etc., etc.
JAMES B. HENDRYX writes about the people and the
land he knows. His famous characters—Corporal
Downey of the Mounted and the ever-popular Connie Morgan
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
40
JARROLDS’ LIST
—have their counterparts in real life. Hendryx is a true son
of the Great North-West, and his tales are full of the bracing
vigour of the Northern winters and the dare-devil spirit of
lone adventure.
In The Yukon Kid we are presented with the problem
of Tom Haldane, who has to choose between his love for
Kitty and the gold fever. In consequence they quarrel,
and Tom joins the gold-rush to the Klondike. He thought
he had lost the girl he loved, but he was young and did not
know much about women. Their romance is a fitting con¬
clusion to a tale as full of swift adventure as anything Mr.
Hendryx has done.
CRIES IN THE NIGHT
By J. H. Wallis
Author of “Murder by Formula”, “The Capital City Mys¬
tery”, “The Servant of Death”, “The Mystery of Vaucluse”,
etc.
''THE moon glimmered palely over the bay. Out of the
distance a woman’s terrified scream suddenly pierced
the silence. . . .
Aboard his yacht Whitney Sinclair, the wealthy sportsman,
was struggling to free himself from the ropes that bound him
while a gang of kidnappers were taking his beautiful wife, a
famous actress, over the side of the vessel. Six other beautiful
women disappear in a mysterious manner. What is the
sinister motive behind these abductions ?
In the exciting developments which follow, Mr. Wallis
reveals himself at his best, and this really original mystery
story rushes rapidly forward to an unexpected climax.
LAST TASTE OF SWEET
By Mrs. Stanley Wrench
Author of “Love’s Fool”, “Burnt Wings”, “Pillars of
Smoke”, “Totter and Clay”, “Strange Lovers”, “Sing for
the Moon”, etc.
T_TERE is a story of the countryside, old houses, and the
life that Mrs. Stanley Wrench knows so intimately,
being a countrywoman herself. Laid mainly in green
Warwickshire, chiefly in the part we know as Shakespeare’s
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
41
country, the novel is concerned with Michael Borde, a
motor magnate, to whom a title has been offered. He
refuses, but, loving old and beautiful things, has pined from
his youth to possess a genuine Tudor house over which, as a
show place, he wandered as a boy. He gets his heart’s
desire, then follows a delicate and unusual love story, set
against a background of russet-brown furrows, green woods,
the Cots wold Hills and the Feldon country.
His love story goes wrong, so does his business; he loses,
too, the old house on which he staked all. How the tangle
of thwarted love and ambition is unravelled, and “last taste
of sweet is sweetest last”, would not be fair to reveal, but
Mrs. Stanley Wrench’s many admirers will enjoy her latest
book, which, indeed, gives a glimpse of that part of the
country which is real England.
THE DAUGHTERS OF BELIAL
Bj Seldon Truss
Author of “They Came By Night”, “The Stolen Millionaire”,
etc.
AS Sir Otto Nielson pointed out, crime has its vogues no
less than other professional activities, and each vogue
flourishes until the law has skilled itself to the appropriate
counter-measures. Then new methods and new exponents
arise. ...
In The Daughters of Belial the exponents are women, and
—what is worse—women of intelligence. That is why Hugh
Romilly, who is loaned from the Foreign Office to deal with
a matter that is considered too delicate for Scotland Yard,
dislikes his task more than anything he has ever undertaken.
One cannot, he explains, shoot at a woman. And since
physical persuasion is equally against his code, the duel
resolves itself into a game of polite subtlety and wit on one
side and feline ferocity on the other.
The scene shifts from London’s West End to a gay and
apparently innocuous country dance at the mansion of a
well-known peer. The peculiar happenings there are only
equalled by those at the Quern Nursing Home for “neuras¬
thenic” ladies. It is a curious coterie of the fair sex that
Seldon Truss produces for his hero and his readers. Eve
Valery, Julia Dawlish, Mrs. Everard Spencer, Sister Murdoch
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
42 JARROLDS’ LIST
. . . Women who have travelled too far along the road to
damnation ever to turn back. Women who are, in the
true sense of the word, desperate—without hope.
But there is one who plays a lone hand against the Daughters
—and against Hugh also. In her possession Hugh found a
quantity of that insidious narcotic known as Anodaine X.
^ier ted on strange trails and suffers torments
and doubts more acute than any that are due to his official
opponents. The story of Hugh and this enigmatic young
woman is played against the dark and watchful background
of the Daughters of Belial—who are waiting. . .
Sister Murdoch, in particular, is always waiting. . . .
LOVE SONG
By Rupert Hughes
Autior of “Lades’ Man”, “No One Man”, “The Thous¬
andth Girl”, “The Uphill Road”, etc.
TN this dramatic story, Rupert Hughes traces the rise of a
small town girl to the heights of musical fame. There have
been many stories of singers heretofore, but none that paints
so vividly the fight which a singer must make against all the
forces which are likely to wreck her career. Mr. Hughes
traces Meriel Lawton’s first assault on the battlements of
musical fame and her retreat in despair. He paints her
dramatic meeting with Georges de Cavenac, who is to be the
guiding star in her life, and her unfortunate marriage to the
weak young composer Emil Woodring. Finally he describes
her return to New York and the amazing manner in which
she wins success. Here are the hard toil, bitter experiences
and supreme ecstasies of a singer’s life.
This story, packed with incident, runs far beyond the average
length and is the most ambitious novel yet undertaken by
Rupert Hughes. 1
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
43
4 Books for
A.nimal Lovers
’WINKS : His Book
By Dorothy Cottrell
Author of “Singing Gold”, etc.
WINKS is short for Tiddly-winks, a funny, wistful little
Australian terrier. He is stocky of body and short
of leg. He has a long coat of silver-grey silk which plumes
his stubby tail and falls in wisps across his melting brown
eyes. He is for ever getting pinned under the gate. When
he bathes he shakes himself where it will do the most damage.
He atones for sins by extending a solemn forepaw. He is
a pest with a noble heart. His life-story is told with a
pathos, humour and infinite charm that will appeal to all
ages.
Crown %vo Illustrated About $s. Gd. net
BEAUTIFUL TOE: The Autobiography of a
Dog
By Marshall Saunders
THIS is another classic animal story and a magnificent gift
for children of all ages. The story speaks not for the
dog alone, but for the whole animal kingdom. Through it,
the child enters the animal world and is made to see as animals
see, to feel as animals feel. The sympathetic insight of the
author is the strong feature of this really beautiful book.
POPULAR EDITION. With full-colour pictorial wrapper,
frontispiece and other illustrations by S. Nicholson, A.R.E.
Crown %vo jr. Gd. net
WARWICK EDITION. With full-colour pictorial wrapper
and frontispiece Crown %vo is. Gd. net
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
44
JARROLDS’ LIST
ABERDEEN MAC : The Story of a Terrier
By Charles R. Johns
Foreword by John Galsworthy
one of the most fascinating and thrilling stories
ever written about a dog. In his long foreword Mr.
Galsworthy says : “I read Aberdeen Mac in one sitting. It
interests and makes you think. It is a really good yarn.”
With a full-colour pictorial wrapper Crown %vo
Cloth zs. Gd. net
BLACK BEAUTY: The Autobiography of a
Horse
By Anna Sewell
T) lack Beauty needs no introduction, for it is one of the-
best-known and best-loved books in the world. Gener¬
ation after generation of children have had the beauty of this
noble story instilled into their minds with an everlasting
effect. The sales of Black Beauty, impossible to compute
with any degree of accuracy, have reached the almost in¬
credible number of not less than ffty million copies ! Black
Beauty is indeed a Bible for children.
POPULAR EDITION. With full-colour pictorial wrapper
and frontispiece and 12 other illustrations by Blampied.
Crown %vo 3 s. Gd. net
WARWICK EDITION. With full-colour pictorial wrapper
and frontispiece. Crown %vo 2s. Gd. net
POCKET EDITION. With 10 black-and-white illustrations
42 by 6| ins. it. Gd. net
PAPER EDITION. With full-colour pictorial paper cover
Gd. net
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
45
Cheap Editions
of Popular Fiction
JARROLDS' SELECT p.6d. net LIBRARY
Crown 8vo, clearly printed on antique wooe paper, tastefully bound in
cloth with pictorial jackets in four colours
NEW TITLES
DRYAD  
LORD’S RIGHT IN LANGUEDOC
POWER    
SEVEN THOUSAND IN ISRAEL S. FOWLER WRIGHT
ETHEL MANNIN
S. FOWLER WRIGHT
S. FOWLER WRIGHT
THE NEW GODS LEAD
RELEASE THE LIONS
OLD FLAMES
DETECTIVE
TIDES OF YOUTH
S. FOWLER WRIGHT
RUPERT CROFT-COOKE
COLLIN SON OWEN
LOUIS JOSEPH VANCE
NELLE M. SCANLAN
QUEEN ANNE FARTHINGS CATHERINE I. DODD
ALREADY PUBLISHED
Venetian Blinds
Green Figs
Linda Shawn ..
Ragged Banners
Hunger of the Sea
Crescendo
Children of the Earth
Martha
The Ghost
The Pascarella Family
The Hidden Child
Sunset Song
Night Out
Pencarrow
Spleen
Fugue ..
ETHEL MANNIN
ETHEL MANNIN
ETHEL MANNIN
ETHEL MANNIN
ETHEL MANNIN
ETHEL MANNIN
ETHEL MANNIN
ETHEL MANNIN
.. ARNOLD BENNETT
FRANZ WERFEL
FRANZ WERFEL
LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
RUPERT CROFT-COOKE
NELLE M. SCANLAN
OLIVE MOORE
OLIVE MOORE
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
46
JARROLDS’ LIST
Bells of Thyme
Apples and Quinces ..
Lords of Red Lattice
The Farthing Spinster
Clad in Purple Mist ..
Three Silences
Fidelity
The Glory of the Conquered
Schooling
Memorial to George
The Longer Days
The Smoking Leg
Eskimo
Jannock
The Death Watch
From the Broad Acres
Mothers in Israel
The Marriage Lines .
Son of a Hero ..
The Yellow Mistletoe
CATHERINE I. DODD
CATHERINE I. DODD
CATHERINE I. DODD
CATHERINE I. DODD
CATHERINE I. DODD
CATHERINE I. DODD
SUSAN GLASPELL
SUSAN GLASPELL
PAUL SELVER
Bj the A.uthor of
‘Miss Tiverton Goes Out”, etc.
[anonymous
JOHN METCALFE
.. PETER FREUCHEN
MARGARET M. BRASH
MICHAEL CAPE-MEADOWS
J. S. FLETCHER
J. S. FLETCHER
J. S. FLETCHER
JAMES OLIVER CURWOOD
WALTER S. MASTERMAN
JARROLDS' NEW 2s. U. net NOVELS
Full Crown 8vo, well printed on best quality paper, bound in real cloth.
Attractive Jackets
NEW TITLES
PILGRIMS 
SOUPING BRASS
GREEN WILLOW
FOR MEN ONLY
WEDDING RING
THEY CAME BY NIGHT .
GREEN TIMBER
BLACK SOULS ..
THE CAPTAIN OF THE
ETHEL MANNIN
ETHEL MANNIN
ETHEL MANNIN
BETH BROWN
BETH BROWN
SELDON TRUSS
JAMES OLIVER CURWOOD
SYDNEY HORLER
LOUIS TRACY
LOUIS TRACY
FRANK KING
 “KANSAS’ ’
THE ARNCLIFFE PUZZLE..
GREENFACE  
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
AUTUMN, 1934
47
THE CASE OF THE PAINTED GIRL FRANK KING
HAPPY LANDINGS ..
good-bye SUMMER
THE CHOSEN OF THE GODS
IN THE BLOOD
NO ONE MAN  
THE THOUSANDTH GIRL
FANNY HEASLIP LEA
FANNY HEASLIP LEA
. ANDREW SOUTAR
ANDREW SQUTAR
RUPERT HUGHES
RUPERT HUGHES
THE SECRET OF THE SCREEN SYDNEY FOWLER
ARRESTING DELIA ..
THE SWEEPSTAKE WINNER
IN THE DAYS OF GOLD ..
RAW GOLD  
SYDNEY FOWLER
EDGAR JEPSON
TAMES B. HENDRYX
.. JAMES B. HENDRYX
CORPORAL DOWNEY TAKES THE TRAIL
JAMES B. HENDRYX
THE WOMAN IN THE SHADOW
THE LONE WOLF’S SON
LOUIS JOSEPH VANCE
LOUIS JOSEPH VANCE
ALREADY PUBLISHED
The Wild Oat ..
The Threshing Floor ..
Grand Relations
The Paths of the Prudent
David March
J. S. FLETCHER
J. S. FLETCHER
J. S. FLETCHER
J. S. FLETCHER
J. S. FLETCHER
JARROLDS' NEtr
COPYRIGHT SIXPENNY NOVELS
With Striking New Full-Page Pictorial Covers
NEW TITLES
60. MALA THE MAGNIFICENT
{Formerly entitled “Eskimo”, the novel upon
which the film of the same title is based)
61. DARRELL CHEVASNEY
PETER FREUCHEN
CURTIS YORKE
Paternoster House, Paternoster Row, E.C.4
48
JARROLDS’ LIST
62. CONNIE MORGAN WITH THE FOREST
RAXGERS .. JAMES B. HENDRYX
47. VALENTINE  CURTIS YORKE
50. THE LURE OF THE LITTLE DRUM
MARGARET PETERSON
54. THE PERIL OF HELEN MARKLOVE
WILLIAM LE QUEUX
55. THE SECRET TELEPHONE WILLIAM LE QUEUX
56. A MEMORY INCARNATE .. CURTIS YORKE
ALREADY PUBUSHED
8. Wife in Name Only
16. Sir Anthony’s Heiress
17. Which Loved Him Best ..
18. A Woman’s War .. .. ,.
23. At War With Herself
25. A Rose in Thorns
27. From Gloom to Sunlight
32. Black Beauty
42. The Gay Triangle
43. Anne Morrison ..
44. Grand Relations ..
45. Families Repaired
46. Found Out
51. A Romance of Modern London
52. A Daughter of Allah
53. Innocence ..
57. Connie Morgan in the Lumber Camps
58. Connie Morgan in the Fur Country
59. Connie Morgan, Prospector
CHARLOTTE M. BRAME
CHARLOTTE M. BRAME
CHARLOTTE M. BRAME
CHARLOTTE M. BRAME
CHARLOTTE M. BRAME
CHARLOTTE M. BRAME
CHARLOTTE M. BRAME
ANNA SEWELL
WILLIAM LE QUEUX
RICHMAL CROMPTON
J. S. FLETCHER
J. S. FLETCHER
HELEN MATHERS
CURTIS YORKE
CECIL H. BULLIVANT
CECIL H. BULLIVANT
JAMES B. HENDRYX
JAMES B. HENDRYX
JAMES B. HENDRYX
JARROLDS PUBLISHERS (LONDON) LIMITED
