B000431048
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
MR. J. LESLIE MITCHELL
has written the following
Novels
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
STAINED RADIANCE
Imaginative Romances
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
THREE GO BACK
THE LOST TRUMPET
PERSIAN DAWNS, EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
and General and Historical Works
ANCIENT AMERICA
HANNO, OR THE FUTURE OF EXPLORATION
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA [in preparation)
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
IMAGE AND
SUPERSCRIPTION
A NOVEL
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34 Paternoster Row E.C.\
MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
First Published in Great Britain, March 1933
The Mayflower Press, Plymouth.
William Brendon & Son, Ltd.
FOR
JOHN LINDSEY
AND HIS
STRICKEN GODS
IN FRIENDSHIP
Know, Friend in the Millennium, whose ways
Are those of Grace, of Liberty and Right,
That your least Heritage was in my days
The crux of fiery Argument and Fight.
For that most trifling Good which is your pride
I endured Hardship, waged a bloody Strife,
The Gods, Heaven, Hell, and Humankind defied :
A Stitch of your fine Cloak cost me my Life.
Rudolf Robert
SECTION THE FIRST
SECTION THE FIRST
§ i
“/'"'VNE of the earliest things I remember is a glimpse
of the moonlight on my mother’s breast, in the dark
of that little room in Magpie Hill Road. I was often and
continually a wakeful child, I’d lie quiet and uncomforted
in a dark unsprayed by any such lighting as came that night,
I’d lie quiet and listen to the quiet unbroken save ever and
anon by the mating cats a-spit and a-squawl on the ragged
fence at the kitchen’s rear. But at sight of that bright white
sword on my mother’s body I crawled up erect in my cot,
I remember, it creaked and I feared I would waken her,
but I had to see that, I had to see it, I clung to the cot-bars
and stared, and whimpered a little in wonder.”
This is the opening intelligible paragraph of the Journal
of Gershom Jezreel—not the opening paragraph, but the
first set forth in the dull convention of sentence-formation
from which he so loves to wander and experiment. Before
and after the words I’ve quoted lie stretches that Gershom
penned—in serious mood—as ‘ sub-conscious selections,’
and as ‘ straying dementia ’ in the moments when he
laughed at himself. And that indeed one finds often enough,
unexpectedly. For in spite of the darkness that patches his
chronicle, in spite of that Shadow that rose in his early life
and glimmered and moved throughout his years, tenebrous
and terrible, he had both an odd, irreverent humour and
the un-pungent irony twin-born of pity. “ Good lying and
laughter are as old as men, older than the Shadow and out¬
lasting Him, they belong to the days of the Golden Age
huntsmen returning at night from following the deer, and
setting the caves a-rock with the earliest hunting lies, the
genial brag of the un-diseased.”
12
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
He might have been four years of age, he thinks, that
night when he crawled erect and stared at the pallor of the
moonlight beam on his mother’s breast. She seemed breath¬
ing scarcely at all and the clock at the other side of the close,
dank room had stilled its tick to a hirpling whisper. “ For
once the amorous cats had ceased from troubling, I sup¬
pose, and were mated, abated, and sated. They left the
silence unmarred, and more than that, the thing had come
quietly alive, I heard it breathe with my mother’s breath,
perhaps it was God in the room, I thought. And then I
forgot that, I’d disbelief even then in my father’s god who
pried and sneaked, it was only my own breath I heard. But
I clung to the cot-bars still, my little soul held in the wonder
that thus my mother, so great and active and dominant,
sweetly and terribly my mother, could lie in the pity of the
moonbeam’s radiance, sleeping, unknowing, her face in
shadow and the moon on her body, and be stared upon by
the moon and me, and not laugh at us, order us to our places.
. . . And then, I think it came only slowly, a kind of terror
succeeded my wonder, was it mother indeed, that thing
quiet-breathing in darkness and lambent-lit curvings, face¬
less there in the night ? My childish eyes grew blind in the
picturing of Another who also rose from shadows, the
Shadow that companioned my father in anger, the ‘ Good-
God-what-an-image ’ as my mother had called it. What
if the Thing had killed her, eaten her, lay there in the bed
where she had slept ? . . . And at that there came anger on
me, determination came with it, and I forgot my fear, I set
my teeth and climbed over the cot-rail and ran and padded
that desert-waste, smooth, silver-gleaming, the bedroom
floor. I was out to unveil the Thing 
“ But in the last stretch I found myself, myself in the
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
i3
moonlight beam, there was terror there, I forgot my mission.
I flung myself on the bed and screamed, and my mother
awoke, and was sleepy still, though astonished. Then
she pulled me into the bed beside her, she was warm and
kind, and she held me fast till I slept again, her arms were
round and soft of flesh, I kissed the one that was round my
neck. She laughed at that, but as though she would cry,
and then asked what thing it was that had frightened me ?
“ And I whispered, but I’d ceased to care, I was warm
and drowsy, I whispered it was the ‘ Good-God-what-an-
image,’ and then I fell fast asleep.”
§2
He was born in Gillingham in English Kent late in
the autumn of the year 1895, and if he still lives he
is rapidly nearing those forties that once chilled him
as “ remote and far for my feet to climb, the heights
and the withered crags of age. My father was forty
the day I was born, and he found in the double event
some mythic connotation, as Ma Anderson told me in
later days. He had the room where my mother lay in her
travail set out with candles in a pattern of locking triangles,
as so they are set on the Shield of David, he was taking no
chances, for at last it might be, the signs so propitious,
that the Wonder-Child himself, the Child Shiloh, was to
enter the world, the seed of his loins. . . . And indeed,
remote though he’s grown, untender, and I shudder still at
his memory, sometimes I’ve thought of my father with no
shuddering at all, pity only, and a kind of wonder. For
behind the gibbering ghouls of his creed there may have
been a holy wonder unhorrific altogether, the knowledge
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
i4
and belief that every child in its hour is the Child Shiloh,
all mankind in the hour of birth potentially that child and
that god.”
It may have been the lighted triangles of candles, gutter¬
ing throughout the long hours of that windy October day,
it may have been the room’s smallness and closeness or
the aged lack of skill of the nodding midwife, but Gershom’s
coming to the world was slow and reluctant. Below in the
parlour his father Gabriel knelt through those long hours,
his shoulders draped in a praying-shawl, and a pattering
of rain came blowing on the gale from the windy circuit of
Chatham harbour; and still in the hands of Agony, swift
and keen-fingered, a lyre for his touch, Myra Jezreel travailled
and found no ease. The midwife, as Gershom was later to
hear, had been brought to the house by Gabriel himself, a
holy woman and a member of the Church of Israel “ but
unfortunately addicted to absorbing gin and sleeping with a
fine placidity the while her patients tormented themselves
from their beds of pain to an eternal unease in the hell of
her church. And down to that dark pit we well might have
gone, my mother and I, but that Ma Anderson came into
my life before my life was begun.”
She lived next door, Ma Anderson, the wife of a sailor,
a great red-eyed, red-haired woman with a Roman nose
and an enormous laugh. She ran her life, her household,
and her husband, says Gershom, with a vast and friendly
contempt and efficiency, and her view of the outside universe,
its plaints and its antickings she summed up in an ironic
appeal to ‘ Lord and God bless me ! ’ This phrase she’d
pronounce as ‘ Lorngoblimey,’ her eyes cool, watchful
beacons on the flanks of the Roman nose. Her children
were boys, two of them, Will and John, and she’d borne
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 15
them with intent and purpose, even directing the cooking
of the household dinner in the crucial moment of young
John’s birth. Now, with rolled-up sleeves and clean-
scrubbed fingers, she assailed the knocker on Gabriel’s
door.
He had little liking for the Gentile woman, and would
have opened the door but an inch or so. But Ma Anderson
had come girded for battle in more senses than one.
‘ Here, Myra had the baby yet ? ’
‘ She is still in the hands of the Lord,’ said Gabriel,
and found the red eye in humorous regard of the praying-
shawl. Then :
‘ Then it’s damn well time she was in mine instead.
Oh, drat the man, what’s he dancing for ? Here, out of
my way.’
With which, says Gershom, retelling an oral saga oft
heard in his childhood, she swept aside Gabriel, mounted
the stairs, entered the room where his mother lay gasping,
and acted therein like a waft from the gale that rattled at
the window-hasp. The legions of evil that besieged the
bed must have shivered and wilted away at once at sight
of those red eyes riding into battle, the Roman nose in the
van. First of the legions : the midwife went first, pro¬
pelled by an ear and ironic admonitions to give heed to
the step, now, dearie. The candles followed the midwife,
Gabriel gaping up at the foot of the stair was caught in the
pelting shower of guttering wax-ends. Then Ma Anderson
opened the windows and punched the bed and straightened
the sheets from the hot, pained limbs, and bent over the
bed with kind, iron wrists for Myra to grip in the throes of
pain. ‘ Lorngoblimey, ’twon’t last long now. . . . Hold
hard, my girl ! ’
i6
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
Nor did it. Fresh air or Ma Anderson’s freshening
presence put an end to the woesome hours of travail, and
out through the humble portals of all birth Gershom
came into competent hands, and gasped, and was pounded
to breathe, and did, and was washed and rolled and pounded
again, and a roller of red flannel wrapped round his middle,
to set him in life with a shapely stomach. Ma Anderson
descended on Gabriel.
‘ Nip out and bring in some brandy for Myra. She wants
a spot in a drop of hot milk.’
‘ Has the child been born ? ’ asked Gabriel, rearing up
his short, broad body from the knees whereon it had knelt
the greater part of the day.
‘ Lorngoblimey, what else am I here for ? ’
‘ Then God be blessed. And it is—a son ? ’
Ma Anderson grinned at him, richly, with the florescent
lewdness that coloured her life, a gay thing and poetry.
‘ Looked so to me—and I ought to know. . . . Here !
Oh, lorngoblimey, he’s at it again ! ’
For Gabriel was kneeling once more, his praying-shawl
over his eyes, but those eyes unobscured, we need hardly
doubt, to a vision, shining, assured, of the Child Shiloh
at last descended on earth.
§3
“ My father, I think (for my viewpoint of him was
upward-gazing, from the lowly stance of childhood), was of
medium height, built low and close to the ground, one
imagined, because of that abnormal length of body. His
face was the face of the Warwickshire peasant, open and
broad and a little flat, but puckered in a strange contracting
of skin around and below the eyes. They were hooded
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 17
eyes, almost, as a bird’s are hooded, and I feared them,
terrifying eyes, especially at those times when they vanished
from his face and betook themselves to the face of that
spitting and hitting and tortured Thing, the ‘ Good-God-
what-an-image ’ of my childhood fantasy. . . . But now I
suppose those hoods were no more than skin-tightening
induced through the travail in sun and rain of those ancestors
who peered in the blow of spring winds or the glisten and
flare of the summer skies. . . . His hands were short hands
and were broad as well, they were spatulate hands, the
right hand had the middle finger glistering a single dull,
gold ring that I never examined in his life, though much
after death. It was set with a crude design of that Flying
Roll he had followed from Studley to Chatham some
fifteen years before my birth.”
Yet, in spite the waning of the years, its shames to the
Faith and its tottering downfall, he followed the Flying
Roll undaunted still. His son was to weed from innumerable
rumours and evidences the story of his father’s childhood
in Warwick, his early days in the village of Studley, his
conversion to the creed “ of that crude calamity, James
Jershom Jezreel, whose name I bear. I think it’s a day
that is over and done, put by, the day when the simple
can still be enslaved with re-dreamings of Levantine night¬
mares, resurrectings of the hopes and fears of the ghoulish
gods men planned and worshipped in their own sad images
by the banks of the primal Nile. Whatever we meet, that
phase is over, and my father, my poor, dull father surely
the last to ruin his life for these strange obsessions. . . .
So I set out his story for that, for that and the fact, ironic
and pitiful enough, that he sold his mind and his soul
to those ancient dreads because he was reared in the
18 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
creed of an atheism itself no more than a hideous
superstition.”
John Shaw had been once the name of Gabriel, and
George, his father, the village blacksmith at Studley in
Warwick, a blacksmith of unusual bent and calibre, Brad-
laugh his prophet, not Longfellow. His atheism was a
scandal in the village and might well have been more but
for the high excellence of his smithying. So in time they
had left him in peace, this squire and that parson, to rear
his two sons (their mother being dead) and sit in the evening
glow outside his smithy, reading openly and aloud from the
writings of Bradlaugh and Ingersoll.
Now, in Studley it was that John Wroe had risen, preach¬
ing the doctrine that gave birth in the world to the Christian
Israelite Church. “ Moses and Christ were at strife in
the world, and salvation denied the people ; and John
Wroe rose up to reconcile the Gentile and the Jew. Scores
flocked to hear him and answer the call, accepting the rigour
of his rule, the wearing of uniform, the non-cutting of
hair, even, in a darkened chamber and two minutes of
fumbling agony, the rite of circumcision.
Smoking his pipe, George Shaw would lean up against
the door of the Studley smithy and laugh aloud of a Sabbath
morn when the Christian Israelites passed bowed in prayer
to their Christian synagogue. And to George and John,
his sons, he would tell that there was no God. For this
fact a man named Darwin (my grandfather held) had
arisen and proved, tracing man’s beginnings to the primal
slime, through a family tree of apes and tigers and fish
and such-like, ungodlike beginnings enough. My grand¬
father befouled his own ancestry with pleasure and relish,
unable to contain his joy that God was so routed. The
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 19
Bible tales and all tales of like kind were lies or demented
ravings, there was no God, there had been no Christ,
there was nothing in the sky to love or in hell to fear. You
seized on this and that and you held to it if you could ; if you
could not a fellow-descended beast came snarling and
snatched it away from you. There was no order at all in the
universe, no plan, no threat, no law, nothing but a fight to
feed the stomach and plant the seed of the genitals.”
The elder son, George, one gathers, flourished on this
hardy diet; that revolt of the heart that was John’s neither
touched him then nor later in life, he accepted the creed of
the beast with ironic complacence. But one night the
younger son came back to the smithy, pale with blood-loss,
and stared at his father and brother, and told them “ I have
become a man newborn ; I have entered the Christian
Israelite Church.” And he stopped, and waited to be
mocked.
But it was worse than mockery that came, pity and a
kindly tolerance and his father’s guffaw of laughter and a
clout on the shoulder from the great smith’s hand.
Well, by God, you’re in need of a drink, boy, if you’ve
been shortened like that ! ’
John Shaw had refused the drink but not the subsequent
debate. For he told his father and his brother George that
hell yawned red-lipped and awaited them did they not
renounce their pagan foulness and follow the teachings of
the great John Wroe, who had come to reconcile the teach¬
ings of Christ and Moses. Whereat (as the tale was told to
Gershom) George Shaw had stroked his great beard, a
puzzled look in his eyes. “ Christ and Moses ? One was a
Syrian Jacobin and the other a desert thief. How have
they fallen out ? ” And he had closed his eyes, fat and
20
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
merry, and wheezed, and bellowed his great guffaw again,
while his elder son glanced from father to brother and
grinned in ironic tolerance of both.
But the brothers shared the same room, the same bed,
and that night, looking curiously on the mutilated John,
young George had questioned, abstractedly, ‘ If it isn’t just
softening of the brain, this Christian Israelitishness, what
else can it be ? ’ And John had flushed with anger, ‘ Oh
yes, you’re the clever one, educated, and think that books
tell you everything. But you’re for hell, hell and undying
fire, unless you come and be saved.’
So George had yawned and remarked, ‘ Well, I’ll give
it a try,’ and next evening had gone to the synagogue
meeting. Unfortunately, as he stood there puzzled by the
side of his brother, an elder drew near and tapped his
shoulder, ‘ Young man, have you found Christ ? ’ And
young George had replied absent-mindedly (immersed in
appraisal of the gathering), ‘ I didn’t know He was lost.’
It was plain to John Shaw then he could live no longer
in a house of sin grown into a house of blasphemy. Obtain¬
ing employment from a fellow-believer, a baker, he slept
at night in a cellar on a heap of sacking, and by early dawn
was at work selling bread round the streets of Studley,
while the two George Shaws lay in comfortable beds and
the ease of unrepentant atheism. But in hell they would
moan, they would burn, sweet and a savour to the Lord
their burning, while the saved of Christian Israel looked
down and mocked them in mirth.
Then it was that James Jershom Jezreel, once merely
James White, a private of the 42nd Regiment ere God
unsealed his eyes, came down on Studley, preaching his
new, all-saving creed, and filching from the Christian
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
21
Israelites the young and sanguine to his standard. First
of the converts was young John Shaw, drawn to this promise
of a Second Coming within his own life, drawn as by a magnet
by that promised gathering of the faithful one hundred and
forty-four thousand to await that Coming about the Hill of
Gillingham in Kent. By special sanction of the new-come
prophet, he altered his name from Shaw to Gabriel Jezreel,
and turned his back on Studley, and never saw it again,
neither it nor his atheist father and brother.
§4
“ And it was truly a great and a splendid vision which
drew my father and many another to Gillingham. The
Second Coming was imminent, James Jershom Jezreel
himself the Man, or at least a close Forerunner. And, as
told it was in Revelation, one hundred and forty-four
thousand would gather in these latter days to be saved the
world-catastrophe, and saved would live ten thousand years
on earth with Christ Himself as their ruler. Logicians,
all of them, armed and blinded with that pitiful logic and
faith that have armed and blinded men so many ages, they
flocked down through Kent in the wake of the sanguine
James.”
And at first the new faith flourished, the Prophet a wary
man, wise in his generation, enforcing no more than the
milder laws old Wroe had written in blood at Studley.
Circumcision he declared a pagan rite, and would-be converts
ceased from uneasy twitchings. But the hair was left to
grow long, or curled up in rollers behind the ears, the style
that Gabriel came to affect. And they awaited the Sign of
the Coming, and wealth poured in on The Jezreel, the
22 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
pennies of the poor, the pounds of the rich, over thirty
thousand in sterling was coffered by the House of Israel.
So, awaiting the final Sign, they set to erecting a fitting
temple whereneath would gather in the last, wild hour the
legions of the saved.
And built it began to be. Higher and higher, in great
floors, the temple rose into the astounded Chatham air.
Bricks of superfine quality were dragged in great loads up
Gillingham Hill, the horses panting, deep-breathing and
heavily-lashed, while higher yet rose the House of God on
the mountain-side around which the floods of the Second
Coming would spume, to be stilled by the Voice of One.
Cement, not mortar, bound and pilastered the arcing
framework of brick and steel, and men foretold that a year
or less would see the Second Advent in fire and flood. . . .
But that year came, the lambs cried and ran in the fields
of Kent, heavy with the fleece of the apple-blossom, days
rose with a splendour of sun and the rain came warping
out of the seas across the Chatham roofs. “ Those days
and nights which never brought sound of His coming
chariot. . . .” The coffers were emptied, James Jezreel
died, the contractors halted in their work, the building
ceased, and presently men came with great engines and
crowbars to demolish the structure. But the wreckers
drew back, astounded and beaten, in a few weeks’ time,
so firmly held the cement and brick of the temple built to
withstand the Flood.
“ ‘ And there it stands unto this day, to tell you if I lie ’
—immovable, hideous, unfinished, a blot on the stars by
night and the sun by day. . . . Ruined, it yet held my
father and a few score others. They camped around in
Gillingham, the Jezreelites, becoming bakers and grocers
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
23
and the like, going still unclipped for the sake of God,
convinced still that the Second Coming was nigh, though
Jezreel himself had failed and died, and his wife, the Queen
Esther, bore no son. Yet sometime the Child Shiloh would
come, upbuild to perfection the ruin that the Gentiles
called Jezreel’s Tower, and gather about Him the saved
to life eternal.”
§5
With this odd incursion through a by-way of history,
Gershom’s Journal returns to the blowing of that October
night when he entered the world and was nursed by his
mother and looked on at last by his father. “ My father
came up the stairs and examined me, prodded me (perhaps
in the hope I’d squeak with divine afflatus) and prayed
over me in some mystic fashion. Unaware of my elevation
to the status of Child Shiloh I greeted his attentions with
yells and cried, bitterly uncomforted, throughout his prayers,
my mother too exhausted to intervene. But Ma Anderson
did, she returned to the house and came flying up the
stairs, to find my father crouching over me in exorcism or
such-like exercise. She pulled him aside and erupted me
heartily from my swaddling bands. ‘ A devil in him ?
Get out ! It’s only wind.’
“ And wind it proved to be.”
Myra Jezreel was a good three weeks ere she rose from
her bed in the baker’s house. She had gone through hours
that left scarred her memory, and rose firm in the resolve
that Gershom, her first child, should be her last. “ My
poor mother ! She had never desired a child, she was by
nature, I imagine, a lover and mistress, not a mother at
all. And she found herself enslaved in my father’s crude
24 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
hopes and lusts, pitiful things, pitiful things. ... But
my anger won’t help them now, nor pity either, those
incompatible two. Neither love nor hate can help them
now.”
She had been born in the Isle of Grain, that Myra Redlow
who became the mother of Gershom, and Grain Island
remained a dark, wistful love backgrounding her days
and nights, her hatred and contempt of her husband, her
philandering and adventurings, her boredoms and her
loves. Grain : where the breakers cease from their mam¬
moth-herd trumpetings, and creep like snow leopards, they
pad in the dusk, across the wide mud flats. She remembered
it always, salt-tingling, a land in a dream ; that, and the
house that the sea had devoured. Often, years after leaving
it, she tramped to Grain to look at the sea which had
swallowed the house where her father had lived. And
once, one day of adventure, she stole out from the rooms
in Magpie Hill Road and took Gershom there, they borrowed
lifts from carters and country folk, and rode far on a summer
day and at noon came down to Grain in the saltiness and
the flying scud of the blue, sun-smitten weather.
“ I was six years old at the time, the summer before my
mother went out of our lives. But she’d little thought of
disappearance then, or I either, we had freedom and holiday,
we raced each other upon the sands, she a girl and no more,
and far from a mother, my playmate rather. The long
skirts of those years impeded her running, but only a little,
I remember, for she kilted them, and was fleet and \ery
swift and sweet. The sea-gulls came cawing about us as
we ran.”
They found an overhang then in the eroded coastline,
the sea was out, a smoulder amidst the flats, and they sat
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
25
and ate the lunch they had brought. And then Myra
Jezreel disrobed and Gershom stared, he had never seen
her nude before, he cried ‘ Pretty mummy ! ’ and she
laughed at him, the sun on the splendour of long white
body and glistening glory of loosened hair. He was after¬
wards to think he’d made no mistake in that cry, pretty
indeed she must have been, with a loveliness keen and
white that troubled other men than the praying fanatic
who haunted the ruined gables of Jezreel’s Tower. She
took Gershom then and stripped him as well, invested him
in bathing drawers, and caught his hand.
‘ But the sea’s so far away,’ he protested.
‘ Silly, it’s near. And the mud—it’s lovely after the
first try.’
So he found it and they waded out, the sea-shimmer
rose up and smote their eyes. Presently, looking back,
they saw the land as a dim, dun haze that crouched and
watched, the mud had streams that flowed and tickled, and
little, lost pools that lay and awaited the tide ; and far to
the west a steamer wheeled and changed its course at the
Medway mouth. Far out, by the actual brink of the tumbling
sea, they came at last, tells Gershom, to the levelled walls of
the house where his mother was born, she was carrying
him then, he was tired, and she padded about the place,
softly, in the swish of water, where once she had played in a
garden, where her mother had borne her, and Gershom
had no knowing of the strange, sad memories that came to
her then, not even when her tears trickled down on him
and he looked on her weeping, unshielded. He cried
‘ Mother, mother ! ’ and she hugged him, the sunset was
close. But she said never a word till he told her he began
to feel cold ; and then at last she turned round and went
26 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
from that place, and he said he would walk again. And
the tide turned behind them, it was terror and delight
racing it far to the shore, green and tenebrous it prowled
in their tracks, swishing and seeping about the lost home of
Myra ; and they reached to safety and the bank at last.
“ It was late that night when we climbed up the Magpie
Hill, my mother carried me sleeping, but I did not sleep
when once we were inside the house and father rose louring
from the chair where he’d sat awaiting us. In his hand was
that whip I had seen before, his hair was loose on his
shoulders, he closed the door behind us and then whispered
at mother. I hated that whispering and whimpered at
him, but he paid me no heed, asking ‘ Woman, where now
have you been to shame my name in the mouths of Gen¬
tiles ?’”
Myra, one gathers, answered to that contemptuously,
truthfully, standing so in the lamplight with Gershom in
her arms ; and Gabriel’s anger burst forth in a torrent of
rhetoric the while he gripped the whip tighter. . . . That
whelming of her home and its evil memories, her father a
heathen, her mother a harlot, was but forerunner of the
whelming of all men’s works, when Leviathan would rise
from the deeps and the heavens would vomit on the earth.
Under the seas to rot and crumble all would yet pass, the
churches and palaces, the houses of pride and the houses of
sin and this selfsame house in Magpie Hill Road. And up
and across through the Kentish fields, through the orchards
bright with blossom and the coming of the hops, that last
dark tide would thunder, mountains high, with the blossom
quivering and falling in the wind that roared in its van,
coronaed in lightnings, London in its path, a smother and
a wailing and a cry of the Gentiles, night upon them and
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
27
death on earth, hell and its torment beyond that death.
Yea, even up into Studley in Warwick that tide would
froth, blinding the fields in pounding slopes of foam,
whelming and crumbling the house of sin where the atheists
blasphemed God 
“ I heard it, remember it, I kept it and stored it with
other memories of childish hate, that frothing of words,
that picture of demented rage that was my father—my
father tortured to brutality with the foulness of lying creeds,
my father twisted in the shape of a devil by the dark, wild
fears that rose first in the Ancient East to shadow all the
bright world of men, my father born with the tongue of a
poet and the heart of a hunter, crippled and cabined and
confined with my mother’s loathing loveliness, with the
fears and hopes of his insane creed, with the grind and wear
and poverty of the bakery wherein he toiled twelve reeking
hours a day. ... To that peace and understanding I seem
to have come, but then—he was terror, he was hate. . . .
My mother flinched as the whip descended, her arms
tightened about me, and then she was over-brave for that.
She warded away the blows with a quivering arm, and
pushed me, and bade me run, up the stairs to my room I
must run. But I crouched and looked from the stairway,
I saw it all, in the half-dark light sprayed from the kitchen
lamp. And suddenly, as once before, I saw my father—my
father no longer, a dark, enigmatic cloud that grew and
grew, faceless, with writhing arms and body, the Cloud that
moved without Form, tenebrous, terrible, muttering and
raving a dreadful chant, the Image that haunted my child¬
hood. . . . And then I think that I fainted.”
28
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
§6
So Gabriel Jezreel had beaten his wife, as a man by the
Law may do, and beaten her perhaps in tormented pride
more than in outraged sanctity. For Myra had had men
who paid her strange, secret visits, often it had been, and
even Gershom’s paternity was in doubt. That doubt we
may image Gabriel thrusting aside in the days before
Gershom’s birth, pressing it away with a shuddering dis¬
taste, the belief that his God could trick him again, as
before with the Man who had failed, The Jezreel who had
sworn to life eternal on earth for himself and his followers,
and himself had died with the gurglings of common death
deep in a swollen throat. ... So Gabriel had convinced
himself of his doubtful fatherhood while there grew and
burgeoned in his mind the insane hope of the promised
Shiloh.
But Gershom differed in no measure from other children,
wailing, irresponsible, prattling, a bore, with no aureole
of lambent light and an eye that came to meet his father’s
fanatic eye with doubt and then a plain distrust. No Shiloh,
but the child of lust and a child of sin—of a sinning outside
the marriage bed, it was like. . . . Muted, heard through
the glass wall of childhood’s half-comprehension, there
went on continually throughout those years a running
commentary on his mother’s lewdness, a storming of
question and denunciation that confirmed his belief his
mother was hated by his father—and that his father was
hated by himself.
“ There is a dank little photograph of myself of those
days, I am clinging to my mother’s skirts, which surely
the photographer did not desire, with that rustic bridge
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
29
for background and rich cushions strewn for a seemly
photographic squat. But so I am, my eyes too large as I
see them now, large and watchful, the eyes that had looked
on the Image, the ‘ Good-God-what-an-image ’ of my
mother’s contempt.”
In after-years, in the writings of the psycho-analysts of
Berne and Vienna, he was to find set forth in a bastardized
Latin some crude theoretic approximations to that obsession
which darkened his early childhood and remained as a
hovering shadow through many a long year of his adult
life. The figure of the Image and its early significance
remains dim enough in his Journal because of those later
theorizings superimposed. . . . But his father and his
father’s shadow, conjoint, half-lit in the flickering candle-
glow, bending in threatening attitude over his mother—it
was inexplicable, it was terror. And it came in time to be
all the dark, wild, dreadful things of human life, it came to
be humankind itself on the darkened stage of the universe.
The Image became for him Man, it is his story and his
story’s leitmotiv.
§7
And then, he was barely seven years old at the time,
his mother disappeared, in a night she disappeared, and his
father was found a week later lying dead on the floor of
his bakery.
“ Yet, strangely, there had been no quarrelling in the
immediate days before she went, indeed, I remember my
mother gay and light-hearted, gay, if a little absent, and
kind. She sewed much and often, at a bright new dress,
the heavy flounced dress of those days. I would squat in
the window-seat and watch when I came back from school,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
30
she would sit and hum and tap on the floor with her shoe-
point the while she worked. And then glance at me smiling,
and away from me, out of the window, at the sunset on
Chatham, at the coming night with a swift, sly mirth. . .
And then she disappeared. Returning one early morning
from his bakery Gabriel Jezreel found her letter awaiting
him on the parlour mantelshelf. He took it and read
it and burned it and went out of the house, it was late in
the forenoon before he returned, and then to find Ma
Anderson urgently a-beat on his door and turning in a
red-eyed impatience upon his slow approach.
‘ Lorngoblimey, and where have you been ? There’s
something gone wrong in here—young Gerry’s crying
himself sick and I can’t hear Myra.’
‘ You will hear her never again.’
‘Eh?’
‘ The harlot who was my wife has left my house forever.’
Ma Anderson whistled through her teeth, ejaculated
her war-cry consideringly, and then brushed aside those
ultimacies of tragedy as she brushed aside Gabriel himself.
Running up the stairs she burst into Gershom’s room, where
Gershom wept in hunger and fear and a general lostness.
‘ Now then, young Gerry, d’you think you’re a water¬
works ? Lorngoblimey, you’ll bring on your father’s Flood,
and I’m sure. Up you get and come round with me and
we’ll see to a breakfast. Where’s them trousers of yours ?
—or do you want another job first ? ’
“ Weeping, I flung myself into her arms and admitted
to ‘ another job’s ’ urgencies.”
Jane Anderson bore him off to her kitchen next door,
he saw nothing of his father in the going, saw nothing of
him until that evening when he came to the Andersons and
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
3i
held brief converse with Ma and her husband, sitting the
three of them “ in the horrific plush of the parlour.” Near
the interview’s end they summoned Gershom from the
kitchen’s delights—he and Will and John Anderson were
practising diabolo to the danger of the unheeded crockery.
‘ Hi, Gerry boy, your father wants you. Come in here
a minute.’
So Gershom crept in and stood off from his father and
quivered in wide-eyed apprehension. It was the last time
he was ever to see his father, and afterwards he tried to
seek out the reason for that strange waning of repulsion
that came on him then. “ Suddenly I was afraid, but afraid
not at all for myself—for him. He sat with his back to
the lamp, his face in the darkness, leaning forward in weari¬
ness, I suppose, and I stared at that weary dejection,
strangely, unboyishly heart-wrung, and heard nothing of
the words he said. I suppose he told me to be a good boy
and obey Mrs. Anderson, that she was to look to me now.
I muttered and backed away and my father did not move.
. . . And then as I closed the door I glimpsed for a moment
a remembered thing, it was the Image itself that sat in that
chair, but motionless, strange, with a strangeness that hurt
me in my throat, not as once in my brain ; and I couldn’t
see for a while how to play diabolo because my eyes were
blubbering and wet.”
§8
He lived from the age of seven to the age of fourteen
in the Anderson household in Magpie Hill Road. He
grew, as is the nature of boys, and went out to the world
and the council school and suffered tormentings from his
smallness and the redness of his hair, and was bullied for
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
32
a time till an appalling incident put end to that sport. He
himself emerged from the incident, dazed, with no very
clear memory of details but a view of his enemy, “ a loutish
young youth and fat, poor pig,” lying gasping and black in
the face. He slept in a room with Will and John and far
into nights there was often no sleep, pillow-fightings
instead, and wonderings anent the moon and death, Kent’s
scores at cricket, the damnableness of school, how babies
were born and girls should be pummelled, and why you
should read ‘ Red Danger ’ in The Weekly Boy. They
breakfasted all three in a haste and hurry in the Anderson
kitchen (Ma urged them with a flailing tongue of unfailing
fluency and humour) and then fled her presence, by a
shivering descent in winter, broiling in summer, to the
council school and its waiting hostilities. He found interest
in games, did Gershom, and forgot the Image and his
mother, but for once, a Saturday when a strange compulsion
came on him, and he sneaked out of Gillingham and tramped
and rode to the Isle of Grain. There, unchanged, was the
muted thunder of the breakers beyond the flats of dun,
seething mud, and to and fro he paddled and played there
a whole long day, and was wearied returning, and slept in
a hedge, and came back but next day to Magpie Hill Road.
There, gravely and inefficiently, Bill Anderson beat him,
Bill back from a voyage and sweating great drops that so
he must pain any living thing, for he was the gentlest of
men. . . .
Gabriel Jezreel had died in his bakery, he had died of
heart-failure, but he’d made before that a will leaving his
effects to Gershom and the care of the Andersens. A
hundred and fifty pounds was the heritage of Gershom, and
worriedly (lest they rob him) the Andersons worked out the
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
33
matter for him, the while he stood negligent, listening,
anxious to be back with Will and John, immersed in diabolo’s
dizzy manoeuvrings.
‘ This money will just about feed and clothe you till
you’re fourteen or so,’ said Ma. ‘ Then we’ll find you a
job, eh Bill ? . . . Lorngoblimey, he’s dreaming again.
Poke him awake there, Gerry.’
Bill Anderson turned round his lion-like head and smiled
slowly, tolerant, unruffled. ‘ I’m listening fine. Go on,
then, woman.’
‘ Lord, them Scotchies ! Who’s a woman ? Is that all
you can call me ? ’
‘ Well, well, I aye thought you a woman—and the bairns
seemed to prove it. But maybe I was mistook.’
Jane Anderson, spite her girth and her weight, was still
young enough to engage in the mauling play of a young
animal with the slow, quiet Scotsman to whom she was
married. So Gershom, with a grin, abandoned them to
their play and fled to his own, and there the matter of his
heritage rested, contented himself, as the Andersons were.
“ They cured me and loved me and covered me away
from the world, as I think no others could have done. I
was scared of the dark before I went to sleep in Will’s
bed—and he cured me of that by sitting up in bed and
pretending to eat the dark in great gulps, until there was
none of it left ! He’d a cheerful grin, wide-mouthed, and
the freckled skin of his Scottish blood, and presently my
appreciation of his valour was vanquished in mirth at the
display of it, and off I sank into sleep and awakened next
morning cured and whole from that fear. You could hardly
believe of an early morning, Bill home and Will and John
there, Ma bustling around red-eyed and uplifting her voice
c
34 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
in astounded Lorngoblimey, there was anything mean or
cruel on this planet. He took us great walks over the hills
and down to the docks, the weeks he was home, did Bill, and
fed us on sweets till our stomachs turned. But we writhed
and were loyal, and crept to bed of a night and fought our
writhings unvocal, lest Ma should hear and unleash her
wrath on the head of our outrageous benefactor.
Bill’s one other interest ashore, his family and his ward
apart, was membership of the Royal and Antediluvian
Order of Buffaloes. He would dream, says Gershom (who,
for one who never entered a lodge, has much knowledge of
its rules and rites), of his coming elevation to the rank of
Knight, and on this topic the flow of Ma Anderson’s ironic
comments was quite undammable. ‘ Them blinking
cattle,’ she would call them, the Buffaloes, and transposed
the mystic Buffalo toast M.B.F. (which stands, on Gershom s
authority, for ‘ May Buffaloism Flourish ’) into ‘ More
Blinking Fools ! ’ But Bill would merely sit quiet and grin,
brow-corrugated, engaged in mysterious passings and
grippings upon the air : he was in training for the ordeals of
promotion.
And at last the day came, or rather, the night, and Primo
Bill Anderson disappeared within the local Buffalo lodge
a back-room of The Gutted Hare—and there presumably
passed his trial with triumph. For the next morning Ma
Anderson, rousing the household for Sunday breakfast,
directed special attention upon her husband.
‘ And here you, Sir Bill, are you to lie all day in bed
because you’re a blinking Knight ? Or do you want me to
bring up your horse and spear ? ’
“ I remember that Will and John and I all stared our
curiosity at Bill, embarrassed, the while we sat down to
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 35
breakfast. A Knight: but he looked just the same ! . . .
Remembering, I am left without wonder. For he was by
nature a knight, valorous and kind and leal-hearted. The
Buffaloes wrought better than they knew in their mum¬
meries when they gave him the accolade—with a baton or
beer-bottle or whatever esoteric weapon they used in the
lodge of The Gutted Hare.”
§9
He was twelve years old when he saw his mother again.
It was down by the docks, a sleeting day on the verge
of winter, he had strayed down there from school on the
rumour that a Zoo ship had come into harbour—a ship
loaded up with monkeys and crocodiles and such-like fauna
destined for the London Zoo. Unable to discover the
ship, and urged on by a stomach complaining of supper
neglected, he was trotting home, short and stocky as his
father, his school bag flopping against his buttocks, when
he came to the corner of Walker’s Row, and hesitated only
a moment, and then took the plunge up through it.
Walker’s Row in those days was the brothel street in
excelsis of Chatham, and known as such to all boys, all
intelligent boys walking around and about the question of
sex with the stealthy tread of high-minded cats. Men went
there and lay with women, they knew, Gershom wondered
on the matter, was a little sick, as most boys were, but
curious as well, especially to see such women and the men
who companioned them, impossible creatures that did such
things. That Bill and Jane Anderson had done them as
well he and Will and John also knew, but they left it un¬
debated, concealed, and apart, in their code those two
36 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
were completely sexless. <l Which I think would have
greatly amused Ma Anderson, who probably loved her Bill
with great vigour and sweetness, and had borne him his
two sons with something of the jolly enjoyment that might
well have attended their conception.”
So his turning up Walker’s Row was an act intentional
enough, and hurrying he half-hoped to see some woman or
man of whom they talked, half-hoped to unveil the mystery
that came vexing you out of your fun and games, eating
and sleeping’s simplicities. It was then a dark and a
twisting street, much straightened when next he saw it,
that was ten years later. In that later year he searched but
he could not find the place or the bulging house-front from
which his mother kicked out a client into the gutter.
Almost she kicked him atop of Gershom, but he swivelled
aside, again like a cat, to avoid the impact of the soldier s
fall. Then he raised his eyes and saw her his mother, she
was half-unclad, her hair on her shoulders, her voice and
her colour high with excitement—and other aids he half-
knew as he looked.
‘ You ! ’
It was a stream of such curses as few women knew,
efficient and foul, the little soldier staggered to his feet and
fled one direction, Gershom another. But as he ran he
looked back, the lights had come on in Walker’s Row and
one flickered its pale gas-flame on the steps of the house
where his mother stood. So he saw her, he saw her and,
running, he stumbled and gave a wild gasp.
It had ceased to he her. Bending from the doorway of
that dank, foul place he saw the Image, remembered,
clouded and dreadful, the superscription an obscene babble.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
37
§ io
He never told of that meeting to Ma, ten years elapsed
before he passed again through the harlot’s street; and
he went then as a ghost half-seeking a ghost, and found
nothing but change, immutable, change and faces and
places unknown, unremembered.
“ And what happened to my mother, how she came to
that house and when she left it, I do not know to this day.
But even then I did not pity, and I do not pity her now.
She was beyond and above my pity, I knew, she lived as
she wanted to live, cursing her soldier and defaulting
client it was plain she did it with pleasure. . . . But for
that wild vision from childhood she’d evoked I’d have gone
home cheered and cheerful, I think, instead of the slinking
boy who vexed Ma from her usual good-humour to sternness
and administration of salts in a nauseously generous spoon.
“ Exiled to bed, I blinded the window with a blanket
and read far into the night a Public Library book I had got,
it was Haeckel’s Descent of Man; and only once or twice
did the noise of the sleet on the panes, and a wheeling
vision of that Image that had once been my mother, vex
me out of my reading.”
Will was fifteen and gone to sea, John, fourteen, had gone
to London, to a shop and service there, and Gershom left
alone with Ma Anderson in the house in Magpie Hill Road.
At first their going had seemed to take with them the uni¬
verse and its meaning, Gershom wandered the streets and
the house in boredom, a squat, dark-faced boy with incon¬
gruous grey eyes and rusty-red hair, prowling unbidden
‘ in the way ’ of Ma Anderson’s sweeping activities. She
had cried at last, vexedly, ‘ Lorngoblimey, then, can’t you
38 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
sit down ? Read a book or something. How d’you ever
expect to get took to sea—much less grow into a knight
among cattle—unless you’ve a brain that don’t rattle like an
empty pumpkin ? ’
For Gershom’s expressed ambition was the sea. . . .
He stood then and hesitated, grumbling.
‘ But I don’t like books—lesson books, anyway.’
‘ Bless the boy, then can’t you read a story-book ? Don’t
always have to hop about like a monkey with fleas. You’re
nothing but a walking proof for that chap who says we all
come from monkeys.’
Amusingly, that arrested Gershom, he prowled down to
the Public Library with Ma Anderson’s ticket and demanded
a book by the chap who said we all came from monkeys.
With the Origin of Species and the essays of Huxley he
wrestled through the succeeding two months, and slowly,
as he educated unaccustomed eyes to the task, absorbed new
meanings and excitements. He slipped further and further
from the life of Magpie Hill Road. He read steadily,
swiftly, presently with a passion and precision of grasp
that was transferred to school-time lessons and amazed the
teachers of a “ pupil whom before I think they’d graded as
a moron—if that term had then come winged over the
Atlantic.” The evolutionists took him to history and back,
Haeckel was an early discovery, and far in the deeps of time
with the early Humanoids that night of the Image’s reawaken¬
ing he went, and followed them up from the early prime,
through sparring bout on bout as belligerent Haeckel held
up here a tail and there a horn and the Deity shrunk back.
And other readings followed, history, romance, the
great French romancers, Spaniards translated, the voyagers
of the early world, history again and that spate of letters that
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 39
flowed from the rock that Darwin struck. . . . His grand¬
father and father commingled, he trod the tracks they had
trodden, putting off his own judgment till a later day,
though in dark hours of his night-time reading he would
sometimes pause and shrink up in himself.
Men were cruel as beasts, by nature beasts, he read in
those books, he could build from his reading an image of
Man and know ic the same Image as companioned his
father. And the cloud was blown from about its face, the
face of an ape was shown, snarling and slavering, the Ape
that was Man and towered immortal over all the little
likings and desires and dear hopings of men.
“ And then I’d remember Bill and Ma Anderson—these,
and the Ape 1 ”
§ 11
But you see him set wrong in the picture if you see him
sullen and oppressed altogether. “ I’ve filled up this part
of my story falsely if you think of either my readings or
the Image obsessing me morn till eve. For long times I
forgot them together, I forgot my books, all the stirring
plumes of thought on the downy chest of the chick who was
I. Summer and the sketchy cricket of Chatham had come,
and I learned that I was a bowler of merit and speed, I’d
a twist to the wrist that lobbed snake-like balls to demolish
the Lines’ unauthorized stumps. Much in requisition I
played up and down the Chatham games-fields that last
summer before I was plucked from Chatham and the
English scene like a whelk from one of those paper bags
wherewith we would pant and halt and regale ourselves.
Winter brought football, and, mitigating its joys, a shadow
from the future. And as this bore and dark dread drew
4o IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
near I pushed it aside with a book or games ; but it still
closed in, unescapable it seemed, Ma Anderson and I
discussed it again and again—if a discussion it could be
that was all thesis on the one side, and on the other such
reluctant grunting as would have pleased the Humanoids of
Haeckel.”
And this vexing shadow was the fact that the following
October would find him fourteen years old, a man in the
view of Chatham, “ to get out and get on or get under
an acquisitive symphony, in fact.”
But now he found the thought of a ship and the sea
unendurable. Something had come with the books and
within his head a spring was verdant, green with its shoots,
things read of and dreamt of and pondered upon. The
skies that once rested on Chatham, its hills and its harbour,
had melted away to give him the planet itself for vision,
for a footstool to stand and gape at the pointed glories of
the Galaxy. . . . Lose that and all that went with it—
for the stinks and stews of a ship, the batter of the rain
and tides, long voyagings out in the dark and the mush,
the brothels of Walker’s Row his retreat when the ship
came back 
In the mid-December of that year there came a great
storm and the rumour of the foundering of Anderson’s
boat. Jane Anderson laughed when she heard the rumour,
the red growing redder, deep-veined in her eyes, and with a
casual insouciance closed the door in the gossiper s face.
Then she sought the parlour where Gershom squatted in
a chair and read, and he stared at her, her working face,
and the lips that twisted a little from their cheerful grin as
she told him the rumour. So only for a moment he sat
and then he was across the room and standing beside her,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
4i
her great calloused hand came into his hand and gripped
till it hurt.
‘ Lorngoblimey, they’d make you laugh ! Bill’s ship ’
She gulped and sat down and was presently honest as
usual.
‘ And I’m nearly at the weeps—never can find that
hanky, I’m sure. . . . Think you could make me a cup of
tea, now, Gerry ? ’
He made the tea and returned with it, two cups of it,
and they drank it and comforted each other, and you see
them plain in Gershom’s Journal, in that faded year at
the far thither side of the War, the boy with the heavy
face and the body not now so squat, he was growing to a
ranging surprise, outreaching his trousers and vest in odd
and unexpected moments ; and his Warwick face had
fined a little, browner and narrower ; and his grey eyes
were on Jane, I suppose. And Jane, immensely comforted,
was drinking her tea in peace, but she nearly dropped the
cup at her protege’s next remark.
‘ Look here, Ma, I’m not going to sea.’
‘Eh?’
‘ No, I’m not. I’m not going to risk this kind of thing
for the mess of a sailor’s life.’
‘ Lorngoblimey, what kind of thing ? ’
‘ You sitting here crying,’ he told her, stoutly, maturely,
and scowled at the future. ‘ I might be married myself.’
She stared saucer-eyed and then shook her head. ‘ You’re
filled up with fancies like a sausage with grilled cat nowadays,
Gerry boy. There ain’t no life like the sea. Ask Bill.
And what else could you do, anyhow ? ’
He got up and began to prowl the room. ‘ I just don’t
know. Shop, I suppose, like John.’
42 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
But John, coming home for Christmas, had little support
for that plan, John thin and white from his basement
life in a London warehouse. He spoiled the Christmas for
Gershom with his tales of mean food, mean life and a meaner
sinning, not even Bill’s safe return from his laggard ship
was much compensation. To Gershom’s resolution to
eschew the sea Bill listened with unwavering, gentle smile.
‘ Well, you ken your ain mind best, I suppose. But it’s
fine, a fine life, the sea.’
Ma Anderson acted in character, whipping littered plates
from the Christmas table. ‘ Now then, you leave our
Gerry alone ! You Scotchies are all the same, ’cause you
like something yourselves you think everyone else should
like it. Be wanting Gerry to join up with them cattle of
yours next ’
“ I remember very vividly that winter, how it wore
to spring in the grime and greyness of the Chatham streets,
and my own odd alternate spurts of despair and revolt. A
shop and the selling of lace or carrots, beef or beer, the
plodding of errands—when I wanted—I wanted the world !
I wanted life like a dream and life like a song, writers had
had it and why shouldn’t I ? I wanted great skies of the
tropic nights, the fires of dark tribes in the jungle wastes,
the sledges that ploughed through drifts to the Pole, Egypt
and the Sphinx at sunrise, mist on the mountains of Scotland
—I wanted the world of my books, not that grimy actuality
that awaited my fourteenth birthday. . . .
“ And behold, the gods were good, they gave me the
world I wanted. Perhaps they matter little in the end,
Gillingham’s stews, Palenque’s ruins, and the change of
scene was a little change. Unreprieved by a miracle I d
maybe have lived with no difference of fate or destiny, less
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
43
with colour and more in the drab, but essentially the same
self still. . . . But I doubt it and am glad of the doubt.
Whatever else it did, it took me far miles, it gave me some
taste of that wandering, wild life that was once the life of
all men on this planet and may again be so when the cities
are smothered in grass and weeds and the Hunter returns
to the earth.”
§ 12
He had read far into that Saturday night. Now, with
the nearing of morning he raised his head from his book and
looked out at the cloud-drift clear from the stars. It was
May ; even in that hour and that place the night smelt
green. Unveiled in the blow of the wind from the sleeping
Lines, the Galaxy quivered in ivory and gold against the
pallor of remoter stars. Millions of light years below,
in a time and a space yet unquestioned by the prying of
heretical astronomers, a young animal of the dominant
species on a little planet of a second-rate sun, ceased from
his reading and peered at them.
‘ Ain’t half a glow. There’s Mars.’
He leaned from the bed to look at other signs in that
morning-stilled writing on the sky. Far down in the south
was Saturn. Venus ? Venus was as yet inapparent.
But it was to come—it was somewhere there in the
morning.
He switched out the gas-light, slipped deeper in the
bed, and, positioned anew, the window vignetted a fresh
patch and fragment of the star-host. Immense and lighted,
no crouching Image, a Figure sword-girded and splendid
bestrode the sky. The boy whispered to himself with his
knowledge from books.
44
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ It’s Orion.’
It was the Man with the Sword. Out on his endless
quest through the morning skies. . . . Only a star-con¬
stellation, of course, Orion (he knew all about that). Nothing
to do one with the other those stars, just the chance of
positioning that made them look like a man. A million
years back they’d have looked like that not at all.
And a million years back there hadn’t been men—
either ! The stars had changed and changed and come to
fresh groupings as Haeckel’s Humanoids had come to be
men. Maybe there was some connection, maybe Orion and
men had grown side by side, it was something of men
themselves that bestrode the sky on that endless hunt! . . .
§ 13
“ It was Sunday dawn in Magpie Hill Road. The sun
rose from the sea with that same trailing of mists it had
brought in the wake of its surgence in the days when the
Chatham hills harboured, unchancily in this rock-shelter
and that, the inhuman precursors of men who left their
bones in Piltdown and the mud of Cornhill. In the shim¬
mering rise and fall of the days, that had seemed but a last
night’s dream to the Man in the Sky. It flowered its
greenery of spring, this little planet, a skin and a fairy
feathering, it blossomed white as with down in the apple-
blossom and the cherry-blossom, it darkened to autumn’s
slow brown, it grew bare and it rose to green again. And
amid this lush growing and dying, florescence and fading,
a piping of little voices rose unending, unbeginning, a
maggot-imagery and a maggot-swarming questioning the
white hands of Space... .
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
45
“ Once the woolly rhinoceros had shuffled and fled and
his squeals risen through the morning silence of Magpie
Hill Road. The great bear had prowled those slopes and
sniffled the wind within three feet of the spot where I lay
that morning. Once kith and kin of those mongrels that
now met and frisked and sniffed in the gutter, cuddling
the lamp-posts and with grave-pricked ears smelling at
each other’s bodies—their kin the wolves had loped over
the Lines in long, skeltering packs, and from Medway
forests the great Pliocene cats had spat and snarled at their
passage. . . . Their descendants snarled now, backing
amid the milk-cans. And the sun remained unaware the
change and rose and grew.
“ A crying of wakened babies rose with it. Scraps of
singing rose up from the houses in Magpie Hill Road.
Men awakened from sleep and threw dank blankets from
their bodies, and yawned, and thanked Christ it was Sunday.
And the women they had lain with rose from those beds
and prepared them food, and yawned, and were slow and
rheumatic. And young girls rose up and robed their
budding breasts in their Sunday finery, in near-silk and the
soft-washed linens of their mothers’ scrubbings, and
answered with gaiety to the questionings if they thought
the breakfast could be kept warm for them ? . . . And they
drew their stockings tight up to the knees, and then slipped
the garters up under the knee and rolled down the stockings
upon the garters, as was the new fashion of the time. And
they thought it cute and went down to their breakfasts. . . .
And boys—the boys like myself slept fast—the boys whom
no miracle awaited, as miracle awaited me.”
46
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
§ I4
Below him the house stirred to life about eight o’clock.
Ma Anderson took in the milk, and banged the door and
clattered the frying-pan briskly. Gershom wakened to the
sound and listened and went to sleep again. Half an hour
went by, and he came from sleep, his shoulder shaken by
an urgent hand. Automatically in response he shrugged
himself deeper in the blankets, and found the manoeuvre
unavailing, and reluctantly open gummed eyes. Beside his
bed stood Ma Anderson, his boots and his Sunday clothes
in her arms.
‘ Lorngoblimey, he’s wakened at last. Here, get up and
get dressed, it’s near nine o’clock.’
Gershom sat up and yawned and said it was all right.
‘ What’s up, anyhow ? King coming for lunch ? ’
She grinned. ‘ You’ll know soon enough. Got a clean
shirt now ? . . . Home too late last night to tell you the
news. . . . And if you want any breakfast you’d better
hurry.’
He crawled out of bed and took off his pyjamas and
looked at himself with a sleepy disinterest, as he tells.
The sunlight poured in through the window on a boy’s
body, sharp and muscular, narrow at the hips and waist and
as yet undeveloped at the shoulder. He was nearing to
puberty, nevertheless, and regarded the process and changes
with interest, vexing to blushes the pallid librarian for books
on the subject. “ And I liked the shape of my legs. I remem¬
ber that morning I found my legs the only objects to set on
the credit side of a debit universe. For, as so often when
awakening, my future was with me. ... A butcher’s boy
in the High Street, that was the latest planning of Ma.”
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
47
Dressed, he went down and sat and ate with Ma, herself
unusually silent. But ever and anon he would find her
stare at him strangely, he moved under that scrutiny
restlessly, what on earth was up, were his ears not washed ?
Ma said they would pass, don’t crease your collar, I’ll do
the washing-up myself.
‘ But, Ma ’
‘ But nothing. I thought I’d tell you—but he’ll tell you
himself.’ She sniffed. ‘ Oh, drat this bacon, pig was a
boar, grandfather at that, I’ll be bound ’
‘ Look here, Ma, you’re crying, what is it ? Something
I’ve done ? ’
‘ You’ve done nothing, except be a dear. . . . Oh, drat
the boy and his gogglings ! Here, get out, get into the
parlour and wait. Gerry ! You’re to leave them dishes
alone ! . . .’
So he left her to do the washing-up, and, considerably
puzzled, prowled into the parlour, that horror in plush,
and found a book and sat down to read it. But he found
his attention wander at once. Who was coming, and why
should his coming set Ma to sniffling like that ?
It was nearly church-time in Magpie Hill Road and
Gershom sat and looked out at the church-goers. The
steady labourers were the religious men, they had much
for which to thank God, good jobs which kept them fed
and free from the horror of the workhouse. Now they
trooped down the road, they and their wives, into the hot
steam rising from Chatham, leftwards the Lines sent up a
thin smoke. An occasional young man, even sometimes a
boy, slouched shamefaced in the rear of some family-party,
his trousers very tight and his jacket very loose, neck
scoriated with unwonted collar. “ And the girls with the
48 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
rolled-topped stockings were there, though I saw nothing
of the rolls and but little of the stockings : those were
modest days. Two boys whom I knew went by : they
‘ made faces ’ at me, and it intrigues me to remember that I
never saw them with their normal faces again ! ”
A noise far up the street made him crane his neck un-
availingly for a view, the noise was a series of noises, sharply
exploding, the backfire from an automobile exhaust. Now
motor-cars in Magpie Hill Road were but rare phenomena,
so steeply did the street slope down from the Lines. But
the sound this time was quite unmistakable, Gershom
searched his mind for possible explanations : a wedding,
that must be it, or taking someone to hospital
The window of the parlour darkened, a man had passed,
slowly, with scrutiny. Then he passed again, and Gershom
saw him and knew him this time, it was the man from the
garage in George Street. Promptly there came a rap on the
door and with it the voice of Ma Anderson calling from the
kitchen, flat, and yet with a tingle of interest:
‘ That’s him. You answer the door.’
‘ Shall I ask him in ? ’ called Gershom, going down
the passage.
‘ He’s taking you out.’ ou 2 >
‘ Hello,’ said the chauffeur. ‘ You Gershom Shaw .
§ 15
There was a swarm of children about the car. Gershom,
still puzzling on the ‘ Shaw,’ followed the chauffeur through
the sardonic grinning of the juvenile throng, and stopped
and hesitated as the man flung open the rear door and
stood back. In the rear seat was a man who turned his head.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 49
He might have been fifty years of age, narrow at the hips
and broad at the shoulders, he’d have been a good runner
before he grew old. Like Gershom himself he wore no
hat, but the rest of his gear was morning clothes—so
Gershom knew from window-displays, “ and had he
appeared in a mutcha and assegai, his garb would have been
but a little less alien to Magpie Hill Road.” A pair of
pale blue eyes frowned down at Gershom from a brick-red
face, at the corners of the nose and the down-turns of the
lips that brick-red turned to black. Yet the forehead was
neatly segmented, the lower half the prevailing shade, the
upper a normal white. The man thrust out an impatient
hand.
‘ That you, then, Gershom ? Jump in. . . . Know a
decent place for lunch, driver, out in the country some¬
where ? ’
‘ There’s the Bull down in Hoo, sir. They do you well
there.’ .
‘ Drive there, then. . . . Come on, lad, jump in ! Even
the boys are paralytic in this blasted country. Right.
Oh dammit, don’t jam your boots on my legs. ... Eh ?
What the hell next ? Why don’t you jump to it, man, and
get out of this rat-run ? ’
The car creaked, jerked, and moved off down Magpie
Hill Road. The children cheered. Gershom looked back
at them, glanced at the window of the Anderson house,
and then raised a shy, puzzled scrutiny on the man beside
him.
‘ Here, there’s been maybe a mistake,’ he protested,
whereat the brick-red face swung round on him like an
angry moon and he stopped.
‘ For the love of God,’ said the brick-red individual,
D
5o IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ don’t spatter my chest with aitches. I’m your uncle,
George Shaw.’
§ 16
“ And it was no other—my uncle George in the throes
of his usual morning dyspepsia. Unchancy feeding at
unusual hours lit nightly the flames of hell in my uncle’s
interior, and from sunrise until near to noon his outlook
on all matters human and divine was one of the blackest
pessimism. Too busied with the ancient dead to see to
the young and the quick, he had early in life outraged his
stomach with such quantities of half-baked frijoles as only
a crocodile might devour and, equanimous, endure un¬
twitching. ... So, when I knew him better, I was yet
to tell him, but that morning while we drove to the Bull in
Hoo I’d as soon have upbraided my father’s God on the
weather, so much was I dazed and at sea.”
They sat in the Bull and lunched, in dead silence at first.
George Shaw drank whisky with a scowling persistence
and barked at the waiter, and then was abruptly human.
‘ Well, well, my lad, so you’re young John’s son ? Not
like him—much. Your mother, I suppose. ... Eat up.
. . Suppose that scrofulous female who’s kept you has
half-starved you most of the time ? ’
He was to discover that another of his family could scowl.
‘ She ain’t.’
‘ “ She hasn’t,” you mean. Murder whom you will
in my company, my lad, but not your own language. If
you’d been without her as long as I have you d appreciate
the lady with her body unswathed, not draped in these
Cockney rags. How old are you now ?
‘ Near fourteen.’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
5i
George Shaw winced again, as though stung. ‘ Oh
well, time enough to finish your education when we’ve
settled your fate. Did you ever hear about me before ?
Ever hear of your father ? ’
‘ Never heard about you. Father was potty, he was a
Jezreelite. He died when I was seven years old and left
Ma Anderson look after me.’
‘ So I heard from the woman last night. Well, your
father was my brother John. His name was no more
Jezreel than mine is—Huitzilopochtli.’
Gershom murmured something into his plate of beef.
His uncle barked ‘ What ? ’
‘ Oh nothing. Just said he was the Aztec war-god,
wasn’t he ? ’
‘ Eh ? ’ George Shaw sat erect as though stung again.
‘ What the devil—where’d you learn that ? ’
“ And I believe that he loved me from that moment,
that the decision he came to later in that day hinged on
nothing greater than the fact that I knew of Huitzil, that
at once he decided I’d been born an archaeologist, as he
himself had been born. He’d put me a quite unpremedi¬
tated test—and I’d passed it with triumph ! ”
§ W
‘ And what did you do ? ’ asked Gershom.
‘ A fair amount of things when your father left. I went
through university, as you’ll have to do—and if ever you
call it ’Varsity God may forgive you, I won’t. Then I
got a job on a Liverpool museum, went out on an expedition
it staffed—to B.H., which stands for bloody hell and also
for British Honduras. Heard of it, hey ? . . . Well, I’ve
52 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
been in Central America ever since, off and on. Till I gave
myself a six months leave this year and came home and
thought of looking up John. Found out he was dead and
you his relict. All plain ? ’
‘ Yes.’
They were down by the Isle of Grain, the chauffeur
and the motor-car parked in a field, their own feet treading
the pebbly beach. Behind them, dun and remote, the
smoke-cloud of Chatham ; rightwards, far in the mud flats,
the sea sighing in a cloud of May-time mist. ... If you
waded out there you’d come in time to mother’s house lost
in the tide, you hadn’t been able to find it yourself, but
mother had once, that time long ago. . . . Gershom came
back with a start to the sound of George Shaw’s voice.
‘. . . And you’ll have to go to a school, of course. Damned
nuisance. There aren’t any decent schools so you won’t
have an easy time. They’ll twit you to hell with that
ghastly accent of yours—and I shan’t blame them. Do
you good. . . . You’ll start pretty low, of course.’
‘ No, I shan’t.’
‘Eh?’
‘ I’m not going to any school to be bullyragged about
the way I speak or the way I don’t speak.’ Gershom was
suddenly angry. ‘ See ? ’
‘ I see.’ George Shaw had not paused a step, but the
frowning eyebrows in the brick-red face twitched once or
twice. ‘ And what are you going to do, then ? Sell papers
in the street or get a job as a butcher’s roundsman ? ’
But the boy’s slow-kindled anger was quite beyond
staying now. “ Something at the back of my mind wailed
‘ Hell! ’ as I proceeded to demolish the miraculous chance
that had risen to save me from sea or a shop. But I didn t
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
53
care. I wanted to hurt him, to smash in that inhuman
abruptness and sureness.”
‘ Why shouldn’t I, then ? They’re as good as you are,
paper-sellers and butchers’ roundsmen. We’d never hear
about you and how famous you are if it wasn’t that some¬
body sold papers ; and if there weren’t butchers you’d be
in a bad way when you wanted another feed like you had
back there at the Bull! ’
He’d halted, speaking, stood red-eared, waiting for the
beach to open and engulf him. He stared desperately out
to sea, not looking at the bulky body which also had halted.
And from the depths of that body there emerged a wondering
chuckle.
‘ You damned little shrimp !... Here, let’s sit down where
we are. Dry place and we’re out of the cut of the wind.’
The grass was rustling dry in the cove where they sat,
the spring was yet laggard to green it anew. The whisper
and pelt of the sea on the flats came borne to them on a thin,
cold wind, George Shaw brought out a pouch and pipe and
loaded one from the other. Smoking, he leant his head
back in his hands and turned half-closed eyes on Gershom.
‘ Go ahead, then, tell me what you want me to do. If
there’s anything you want. I don’t care a damn myself,
but 111 help you whatever it is. . . . Think clearly about
it. With a voice like that, without a tincture of letters,
you’ll hew wood and draw water all the days of your life.
So what do you want to do ? ’
The boy drew a long breath and made the plunge, Ma
Anderson, Chatham, Gillingham’s Hill, the Tower of
Jezreel and his father’s Image no more than phantasmata
grown already.
I m going back with you to B.H.,’ said Gershom Jezreel.
SECTION THE SECOND
SECTION THE SECOND
§ i
FAR off, down where the forest sloped by the mule-
track, a jaguar was coughing in the dawn.
It was almost as if a furnace-door had opened, that
passing of the darkness. A hot, dry dawn blew out of the
forest, you felt it before it became plain to your eyes, its
heat foreshadowing its light. Then through the tree-boles
the sky lightened and lightened, was painted with swift,
brusque fingers impatient of picture and palette. Dead
white changed then to a powdered grey, to an ambient
amethyst, fell and faded and rose anew at a great brush
stroke, sky-limned from a brush dipped deep in a jar of
blood and of molten gold. Then came the sun, so quickly
you heard the hiss of its coming, the hiss of the myriad
javelins it flung, and abruptly the darkness crouching amid
the tree-boles went scuffling through the aisles in hasting
retreat. It left a world of jade, that coming and departure,
the palms, the bushes, the ceibas’ spread flung upwards
so brilliant a green that between the openings of the tree-
tops the sky appeared as a jadeite-blue. Here and there,
in the crowding confusion of tree-trunks, orchids burst
from the casement of night, great clots of honey or of blood
they looked far up in the javelin-rain from the sun. Head
pricked in the depths of the forest, the jaguar coughed again.
Gershom drew up his blanket about him and re-sought
a soft place for his head on the saddle he used for a pillow.
It was still very cold, spite the flare of the dawn’s swift
coming. Hunched in his blanket George Shaw, his head
in the shadow of a tree, slept fast and silently not three feet
away. Beyond him lay Mellison, his blanket had drifted
away from him in some night-time unease, his shirt lay
57
58 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
open to the waist with his dark body-hair almost blue in
that light, dark hair close curled like wool or the hair of a
negro. Remotely down by the track the jaguar coughed
once more.
Beyond Mellison’s back a dark shape uncrouched and
moved at that sound, and Gershom for a moment lay rigid.
Then a covering slipped from it, it upended two arms,
and yawned with a glint of great teeth ; Euriquito, the cook,
a mozo whom George Shaw had re-hired in Sisal, was awake,
reluctantly awake. He rose up, still yawning, and looked
cautiously round and grinned with thick lips at Gershom,
then lurched away light-stepping from the shadow of the
boles, and so vanished.
Five minutes later he came back to shake Gershom
awake from an after-sleep drowse. In the dawn-air now
was the blue, thin reek of a wood fire, in Euriquito’s hand
a coffee-cup. Again in a silent exchange of grins the cup
changed hands, and Gershom sat up and sat drinking.
That finished, he crawled from his blanket. He was
clad in a khaki shirt and in khaki breeches, faced with
grey leather the latter, and in grey woollen socks which
tickled his feet. His boots and his puttees he had slept
without, the latter rolled neatly on a ground-sheet corner.
Reaching now to the boots, he upended them carefully,
one after the other, one boot poised club-wise as the other
was upended. From the second boot a great spider leapt
out—leaping, not jumping or crawling, and it leapt again
as Gershom struck. Phoo !
The spider was a smear on the leaves. Gershom choked
back a surge of his early coffee, put on both items of foot¬
wear, and then slipped away under the trees in the direction
of Euriquito’s cooking.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
59
Both mule-drivers squatted near the fire in their ponchos.
Both grinned at Gershom.
‘ ’S dias.5
‘ ’S dias.’
‘ Can I bring you water, Euriquito ? ’
He spoke in the carefully-learned Spanish of a month-
time’s teaching. But Yucatecan Spanish differed from that /
of the textbooks, and Euriquito, as usual, frowned in
perplexity. Then he caught on the syllables of agua,
brightened, and pointed to a canvas bucket hung on a bush.
Gershom caught it from there, swung under the trees,
leaving busied cook and somnolent muleteers, and made
down the slope of the track to the stream he had seen in
the previous night. Already in the air was a drone of
insects, in an air so heavy and unstirred it seemed almost
liquid. Underfoot from the litter rose a pungent smell as
your feet trod on it, even so light. Now he heard the
stream, still in darkness, a babble and a murmur down in
the trees that awaited the morning.
The jaguar coughed again, remoter, slinking into the
undergrowth’s ramparts ; probably all night it had prowled
the camp. . . . Jaguars never attacked a man in the day¬
time. But was it yet day ? Of course. They feared to
attack you even at night. Though there had been cases 
His spine a little chilled, not looking to the left or the
right, Gershom went down to the stream. . . . The
beasts would pad by the side of a horseman through hours
in the dusk, through miles, and the traveller never see,
only hear, the thing that companioned him. Nor would
it ever attack. Except sometimes 
The forest was silent, nothing had followed him. He
came to the stream brink, pushed through the grasses, and
6o
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
squatted above the flow in his untied boots. There, halted
a minute, he considered himself.
He had grown two inches in the last two months. “ I
looked down on a face tanned deep already, not at all the
white face of my Chatham days. . . . And I squatted and
stared a long time, I remember then, in that morning hush.
Was it all a dream, a thing Td imagined in the garret in
Magpie Hill Road ? But I knew that it wasn’t, Chatham
rather the dream, and a dream of one’s childhood, faded,
foregone. Two months—they seemed twenty years.”
And, whistling abstractedly, he washed his face.
§2
The camp was violently in motion by the time he returned,
George Shaw and Mellison both on their feet, seeing to
the strapping of baggage and the cursing of the muleteers.
Now those brush-strokes of colour had gone from the sky,
the sun an inverted cup poured molten metal on the un¬
stirred trees and the track that wound westwards through
Chiapas. George Shaw swung round with a scowl at his
nephew.
‘ Where have you been ? ’
‘ Washing,’ said Gershom, and left it at that, drinking
more coffee. The brick-red face towered over him murder¬
ously.
‘ And how often have I told you not to prowl around
the bush in the morning ? Do you think I dragged you out
of the gutters of Chatham and a Cockney accent in order
to feed you to the belly of some beast in Central America ? ’
Gershom felt his ears colour richly at that, but he’d
abandoned long days before his first habit of retorting in
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
61
kind. He had developed already a curious compassion for
his uncle’s morning-time temper. So he drank the coffee
and answered nothing, and George Shaw swung now on
Mellison.
‘ You’re supposed to look after the cameras. Call that
one a load that’s properly tied ? ’ He jerked his thumb
at a sagging bundle askew the back of the nearest mule.
‘ Hell, you’re not fit to cart turnips to a market, let alone
look after a digging pack.’
‘ Sorry, Mr. Shaw.’
‘ Sorrow be damned. Look after your work.’
He went striding away through the trees, convulsively,
on an errand none ever enquired. Mellison’s red flush
faded and he looked at Gershom. Both grinned ; Euriquito
grinned ; the muleteers grinned. ‘ God help that jaguar
if he comes upon it,' said Mellison. And added, ‘ Some day
I’ll forget and sock him in the jaw.’
‘ He might sock you back.’
‘ Suppose he might.’ Mellison sighed and rolled up
his sleeves. ‘ Come on, then, and help me with this bloody
mule. Why I ever left the comforts of Liverpool to mess
about with these antique fauna I’m damned if I know.’
“ But indeed Andrew Mellison knew very well. His
father was the Egyptologist, Sir Kyrle, archaeology was
deep in his blood and bones. After Oxford he’d gone up to
Liverpool as a curator and there had taken to American
work as naturally and inevitably as his father to Egyptian.
He would say it was only a fair repayment, America had
squandered thousands to dig up the East, God alone knew
why with her own excavating hardly begun. ... In three
years of books and exhibit-study he’d acquired as much
knowledge of the Ancient America as book-learning and
62 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
exhibits may give. Opportunity for more came Mellison’s
way when he heard my uncle was in England and preparing
to return for three seasons’ digging at Palenque. He wrote
to George Shaw and offered his services, and received a
characteristic letter in reply :
“ ‘ Come if you please. But I don’t pay anything except
your keep. No Museum fal-lals or notions, mind. I’m
the boss.’
“So he was and Mellison had accepted that condition,
and now, as this morning, endured it. He was young,
with head-hair as dark as his chest, a fine skin that came
from a long line of forbears well-fed and well-bathed and
wealthy. He could drink as no fish probably ever has
drunk, and alone with myself in such moments would find
odd amusement in our little expedition of three. Himself,
an aristocrat, George Shaw, a peasant, myself, a slum-
urchin—only Providence could have planned it so neatly.
For of Europe—civilization, society—we were surely
representative enough, our mission to pry in the why and
where another civilization had vanished from the earth.’’
§3
Shaw was Shaw, he told Gershom, probably the last of
the old-type antiquary, unhampered by museum or govern¬
ing body, a man of the order of Schliemann of Troy and
with a reputation to match.
‘ Something of a genius and something of a buccaneer
and extraordinarily lucky, your uncle. Oh, he wouldn t
mind me saying that, though he’d never say it himself. . . .
Knows more of the Pre-Columbian American than anyone
alive in the world to-day—which means he knows more of
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 63
human nature and history than three-quarters the doddering
old fungi who grind out tomes on the subject and hold down
university seats till their backsides are flattened with the
exercise. He’s the Maya Shaw quite as much as Maudslay
was the Maya Maudslay.’
Gershom said he knew nothing about him—or them.
What happened ?
So Mellison, from his reading and talking and listening
to gossip, built up the tale of George Shaw’s career. He
had gone out to Mexico at first in a quiet and conventional
way, under-curator in Museo Nacional, to ticket and sort
and assort, and indent for a holiday now and then, and
improve his Spanish and his knowledge of women. And
from the first he’d refused to play the part, he acted instead
as a destroying fiend, he ridiculed Museo’s groupings and
datings, and advanced wild theories on the Maya culture.
He left Mexico in less than a year—the city not the country
—and vanished to the south, he’d borrowed some money
to outfit himself and the small expedition that was necessary.
Chiapas heard of him next, then Guat, and the natives,
terrorized, would sprint through the forest to show him the
sites of the old ‘ stone houses.’ Near Piedras Negras (though
this was but rumour), he unearthed a tomb as full of treasure
as an egg full of meat—not Maya treasure, for they never
had any, but gold in great bars, a buried Conquistador
cache. . . . This was the rumour, it remained unconfirmed,
George Shaw at the least made no attempt to hand over the
cache to the Government. Instead, he returned to the City,
paid off what he’d borrowed, fitted out the next go as though
Rothschild financed him, and thereafter, untrammelled,
sought and studied as he chose. In the years since then
he had worked to first place in American archaeology—or
64 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
might well have done so but that half his reports had a
gastric acidity which stung like an adder.
‘ And what’s he going to do now, then ? ’ Gershom had
questioned.
‘ He’s to tackle Palenque. Never heard of it ? Well,
it’s the brazenest of all the Old Maya sites. They built it
round about a.d. 400, “ made proud with pillars of basalt,
with sardonyx and porphyry ”—and in less than a century it
was abandoned overnight to the beasts and the jungle. . . .
Why ? God knows, and He’s kept the facts still undivulged.
Nobody’d seen the place till last century Charnay went
there. Up to date your uncle has missed it, but its fate is
upon it at last. He’s set for three seasons there, digging
and sketching and all kinds of doings. . . . Hell, isn’t it
hot?’
That was outside New Orleans he said that, the city
itself riding the northwards horizon like a harlot—a mulatto
one—bedecked for a banquet. Gershom liked New Orleans,
the tall houses, the heat, the biscuits with honey, stuffed
frogs for dinner, the grinning black faces, the wide-brimmed
hats, all the scents and smells of this un-Nordic south.
They had three days to wait till a ship would sail to Sisal
or contiguous ports, and Mellison and Gershom ran errands
for Shaw, and avoided him mornings, and listened to the
music in the flower-bedded parks. The last day, with a
list, they went out to the bookshops, Mellison sought and
probed for the books he needed and the books George
Shaw had commissioned him to buy. Once, frowning,
he made Gershom look at the list and seek to decipher a
scrawl thereon.
‘ It’s a Latin Grammar—Sonnenbury’s—no, Sonnen-
schein’s.’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
65
‘ Sonnenschein’s ? So it is. Looked Shaftesbury’s to
me.’ Mellison grinned at Gershom from the list. ‘ Sonnen-
schein it is you’re in for, my boy. May the Lord have
mercy upon your soul.’
‘ Mine ? ’
‘ Who else’s ? The Grammar’s for you—and half the
rest of the books. While we excavate Palenque you’ll be
excavating Caesar.’
‘ Latin ? ’
‘ Looks like it. And Greek and French. Spanish
automatically.’ Mellison grinned at the list again. ‘ Trig.,
Algebra, the Lord God alone knows what. If Shaw’s
hopes for his work at Palenque don’t mature, he should at
least emerge from the bush with a young prig full of learning
as a Thanksgiving turkey with stuffing.’
This, as Gershom tells, wasn’t his idea at all. So that
night he tackled his uncle in person. ‘ Look here, when
we made that agreement at Grain you said nothing about
me learning Latin ? ’
‘ Oh, didn’t I ? ’ George Shaw canted his head to one
side. ‘ Neither did I say anything about you not learning
it. And learn you will though I’ve to hail you to your
seat each day by the seat of your shorts. Soon’s we get to
Palenque that’s set for your job.’
‘ But why Latin ? It’s dead. And I’m not to be a doctor
or a chemist, am I ? ’
George Shaw drained down the long drink they call
a muchacho in New Orleans. ‘ Nor a curate either, as
far as I know. Listen, you told me you liked reading
poetry ? ’
The boy nodded. His uncle reached into a case, and
brought out a small, blue-bound volume and handed it
66 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
over. Gershom took it and stood in the white fall of light
and looked at the page that was indicated.
‘ Read that, then,’ George Shaw commanded.
He began on it haltingly, stumblingly at first, till his
eyes caught the dash and the wash of colour in the wavelike,
unaccustomed words :
‘ Men have lost their reason in nothing so much as their
religion, wherein stones and clouts make martyrs, and
since the religion of one seems madness unto another, to
afford an account or rational of old rites requires no rigid
reader. That they kindled the pyre aversely or turning
their faces from it, was an handsome symbol of unwilling
ministration * j
‘ And how much of that have you understood ? ’ George
Shaw enquired.
Gershom stood pondering. ‘ Half, maybe. What does
a “ symbol of unwilling ministration ” mean ? ’
The heavy eyebrows twitched in the brick-red face.
‘You’ll know when you’ve learnt some Latin. I’ll ask
you the meaning inside six months.’
§4
Sisal. Gershom had been almost the first to see it on
the little henequen-trader that crossed the Gulf. It came
out of the morning in a golden glow, a long, far-flung beach,
white, pelted with combers, and the wheel and dip of bright
birds like the dotting of a signature against the waving
veils of translucent jade. And Gershom stared with a
quick-beating heart.
Sisal: Yucatan! The home of the Maya of whom
he now heard so much, the strangest folk of that strange,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 67
lost world in the West before Columbus’ Pinta ploughed
the Atlantic ! A dark, wild civilization that had sprung,
mysteriously mature, in the forests of night, a culture of
stone tools and magnificent temples, a skilled astronomy,
an infantile agriculture, high art and cannibalism, horrific
gods and paternal rulers, a theocracy and a savagery. There,
apart and alone from the life of the world it burgeoned
in the morning of Time, and spread and endured and
waged its wars, civilized the Americas—and then crackled
and collapsed, mysteriously murdered, with the relics
of its culture long centuries after astounding the hosts of
Spain . . . Yucatan !
He ran below, down the close-smelling hatch, and
summoned up Mellison from sleep and his bunk. George
Shaw’s assistant came up and stood looking, and yawned at
the sight, but even his indifference quivered a little at that
bright be-painting of the morning horizon. ‘ Yucatan ?
Well, well, I wish we’d come six hundred years earlier.’
‘ So do I,’ said Gershom.
Mellison yawned. ‘ What, you too ? What would you
have done ? ’
Gershom was quite definite about that. ‘ Landed a
strong party and marched to Chichen—or Mayapan or
Ake—and seized whatever high-priest was handy ’
‘ Yes ? ’
‘ And compelled him learn Spanish and translate the
Old Maya inscriptions.’
‘ Correct,’ said Mellison, preparing to vanish. ‘ You
pass with honours.’
George Shaw had heard that interchange from his
bridge-deck cabin. An hour later as they sat at breakfast
and drew into the shore, he sat in the flood of bright light,
68 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
and for once good-tempered even at such an hour, told them
the origin of the name Yucatan. It was in I5i7> an^ a
slaver and gentleman, Francisco Hernandez de Cordoba it
was, took a ship out from Cuba to explore the vague limning
of coasts already known to rumour in the West. So he sailed,
with uncertain winds that came and passed and left him
becalmed and came again, for twenty-one days he sailed.
But the twenty-second dawn came and the look-out sighted
a wooded point with near it the surprising phenomenon of a
town which glinted white-painted walls in the sun. A sea¬
port of Titzimin, we now know that town, the port of a
Maya state long sunk in decay, half-deserted, with the
lichens sprouting on its walls.
But Cordoba and his crew knew nothing of that. They
stared their amazement from every vantage-point, rigging
and deck, and then, as they rounded the cape, saw a great
stepped pyramid, ruined and deserted, swing past. Then a
belt of trees marched down to the shore and cut off sign of
the impossible town their look-out had sighted.
But a plausible explanation was offered, at last they’d
arrived at the coasts of Ind, so long those coasts sought by
Columbus himself. Here at last was the East and its
wonders, treasures, and slaves. Cordoba cast anchor and
gave order for the boats to be manned.
So they rode into shore, strange Indios were there,
the first Maya to encounter the armed white. One stood
forward a little from his fellows, the leader, and Cordoba
had him questioned in Carib : What were his people and
who was his king ?
The Maya stood wondering and tall and brown, in
fibre sandals and embroidered loincloth, his head mis¬
shapen to an alien canon of beauty, himself that lost expedi-
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 69
tion of civilization that had run its strange course to an end
long years before.
‘ Tectemal: I don’t understand,’ was what he said.
So Cordoba called the place Yucatan, as it sounded,
and if you look on a map of the Gulf you will see to this
day a peninsula curve out in the water, great, like a question-
mark, so that maybe the misname remains descriptive in
the end.
§5
Such was George Shaw’s story as their ship steamed
slowly into Sisal port and the flying odour that came on
the wind from that mother of the henequen industry.
Gershom wished to ask more, “ like Cordoba’s Maya, I
didn’t understand,” why ever should the peninsula question
the Atlantic ?
He put it to Mellison that evening as they took their way
back from dinner at the house of the American consul.
George Shaw had remained behind to gossip : Gershom
he’d sent home in Mellison’s care. In that care he had
wandered a round of wine-shops till Mellison, affirming
‘ One more and I’m drunk,’ had reluctantly foregone that
additional one and now made straying and uncertain tracks
for the shore. A great moon was riding far off on the
limestone wastes of the Yucatecan country as Gershom
questioned what his uncle had meant.
‘ Possibly the excellent George was being allusive and
literary. It’s a disease that comes on the old. Look out! ’
‘ What did he mean, then—whatever he was being ? ’
‘ Hell, you’ve a leech-like grip on a topic. Well, you
see, this dying civilization—the Maya—was saying to
the rising culture—the Spanish—“ I don’t understand.” ’
?o
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ Yes, but ’
Mellison stumbled over a cur which slunk snapping aside.
‘ For God’s sake give an educator time to marshal his
similies. Right: The Maya—the present-day world,
doomed and cankerous and half-dead ; the Spaniards the
rising forces of the world to be.’
Gershom pondered this as they plodded along. They
came to the gangway before his question matured :
‘ And what are they ? ’
‘ Eh ? ’
Gershom persisted. 4 The forces of the world to be.
‘ They just aren’t, or to speak in your argot, they ain’t.
When our civilization goes down, my lad, there’s nothing
to rise up and take its place.’
‘ What’ll make it go down ? ’
‘ Wine, women, or war. Fire, flood, or famine. How
the hell should I know ? Ask the Old Maya, it happened
to them.’ He hiccoughed, and posed, one foot on the
deck, in a drunken solemnity. ‘ And a damn good job.’
§6
Laguna de Terminos. George Shaw had chartered an
unchancy fruit-boat, and for three days they crept along
the Gulf from Sisal, that coast that Cordoba and others had
followed, Montejo and Cortes and their steel-clad hosts,
four hundred years before. There, to the left, where the
jungle now massed, Mochcovoh, the ferocious Maya, had
met in pitched battle and routed the whites, through
generalship, not through ferocity. There Champoton had
risen in that grey-green blur, then palaced and splendid,
where the Tutul Xiu rested and plotted and planned while
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 71
in Europe they were preaching the first Crusade. There,
while the warriors of William the Norman rode up to the
Senlac palisades, Quetzalcoatl the Toltec had landed his
flotilla, his refugee-army from the Mexican plains, and set
out on his march to subdue the land. There 
Gershom’s head reeled with the stories, the heat, the
blinding glister of the blue Gulf water. To George Shaw
this land was his land, he its, his enthusiasm for its present
and its past was unbounded, it softened the blank frown
from his brick-red face as no other thing on the earth could
do. Of a vanishing order of archaeologist, Shaw, he’d no
belief a cold attitude was necessary to accuracy. For that
reason his reports were like no other reports ever penned—
unless those of Augustus le Plongeon.
‘ Augustus le who ? ’ asked Gershom.
‘ Plongeon, a genius, but potty. Potty as a Gillingham
Jezreelite, almost. But he knew the Maya, he drank up
their tales, and then issued his fantastic books. Swore that
so far from being moderns in the scale of culture, the Maya
had been forefathers of the Egyptian and every other
civilization.’
‘ And weren’t they ? ’ asked Gershom, and at that Andrew
Mellison, sitting sweating in a topee and very little else,
a stained notebook in his hands to check stores and gear, a
litter on the deck of the one-time fruit steamer, groaned
loudly.
‘ Go away. Good God, you’re too ignorant to hold
converse with a mule, let alone an archaeologist. Not that
they haven’t got points in common. . . . Let up, there’s
a sweet, and go look at the scenery.’
So Gershom ‘ let up,’ and from vexing archaeologists,
was speedily transferring his attentions to those fauna
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
72
with whom they’d points in common. The boat ran across
the Laguna in a slight squall of rain, slight, said Shaw,
though it seemed a blinding white torrent, and that night
made the mouth of the Rio Tabasco. At the coming of the
morning they ran close in a harbour—at which Gershom
looked in the wonder of one to whom harbours were Chatham
and stone piers and the wheeling of cranes against a leaden,
soot-stained sky. Here the village, the world, and the
harbour slept, bowered deep in green, overhung unendingly
with the drone of insects, far off the Tabasco a ripple and a
surge on the breast of the dark green land.
But George Shaw was in haste and the usual temper,
he cursed rapidly and with fluency the morning, the steamer,
the captain, and Gershom, did they think he’d come here
on a blasted pleasure-trip, hey ? Fortunately the village
was exuding its porters by then, and Gershom, emerging
from that acid-inspired wrath, looked down on his first
Maya with close, critical eyes. Men and women, black-eyed,
apathetic, dull-eyed and dull-skinned, with here and there
even yet the sloped forehead and hooked nose of the pictures
and talks. They set unloading the equipment with hardly a
word, far less with that singing of the negroes that at New
Orleans had so pleased and amused. They looked shrunken,
deflated, in some way, thought Gershom, and was puzzled
by that, they seemed healthy enough. But Mellison
understood and nodded and was cocksure as usual.
‘ Mentally deflated, they’re mentally old. The negroes
are children, but these folk are born old. They’ve never
recovered from the Maya Old Empire, there’s failure and
age in their blood. They’ll look just the same, your descen¬
dants, my Gershom, if a stray Martian lands for a look at
them on the Chatham hills a thousand years hence.’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
73
Seven mules were purchased that day by George Shaw,
and Gershom, with qualms of delight, realized he was
expected to ride one of the beasts. His uncle had forgotten
the fact he had never yet ridden, so Mellison was detailed
to take him to practise. They went out that evening with
the quietest of the mules : its quietness was deceptive.
Extricating himself for the tenth time from the depths of
a thorn-bush, Gershom saw Mellison seated in helpless
laughter upon the ground, and decided to dispense with his
help. So he drove the mule out to a more secluded spot,
cut a strong switch, and rode to and fro his long-eared
mount till his seat was secure—if an aching one. Returning
long later to the guest-hut he found Mellison and his
uncle fast asleep, and would himself have slept with a like
tiredness and serenity but for a loud breathing and thump
at the door of the hut as the night wore to morning. Wakeful
at the thought of some wild beast on the prowl, Gershom
struck a match—and looked into the eyes of his mule. The
beast had conceived for him a violent affection and had
come to pay him a call.
He was to find that affection had its uses in the days to
follow. George Shaw had a permanent permit from the
Mexican Government and had no need to have it restamped.
Now he planned to strike southwards along the usual trade
tracks till he came to the village of Huacachahoul, and then
turn left and east for Palenque. ... It was a week of
burning heat, vexed in the day by flights of insects that
stung and droned, lighted at night with the shimmering
bodies of the fire-flies. The track wound now by precipitous
ledges above the Tabasco’s slow flow, now splashed un-
chancily through swamps that oozed great bubblings of
foam, iridescent and glittering, malarial, from under the
74 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
hooves of the mules. Gershom clung grimly to his saddle,
his mule benignant, and his soul expanded ; he was never
to forget the days of those rides. There were times when
the forest came down and devoured them in long hours ;
there were times when a silence as of death came on it;
there were times when it listened and waited, apathetic, or
quivered in menace, the little grey monkeys would cease
from their chattering of insults and squat shivering in
colonies above the trek of the mules. Once the forest
disgorged on their sight a detachment of soldiers, in fibre
sandals like their Maya ancestors, rifles on the shoulders of
their soiled cotton jackets, marching up north to seek out a
bandit who was levying tribute on outlying haciendas.
George Shaw made halt and smoked a cigarette with the
detachment’s commander, a lieutenant, one Maquene,
whose grandfather had come from Boston and rejoiced in
the designation M’Kinney. Introduced to Gershom, he
raised hands in astonishment.
‘ But a boy in the wilderness—he should be at school in
England ! ’
Shaw grunted. ‘ So I told him myself. But he wanted
to inspect your admirable country.’
‘ A discerning youth,’ the lieutenant agreed. ‘ But see,
he cannot stay at the ruins through the wet seasons—if you
stay three years. Send him to Mexico City there s the
admirable school of Dr. Ruiz there. There he will learn
Spanish more admirable than in any place outside Castile.
George Shaw translated for Gershom. ‘ Well, what do
you say ? Rainy season’s only six weeks off. How about a
trip to Mexico ? ’ He conferred again with Lieutenant
Maquene. ‘ The lieutenant here’ll take you with him as
far as Comitan, and get you sent on to Dr. Ruiz school.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
75
Mexico City’s worth seeing, and you can come down to
Palenque when the wet season passes.’
Gershom considered and then shook his head. ‘ I don’t
want a school in England or in Mexico either.’
‘ Damn fool.’
So Lieutenant Maquene shrugged his shoulders and
smiled at Gershom and shook hands with him, and went
on to hunt down his bandits. But, as they afterwards
learned, it was the bandits who hunted him. They routed
his little force under a bluff of the Rio Grijalva, in an
ambush and a volley of Mausers, and Maquene himself was
among the half-dozen captured. He was tortured for
a week, his eyes put out, his genitals cut off, and then set
adrift in the forest. Three days later his half-eaten body
was discovered by a meztizo trader who brought down the
news to George Shaw halted at Huacachahoul.
‘ Damn good job you refused Maquene’s offer to take
you to Comitan,’ said Mellison, and translated the gist of
the trader’s remarks, and was suddenly sick. But Gershom
didn’t sicken, he just shivered and stared—stared out at
the hell of naked pain veiled in the dull sleeping beauty
and greenery of Chiapas. And that night it came back
to him, the first time in long years, he saw tortured and
dreadful the Image of old, it cried to him, cried to him,
and he woke then crying himself, weeping in a passion of
pity and rage.
“ The moon was sinking, I lay and wept, my uncle and
Mellison sleeping nearby. In the agony of that moment,
the terror of that dream, almost I called to them, but they
wouldn’t understand. . . . Strangely then, mere boy as I
was, it came on me clearly I’d to fight it for myself, fight
through the nightmare and answer that cry if ever I could,
76 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
ever yet unveil the face of the Thing that had come from
my childhood, that followed me here in the forests of the
night.”
§7
Huacachahoul village was a day’s march behind that
dawn when the coughing of the American tiger awoke
Gershom from his sleep. Next stage on their road was
Yaholan, they reached that at eleven along a trail seemly
and reputable since the days when Stephens and Catherwood
had crossed it. It was at Yaholan that Stephens met with
the girl, an Indio girl ‘ of extraordinary beauty of face and
figure,’ who so dwelt in his memory and was written of in
detail in the pages of his genteel, voluminous ‘ Travels.’
‘ Not that the damn fool slept with the girl,’ said Mellison,
riding abreast with Gershom through the squalor of the
village. ‘ But he liked her modesty.’
‘ So do I,’ said Gershom, unexpectedly.
Mellison raised his fine-pencilled eyebrows in mockery.
‘ Can it be there are prigs in the gutter ? Tell me, you’ve
surely been blooded by now ? ’
‘ Blooded ? ’
‘ Slept with a woman.’
Beyond Yaholan : the forest discovered a stream that
flashed in the sun and flushed redly under the ceiba
boughs. But no such flush came to Gershom as Mellison
expected.
‘ No, and I don’t intend to.’
‘ Good Lord, and why not ? ’
‘ There are lots of other things to do than be messy. . . .
There’s my uncle calling.’
At noon they came to the Yaholan’s banks, and saw in
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
77
the coming the forward country march darkly and grimly,
sky-aspiring, a forest that wheeled against the east on the
ribs of a naked mountain. Up that wound the track.
George Shaw slowed down and ordered a halt at the foot
of the first incline, Gershom slipped away from where they
lunched and stripped and swam in the seaward gurgle of
the limpid waters. The heat of the day was blistering on
the banks, and he came from his bathe in his panama alone,
and George Shaw shouted an oath.
‘ Blast it, put on your clothes. Quick, there ! ’
Gershom stared in surprise as his uncle flung him his
shirt and trousers. Mellison grinned as he put them on :
he decided he liked Mellison less. On the brick-red face
of the expedition’s leader the heavy scowl smoothed.
‘ No doubt ’twould be pleasant enough doing without
them—until you got saddle-sore. But you can’t in this
country.’
‘ Why not ? ’ drawled Mellison. ‘ You sound somewhat
reactionary. Victoria’s dead.’
‘ And so’s Queen Anne. But you’d look “ somewhat ”
bloody, I think, with your genitals cut off and stuffed in
your mouth—as they’d certainly be if you tried going naked
here. These Indies are natives with a past, poor devils—
the Maya past and the Catholic combined.’
They climbed up the mountain, with curses at the mules
(all except Gershom’s, but it was in love), and so found
themselves on Tumbala, a crater. Here the lava had boiled
and rocks leapt high in ages long antique to both Maya and
mule. In the village the alcalde came drunk from his hut,
a half-breed, Meztizo, and welcomed them with expansive
solemnity to Tumbala’s repose. Nothing else could be
done for that day, it seemed, George Shaw grunted and
78 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
acquiesced to a halt. A meal was spread them in the
alcalde’s hut, and entering from the daylight the three stood
a moment in darkness. And then Gershom’s eyes cleared
and he saw the girl.
She was perhaps his own age, and so far his senior in
physical development. She stood dark and very still,
waiting at table, and her beauty was neither Spanish nor
Indian, but alone and apart, of youth and herself. The
impassivity of the handsome young face surprisingly melted
as her eye caught Gershom’s. The alcalde waved to her,
tipsily.
‘ My daughter Luz, sehores, my Light as I call her.
She will see to it you are tended and cheered.’ He leered,
his eyes passing from George Shaw’s cold glare to the hot,
dark eyes of Mellison. ‘ We teach hospitality here in
Tumbala.’
‘ That is well,’ said Shaw, ‘ we shan’t trespass on it.’
The alcalde wilted a little from that glare and turned
to the platter in front of him. The girl flushed and looked
down. Gershom did the same and sat awkward and puzzled,
eating pork without appetite and drinking his coffee, vexed
by those glances of the girl, they seemed almost to appeal.
. . . What was it she wanted ?
The alcalde questioned them on the world and its ways,
George Shaw rapped out staccato replies, the eyes of
Mellison strayed to the girl, and the girl’s eyes strayed,
beseeching, to Gershom. It was all very strange.
The meal ended at last and Luz left the hut. So then
did Mellison. The alcalde grinned. George Shaw lit a
pipe, he seemed not to have noticed, but when Gershom
rose up and was also to leave he reached out a gaunt arm to
detain him.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
79
‘ Wait a while, boy. I’ll come out with you and show
you a thing worth seeing.’
So Gershom waited, and Shaw completed his pipe,
and then rose, and they went out together. They were there
at the edge of the village, set high on its little plateau.
George Shaw turned left by a worn path that wound through
the rocks, and the ground rose quickly, so that soon they
climbed.
Now in the evening light Gershom drew a deep breath
as he halted by the side of Shaw.
Beyond and below, many hundreds of feet below where
they stood, lay an immense ravine like a blow from a sword.
It seemed one might leap from the summit to the depths
and wheel and wheel and fall minutes in that leap ere one
touched the bottom. Far across from their summit the
other side of the ravine climbed skywards again in a saw¬
toothed range that ran westwards into the dying sun, they
were dun and blood-coloured and crowned with gold. But
beyond, low down yet tremendous, another range crowned
the east. Something in its interstices gleamed and Gershom
questioned that gleam.
‘ It’s the Gulf, the Laguna de Terminos,’ said Shaw,
‘ and those are Palenque’s mountains.’
Palenque mountains ! Nurtured on the name for weeks
as he’d been, Gershom’s blood came stinging in his face
with excitement. ‘ Oh Gosh ! ’ he exclaimed, inadequately.
George Shaw glanced down at him curiously. ‘ Palenque
mountains. The dead city lies in their hollow, and we’ll
make it in a few days’ time. This was what I wanted to
show you. . . . More than Mellison could.’
He read a question in Gershom’s silence, and snorted,
and then blew his pipe with care. ‘ Women, and all the
8o IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
foolishness that goes with them. I have shown you things
that are better : Mountains.’
§8
South of Tumbala, in the wild lands that wound to the
Usamacinta, the Indies lived as before Columbus, in the
barbarism of the Old Empire’s fall. Out of those lands
would occasionally spawn a raiding tribe to fall on a village
and loot it, and leave its inhabitants nailed to trees, and
fade back to the green day-night of the jungle. So
George Shaw related to his nephew and Mellison, his idea
of light chat while they climbed and descended and clung
by their eyelids to that giddy and ghastly twenty-seven miles
of track that lies between Tumbala and the village of San
Pedro. From Tumbala they scrambled and slithered and
lurched to the deeps of the canon that Gershom had
glimpsed, far down, in the previous evening. There,
directly in front, the path wound up, by giddy escarpments,
and crumbling footholds, to the heights of that further
range—a horror of unshielded earth in parts, in others an
equal horror of slippery mosses and deceptive lianas. The
mules plunged and kicked and reared in suicidal ecstasy by
this brink and that; Gershom and Mellison had long
descended, they pulled and tugged, scared and apprehensive,
but George Shaw might have ridden a tramcar in Chatham.
He rode smoking, poised on the back of his beast, even while
it seemed that beast was treading the edge of a razor. And
between whiles he boomed out stories of the Land of the
Unbaptized across the forested sierras.
Gershom had never so admired his uncle. And he read
admiration in Mellison as well, Mellison himself sleep-
weary and laggard this morning. He d partaken of the
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
81
alcalde of Tumbala’s hospitality in more senses than one, and
paid for it, and now fought and struggled the horrendous
paths without any great urge or enthusiasm. ‘ Still, it was
fun while it lasted,’ he affirmed to Gershom.
‘ I prefer the mountains,’ said the sweating boy.
He had more than enough of his preference by night¬
fall. He fell into bed in San Pedro with an ache in every
bone in his body, his pelvis was racked with shooting pains,
his hands red-blistered. He slept like a log throughout
the night and far into morning, and awoke to find George
Shaw had delayed the start to give him a larger measure
of sleep.
Beyond San Pedro was land without name or habitation
all the length of the track to Palenque. Here the forest
came down on the earth like a cloud, black, thick, overgrown,
the forest of your books and your readings, not such as
they’d previously seen since their landing in far-off Tabasco.
Parakeets screamed and flirted bright wings in the murky
depths ; far off in its inky shadows the pools of water would
sometimes glister and gleam at the touch of a finger of
sunlight reached down from the heights. Here even the
insects seemed quiet and subdued of hum. So close was
the bush around the track that riding was a high adventure,
lest presently a bough scrape out your eyes or scrape you,
unwarned, from the saddle. When they made their first
halt all three of the whites were wet with sweat, George
Shaw puffing under that moisture as though to turn it to
steam, Mellison’s skin wrung dry as tight-squeezed fruit,
Gershom red as that fruit new-boiled. George Shaw ate
beans from a can and chatted.
‘ The worst stretch is before us now.’
‘ Worse than this ? ’ Mellison sounded aghast.
82 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
Shaw chuckled as dryly as his condition permitted.
‘ Wish yourself back in a museum arm-chair ? ’
‘ No, I’m damned if I do. Wouldn’t miss this for any¬
thing. But I’d like it in easier stages, so to speak.’
Presently the forest died away and again came the hills.
Here were the steepest ascents they had yet encountered.
They dismounted from the mules and went clawing their
way up pitches so steep it seemed that each succeeding
foothold had a moment before been level with their eyes.
The sun rose scorching, unshielded the heights, you’d
not dare to look up and around. For below and around,
in that first swift glimpse, was a world that canted and
quivered, raced and swam, a great crinkling of mountain
and forest, with the gleam of the Gulf long leagues away
across the matted slopes. Then, on the mountain-crest,
the track betook itself from the crumbling hog-back ledges
to the edge of a precipice, sheer, a bare couple of feet over¬
hung the depths. This was the place, Shaw told to Gershom
and Mellison, where Stephens and Catherwood had crossed,
sitting in chairs on the backs of the Indians.
It seemed to Gershom a precarious luxury. His head
swam as he looked ; and Shaw saw it and cursed him.
‘ Hold up and away your damned head. And mind your
mule—it depends on you. Don’t walk. Ride !
Without that studiedly angry impatience for urge,
Gershom was afterwards to realize he would never have
succeeded in making that path. No wind blew. In the
steely depths below, the air seemed to curl alive, hotly and
moistly, malignant, awaiting his hurtling descent from the
heights In distance the depths were a cobalt blue, but
once, seeming to look down for hours-it was only the
fraction of a second—he sorted from that blue-grey jum e
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
83
the fronds of the waiting trees and the long, sentinel spears
of the bamboo brakes. Behind him another curse came
‘ Look to the left, there, damn you ! ’
So Gershom looked and escaped that nodding nausea,
over to the right, down and down. The day went on. They
halted and then pressed forward again. More hills, more
climbs, more descending. Night was near before they
reached the final descent, and more than near when they’d
made it. Shaw veered his party to the right, then, under
the crags of that last descent, in search of a spring he’d
been told of back in San Pedro.
The darkness came fast, the draping of a great black
blanket over the forest. Tangled in its fringe came clouds
of mosquitoes. The water was nowhere to be found till
Gershom, sitting down to rest while the others searched,
heard almost under his feet a gurgle and trill.
‘ There’s water here,’ he called to them, and didn’t
remember much more, except that he slept.
§9
They had passed the horrifying mountains at last. Next
day, riding through the pasture lands that gird the village
of Palenque, Gershom looked back on those mountains
and the memory of them as an unquiet nightmare dreamt
and ended. But in secret pride he surveyed his blisters,
and remembered the curt smile of his uncle and the slap
on the shoulder of Mellison when he’d staggered from the
hut that morning. Wakening, he’d discovered himself
completely undressed, in the one camp-bed, a mosquito-net
tucked about him, and his body tired but fresh-feeling as
well. Reason for that he’d learned from Mellison. It
84
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
was Shaw who had undressed him the while he slept, had
anointed him from head to foot with oil, and had massaged
him with an equal thoroughness—all the while he slept
blissfully unaware. Gershom thanked his uncle for that,
with some shyness, and was greeted with the usual morning
scowl.
‘ What do you think I’d have done ? Imagine I wanted
an invalid on my hands ? ’ Then the scowl had gone and
for a moment a wintry smile gleamed out. ... A feat at
such hour, that smile !
And here was Palenque at last.
But not the Palenque of the ruins. That lay a good
eight or nine miles distant, across atrocious tracks. This
was the real Palenque, the dead Maya city of the bush has
no name, long abandoned to the speech of men, and archaeo¬
logists but name it from its modern neighbour. That
neighbour young Gershom surveyed without excitement,
better though it was than many a village they’d passed
through since they left Tabasco. The iglesia stood high on
a grassy slope ; the houses of the Mexicans flowered their
great tangled gardens ; the huts of the Indios slept in the
sunlight. At sight of Shaw’s party Palenque emptied out
its population in welcome, calling and questioning in a
Spanish beyond Gershom’s vocabulary. The prefeto
lunched them and wined them and proved expansive.
Doubtless they had come to work in company with the other
sehor who had left for the ruins three days before ?
‘ Doubtless,’ agreed George Shaw. ‘ But what was the
sehor’s name ? ’
‘ Caldon. Almost he has cleared Palenque of flour.
And of needles ! . . . But we have much of other food if
you need it ? ’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
85
‘ I shall need at least some,’ Shaw told him absently.
He was puzzled, and that afternoon while he and Gershom
and Mellison took their siesta, he told them why.
‘ Caldon—never heard of an Americanist Caldon. And
I know of most Americanists alive, I think. If he came
with the equipment the prefeto says, he can hardly be only
a tourist or sightseer. Damn him. He’s probably engaged
the best of the Indies.’
‘ As well as the food. Not to mention the needles.
Must be a damn neat soul, or else covered with rents. . . .
Needles ! ’
George Shaw grunted. ‘ Umph. Ever hear of a Caldon
yourself ? ’
‘ No, no Caldon in archaeology I know of—unless it’s the
Egyptologist.’
‘ And he'd be a bit out of his beat down here. Some
dollar-stuffed scholar from the Middle West, I suppose.
Well, it can’t be helped. Wish to God it was the Egyptian
Caldon : he’d do us some good. Finest excavator alive, if
you can go by his reports.’
Mellison also praised that Caldon and the two of them
wandered into mazes of appreciation beyond Gershom’s
comprehension, he fell into a sun-stilled doze. Occasionally
he more than despaired of ever hitching enthusiasm to such
matters of digging and measurement and painstaking photo¬
graphy, matters on which Mellison and his uncle talked
endlessly, had talked the moon into morning on more
occasions than one.
A gibbous moon came up from the hills that night, and
Gershom at the entrance of the prefeto’s house watched
its coming, and the racing of shadows on the westward
bush. The light was a golden shimmer, faint, like faint
86 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
sunlight, spraying the sleeping lands. South : the Land of
the Unbaptized, those wild relics of the Maya tribes who
had never owned Spanish dominion. West: the tracks
they had crossed. North : jungle and waste to the shores of
Laguna de Terminos. And under and about that eastwards
hill you could hardly see in the moonsheen—what wonders
had once been there, what glory of gods and processions,
prides and pomps and pageantry, where now beasts laired
and the night had made for itself a dwelling-place. . . .
So it was that Mellison found him standing and staring
at that shadow in the night which crowned ruined Palenque.
He came through the moonlight, soft-footed himself, and
suddenly smote the boy on the shoulder with a force that
made him leap aside with a startled cry. Mellison grinned.
‘ Think it an Ancient Maya who had come for you ? So
it is,—or his adjutant. George wants you to check up
stores. Come along.’
So Gershom followed him. The road to Palenque was
almost done. To-morrow and Palenque itself awaited
them.
SECTION THE THIRD
SECTION THE THIRD
§ 1
“OO it was, by ways and means unguessable, un-
predictable, I met at last with Ester April Caldon.
That Odyssey of mine from the slums of Chatham had her
for its end as certainly as Penelope Ulysses’—if Penelope had
but been Calypso ! . . . And I try in faded allusions to
guise my excitement recalling that encounter. In after
meetings, when the years had brought down a curtain of
change and custom upon us, I think she was often to find
my eyes upon her, intently, absently, I was seeing her not
as the Ester of now but the Ester of then ”
It was a day of the usual sizzling heat, but to that both
Mellison and Gershom were at last accustomed. They
set out from Palenque village at nine in the morning, the
mules so loaded that riding was a thing of the past, un¬
regretted at that. Besides muleteers and cook, half a dozen
Palenque Indies had been hired to carry and dig and help
generally in unearthing the city mislaid in the bush by their
own remote fathers. These straggled along the uneven
forest track loaded down with great bundles of fresh-
bought provisions, live stock and dead stock, two chickens
that were plucked and ready for the pot and three still
squawking alive—these last designed to be set pecking in
the ruins to supply the breakfast eggs of the party. Bacon,
said Shaw, they’d dispense with.
The morning advanced ; so did the party. At eleven
they splashed through the Micol stream, meandering
there perhaps a thousand years before when Palenque was
alive with its aberrant cultus. Beyond that, and drippingly,
they forded the Otula, and found then no break in the forest
but abruptly masses of lichened stone rising up from the jungle.
89
9o IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
The city stood entombed. Lianas drooped from the
sculptured doorways with their sun-cracked stucco, wreathed
like bright livid snakes the palace pilasters, blinded in a
vegetal froth the ruined towers and disrupted plazas.
Mouldering stone masses that fought the jungle ; for the
rest, the forest had long routed the masons and artists, the
sculptors and priests and the strange civilization they had
brought that dark place, nothing lived or moved ; halting
at the foot of the incline for breath, it seemed to Shaw’s
party that the place was deserted. And then Ester April
Caldon came through the trees, down the crumbling
pyramid that led to the palace, and halted, and stared on
them no less surprised than they stared on her.
She was fifteen years of age then, with hair a dark red,
like Gershom’s, in a normal light. But it turned almost
black indoors or in shadow, you stared at her hair and
wondered ", and then in the next fall of light, even dun
light, the hair lighted up and glowed as though a lamp had
been kindled in each strand and the web of the shimmering
mass. . . . These are Gershom’s words. She’d a square
little head, with the forehead high, and eyebrows dark and
eyes themselves grey, and her nose was distressingly humped
in the middle—faintly, it gave character, courage, and
insouciance to that elfish face. She’d a trick she had taken
from her father, of stroking her smooth chin when in doubt
on a thing, and she stroked it then as she looked down on
the party come out of the forest to the pyramid s steps.
George Shaw walked uncarefully buttoned as usual,
Gershom had dispensed with his shirt, and Mellison might
well have dispensed with his, considering the rags in which
it was hung. But the stranger they saw alien to sartorial
self-consciousness as they themselves were, she was plainly
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
9i
a girl, young though she was, but she’d made no emphasis
at all on the fact. Across her left cheek was a smear of
paint—or it might have been chocolate ; her clothes were
the clothes of comfort, not elegance or maidenly modesty,
she was clad in soiled trousers rolled up to the knees from
the tops of long shooting-boots—these, and a vest, and
nothing else at all. Chin-stroking, she stood and regarded
them, they her, and then far up the incline a voice called
‘ Ester ! ’
She turned round at that and called back ‘ All right ! ’
Then glanced over her shoulder, smiled at George Shaw,
and fled like a deer up the pyramid slope.
Mellison drew a long breath, the first to speak, his black
eyes kindled and unquiet. ‘ If that’s a descendant of the
Palenque Maya, they were worth building palaces for.
Who the devil can she be ? ’
Shaw grunted, unhumorously invoking an opposing
authority. ‘ God knows. Come on, we’ll take the mules up
to the palacio.’
He knew the way by heart, though he’d never been
there. It was steep, that climb up the terrace, littered with
debris, almost formless now, but artificial as Gershom
saw, like the second one that rose above it. Crowning this
terrace, half-cleared from its trees and the jungle bush, was
that building familiar to him in many a photograph and
sketch, the palace of Palenque. Less familiar, not familiar
at all, the man who came out of the palacio’s main doorway ;
he was tall and grey-haired, with a black moustache, a pair
of tweed trousers, a decayed-looking hat, and, most black
and ill-smelling, a smoke-reeking pipe. He came down
the slope in some haste, the girl Ester scampering behind
him. Shaw instantly he selected as the party’s leader.
92
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ Digging ? ’
‘ Um. I’m Shaw.’
‘ Then I’m welcoming a king to his kingdom. Your
territory, this. I’m Caldon from Egypt.’ He turned round
to the girl in the knee-rolled trousers. ‘ And this is my
daughter Ester.’
§2
As the prefeto of Palenque had told them, Caldon had
arrived at the ruins four days before. He and Ester had
taken up residence inside the main corridor of Palenque
palace, first clearing the jungle’s detritus from walls and
floors, and uncovering in the process the cheerful initials
of other visitors in far-off years. Then they’d set up tar¬
paulins to ward off the rains that drew now so near, and
had so discommoded Stephens and his illustrator more than
a half-century before. Snakes and a puma had laired in
the palace (“ they kept the conventions of poetry in
Palenque ”) before Caldon’s coming, he’d had difficulty in
finding it, so blinded it was in bushes and trailing green
creepers.
George Shaw had also intended to live in the palace,
all archaeologists at Palenque lived in the palace. But that
now proved impossible, they could hardly intrude on
Caldon and the smear-faced elf with the clothes of a gnome.
Strangely, Shaw submitted with a good enough grace to
the task of house-hunting elsewhere, and they wound
their way across the litter of the plazas to the building the
sketch-maps call Casa No. 2, that other and lesser erection
which was probably a temple of human sacrifice in the days
when Hengist and Horsa first planted their heavy feet on
shrinking Thanet.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 93
‘ Funny my uncle seems quite pleased about it,’ Gershom
whispered to Mellison. The latter smiled airily, as usual.
‘ Too astounded to be angry. . . . Caldon of Egypt !
What the hell can he be doing so far from his own
lay ? ’
But Gershom hardly listened. He was staring at the
building to which they had attained. It squatted in its
ruins, blind-cloaked with bush, on the top of what had once
been a great stepped pyramid. Forward either side of its
square-cut door the figure of a man, garmented, belted,
bizarre, overtopped by a head-dress of bewildering design,
stared out in cold scrutiny on the green forest blaze. Once,
Gershom was to learn, these figures had been painted. Now,
void of that as any statue from Greek lands they stood,
guarding the portals to that even more amazing sculpture
within. To it presently Shaw and his party came, stumbling
under their loads, George Shaw was to use Casa 2 as a
store-house throughout their stay, if only as a dwelling
till they’d built them a hut.
‘ By God ! ’ said Mellison, with indeed more reverence
in his voice than he’d have given to a vision of God.
For they stood and looked on the greatest sculpture in
Ancient America, the masterpiece of an art and a culture
long lost in the dark canons of history. It covered all the
rear wall: To right and left of a grotesque cross on which
perched an immense and horrendous bird, two personages
stood in act of worship. Rich-garbed and rich-decorated
they stood in their stone and the glory of their sculptor’s
technique, their faces chinless and browless in that alien
canon, the one to the right with the figure of a god and the
face of a devil. In their hands they upraised strange gifts,
sacrifice, supplication, to that strange nightmare of long-
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
94
dead imaginings, the bird that squatted on the cross. Either
side and about them stood row on row of the glyphs that
no men may read—except for the dating to which Mellison
came, the date which his Museum equated, wrongly, to the
Christian year a.d. 223. ... He glanced back, Shaw’s
assistant, and saw Gershom and his uncle also looking at
the plaque, and for a moment their appearance distracted
him abruptly.
‘ By God,’ he said, gaily, startling them and himself
from that awed contemplation. ‘ You do look alike ! ’
So indeed perhaps they did in the scowl of that mutual
appraisal, Gershom’s dark face sober as he looked his
wonder, George Shaw with that gaze that had unravelled
so many a riddle of the ancient Occident. . . . He trans¬
ferred the scowl to Mellison.
‘ It’s the plaque’s looks that matter, not ours. Quick
now, I’ve known first impressions reveal twice as much as
experience—anything you gathered from the figures in the
first flash of looking ? . . . Don’t consider ! ’
‘ Nothing ’ Mellison hesitated. ‘ Except that I’d
seen it before.’
‘ Of course you have.’ Impatiently. ‘ Photographs and
casts.’
‘ Not only that. Somehow as though I’d seen it—or
details of it—in something else, something quite unconnected
with the Maya.’
But George Shaw was disappointed. He said ‘ Um,’
ungraciously, and turned to the stores, and he did not ask
Gershom’s opinion. . . . “ That was a mixture of admira¬
tion and disgust and disappointment. Somehow I’d
expected something different after all. Somehow ”
He stood at the door of Casa No. 2 and looked out over
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
95
the silence and sun-shimmer of the city’s sleeping ruins.
Mellison and Shaw busied themselves with the baggage,
the Indios and muleteers came panting with their loads, the
mules, released and refreshed, knelt down and rolled on
their backs at the foot of the pyramid steps. . . . Palenque,
the end of the road. And after all it was only, as was
Jezreel’s Tower, a stupidity, a ruin, though frightful,
somehow.
“ From that moment it is probable, though I put it in
no words, the conviction came on me that whatever else
I’d do, whatever else achieve, archaeology would never
provide my life’s passion.”
§3
Night. It swooped over the ruined city of the Mayas
as a great bird might—perhaps that selfsame bird that the
ancient sculptors had seen and immortalized in stone on
the antique cross between the hands of the worshipping
priests. Gershom raised his head from the book he sat
reading—sprawled out on a packing-case the book, himself
sprawled out on a camp-chair, the light flickering on the
pages in the clouding flight of the swarms of insects that
besieged the lantern.
He was alone for the hour in Casa No. 2. In the late
afternoon the white-haired Caldon had descended from
the palace, he’d come trailing in his hand a long coil of
white-painted rope. As he halted at the door his eye fell
on Gershom, absorbedly, abstractedly, the rest of Shaw’s
party at the moment invisible.
( Boy.’
Gershom waited ; Caldon stared over his head ; far
down by the Tower of Palenque Mellison, measuring with a
96 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
tape-line, called figures to Shaw. It was drowsy in the
ruins, and Gershom’s own eyelids quivered.
‘ You’re with Shaw ? ’ The dreamer had awakened.
‘ I’m his nephew.’
‘ Good. Now tell him I’ll be pleased to have him up
to supper—young Mellison and him (I know Mellison s
father) at eight o’clock sharp.’ He pointed to the rope that
coiled off up the hill through the jungle obscuring the palace
itself. ‘ See this ? That’s for night-time traffic between
the two camps. We’d find it dangerous with all the cracks
and crevices. Good. Tell your uncle.
He turned round and away, and then looked back again,
stroking his chin. ' Somebody will have to stay and look
after your stores, so you’re not invited. Your turn later.
An hour later Mellison and Shaw came back, they’d
spent the last half of it attempting to induce the Indies to
spend the night at the ruins. The attempt had been quite
unavailing : As in Caldon’s party, the natives demanded
they be allowed to return every night to Palenque village.
Stay in the ruins they would not, the ghoul-haunted Casas
de Piedras.
‘ But your own ancestors built the damned place, said
Mellison.
‘ Senor,’ the Indio headman replied, ‘ that perhaps is
true. And now they burn in hell, where we also may
burn for our sins. But we do not burn for theirs. ^
‘ As complete a refusal of the sins of the fathers as I ve
ever yet heard,’ commented Mellison as they climbed up the
crumbling ledges to Casa No. 2. But George Shaw was
unvexed. .
‘ No excavator has yet succeeded in keeping his Indies
overnight at Palenque.’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
97
Gershom told them of Caldon’s coming and invitation.
George Shaw pulled at his lips and surveyed the thin, white
rope that wound up through the dusk. ‘ That’s good. He
may tell us something of himself at last. You’ll manage all
right here, Gershom, while we’re gone ? ’
‘ Oh, easily.’
‘ Right. Better begin on your lessons now, in fact.
Read Religio Medici. Appropriate to your surroundings.
. . . Needn’t wait up for us unless you want to. If any¬
thing goes wrong call loudly and we’ll hear.’
‘ But, for a change and our relief,’ amended Mellison,
‘ little boys should be neither seen nor heard.’
So they’d left him, groping away in the mirk by the
guiding-rope that Caldon had laid. Now Gershom sat
deep in Religio Medici :
‘ We carry with us the wonders we seek without us :
there is all Africa and her prodigies in us ; we are that
bold and adventurous piece of Nature, which he that
studies wisely learns in a compendium what others labour
at in a divided piece and endless volume ’
He heard a slight stir by the door. He thought it a
lizard and barely heeded, then that stirring came once
again and he heard in the darkness the sound of a light,
quick breathing. He looked up, his hands on his book, and
so saw the girl Ester Caldon standing in the doorway
surveying him. In her hand she held a tray draped with a
scrap of muslin.
‘ Hello,’ said Ester April, with her voice, and with her
eyes, and with the very poise of her slight, quick body so
gracelessly be-trousered. Gershom answered ‘ Hello,’ on a
lower key, and hesitated, and then stood up.
She came forward, her hair went dead black then in the
98 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
light from the lamp, and Gershom saw the wonder of how
fair her eyelashes were below her dark brows. She set
down the tray atop the Religio, whipped off the cover, and
then stood aside. Her face was grave as she looked at the
tray, then glanced up again at Gershom. And suddenly
the gravity vanished, the elfish gamin peeped out a moment.
‘ I’d a shocking time with that leg of chicken. Mislaid
it twice in the dark—’n’ the second time I found it I thought
it squiggled. Might have been a lizard. . . . But it s the
chicken all right. Like chicken ? ’
‘ Well, if it isn’t lizard.’
‘ Oh no, though you’ll have to brush off the grit a bit.
I thought you’d be lonely ’n’ forced to have supper out
of a can while we guzzled at the palace. So I brought you
a share. ’N’ I was bored, anyhow. Father’s throwing
Egypt at the head of your uncle.’ She lifted a bottle from
the tray. ‘ I pinched some sherry as well, like sherry ? ’
‘ Oh, a spot, thanks.’ (That was Mellison’s word. Was
it right ? The girl seemed to think so.) ‘ Won’t you sit
down ? ’
‘ You eat,’ said the girl, ‘ I’ve had my supper. I’ll sit
just here. Don’t mind me.’
The chicken was good, if a trifle stringy. Ester Caldon
sat and looked out at the night, her face turned politely
away from contemplation of the activity of Gershom’s
jaws. Presently he reached his hand to the bottle she had
brought, he wasn’t quite sure when a man drank sherry,
but he’d have to try it sometime since she’d brought him
the stuff.
She’d half-turned round, and he caught a hint of wist¬
fulness in the grey eyes.
‘ Will you have some ? ’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 99
She stroked her chin, absurdly. ‘ Well, I shouldn’t.’
Inconsequently : ‘ But I hoped you’d ask. . . . No, thanks.*
Gershom found another cup and filled it recklessly.
‘ Come on.’
‘ All right.’
They eyed each other. Far down among the trees a night-
bird screamed, the motfn-bird of Yucatan. Ester said
‘ We should drink healths now, shouldn’t we ? ’What’s
your name ? ’
‘ Gershom.’
‘ Gershom Shaw ? ’
‘ Gershom Jezreel.’
‘ Goodness. Spell it.’
‘ J-e-z-r-e-e-l. And yours is Ester Caldon.’
‘ Ester April Caldon. I was born in April. We should
touch glasses ’n’ then drink. . . . Phoo ! ’
That was how Gershom had felt also at the first mouthful.
He gulped, his eyes watering. ‘ Not bad. Have some
more ? ’
‘ I think we should sip it. How old are you ? ’
They put each other minutely through a questionnaired
catalogue of ages, birthplaces, effects and affections. They
drank more sherry, and presently Gershom had mislaid his
shyness, Ester had never had any to mislay. They stood
up to measure heights one against the other, Gershom won
by an inch or so, and it was then that Ester suddenly giggled.
‘ It’s that sherry. My head feels swimmy. Doesn’t
yours ? ’
It did. “ I giggled in sympathy.” . . . ‘ A bit. Let’s
sit down.’
She had done so already, with some abruptness. Now
she reached out her hand and caught his and guided him
100 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
to his seat. They began to giggle again, till abruptly an
idea came on the boy, he caught up the lantern and sprang
to his feet.
‘ Come on and see what they look like at night-time.’
They scrambled back through the packages and bales
George Shaw’s expedition had piled in the chamber. So
they came to the rear wall at last, and there, in the fitful
light of the lantern, saw the sacrificing priests stand waver-
ingly alive as they held up their strange offerings to the
bird on the cross. Ester shivered and then shook herself,
resolutely.
‘ It’s horrible. . . . But I’m not afraid.’
‘ Aren’t you ? ’
Gershom himself felt less certain. He turned and they
groped their way back to the entrance, and, groping, he
looked again at the plaque. The lantern fell from his hand
with a clatter. . . . The Image zvas following at his hack.
. . Silly ! ’ The girl’s hand touched his. She was
stooping and searching. ‘ Here it is, ’n’ it hasn’t gone
out.’ She upended the lantern while he stared at her.
She sat down and giggled. ‘ I know. Let’s sing. Do you
know any songs worth singing ? ’
§4
‘ What the hell,’ said George Shaw, violently, ‘ is that ? *
Mellison was later to tell of the scene to Gershom. They
were sitting in the corridor of the palace of Palenque.
Forward of them, Mellison and Shaw, the lamplight, the
table, and Caldon. Caldon, indeed, had just finished
speaking, his eyes turned away from his listeners, remote
and away from Palenque altogether. And Shaw and Mellison
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
ioi
had sat listening in a stunned, dazed silence, or exchanging
once in a while that swift look of comprehension that sane
men exchange in the presence of those whose sanity they
doubt.
Caldon of Egypt! The most brilliant of Egyptologists to
have gone the same road as Augustus le Plongeon—only
that road reversed. Almost incredible, and nevertheless
true. Caldon had been explaining in the rolling periods of
his time and type.
‘ Firstly, I was awakened to the possibilities of the thing
by a purely chance encounter with Maudslay’s Biologia
Centrali-Americana. . . .You know it ? ’
They nodded. Mellison grinned faintly in his hands.
Scientific Americanism was fathered by Maudslay’s epic
book ; it is an archaeologist’s childhood primer. . . . But
Caldon saw the grin.
‘ That, of course, seems childish to you both. But my
work, you must remember, has been far from America—
like too many Americans I’ve strayed further than I needed.
Egypt and Syria, as with Petrie, have been my territory.
I’ve no more than a layman’s knowledge of cultures outside
these fields. Once, indeed, a member of the French Academy
wrote and drew my attention to the curious resemblances
between certain archaic Hindu customs and those of old
Egypt. I put down those resemblances to coincidence, of
course, the fact that the human mind in all ages flows along
much the same bournes of thought, and in widely diversified
localities manufactures for itself implements of culture
that differ but little. I actually believed that those phrases
explained : I did not conceive that they blinkered thought.
‘ Till I came on Maudslay’s book ’
He went on. He had looked in Maudslay’s book. He
io2 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
had taken to the research of comparison. Similarity of the
human mind—could it account for the fact that the Winged
Disc of Egypt should be reproduced, almost perfect in
detail, on the lintels of a temple in Ocosingo—far off in the
heart of tropical America ? Could it account for the fact
that the elephants of Guatemalan Copan were Indian
elephants—in a continent like America where elephants
were unknown ? . . . He was responsible to no particular
body, Robert Caldon, and his means at least sufficient to
allow him research on his own. Abandoning Egypt,
he sailed for New York, went down to his home in Kentucky
with a stray Castilian, learned Spanish in six months . . .
and was now down in Central America to answer for
himself the great question : Had some items of the ancient
y Maya civilization originated from an Egypt even yet more
ancient ?
‘ But ’ Mellison made the interruption slowly,
carefully, as to one overwrought, ‘ have you thought of the
wide difference in space and time between the two cultures,
sir ? First, Ancient Egypt lies four thousand miles or so
from Central America. All kinds of geographical barriers
intervene—continents and seas and islands which show no
traces of the Ancient Egyptians. It seems proved to the
hilt that Asia had never any connection with America
in the days before Columbus. And then there’s the time
factor. Egypt was at its apogee about the year 2000 b.c.
The Maya were at their apogee at least two thousand years
later.’
‘ All that, of course, I know perfectly well. But is it
indeed so certain there are no traces of Egypt in India,
in Indo-China, in the Pacific ? It’s a matter I’ve not yet
examined in detail; presently, however, I shall, and satisfy
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
103
myself on these points. Meanwhile, I’m here to make a
thorough investigation of all the old Maya sites and collate
what evidence there is. Even China 5
‘ China ! ’ It was George Shaw’s deep growl. ‘ What
Egyptian influence was ever there, hey ? Its culture was
probably well under weigh before ever Egypt rose out of
the Old Stone Age. Besides ’
But Mellison also had seen that ‘ besides.’ ‘ Why, it
would mean that all civilization—or nearly all—had origi¬
nated at one central point and spread across the globe.
It would mean that men are not naturally capable of civiliza¬
tion, of progressing up from a lower cultural point to a
higher. It would mean the collapse of historically-applied
evolution ! ’
Even Caldon was slow to reply to that. ‘ Even these
things it might mean, though that’s no concern of mine.
We work inside a framework of hypothesis, and if the frame
fails to hold the facts, we make a new frame. Now I’ll
show you something.’
He went into the darkness of the corridor alcoves and
presently returned with a sheaf of photographs. ‘ I have
had these taken by various people. . . . You’ve both heard
of the Gorgon’s Head ? It’s a legend of the Mediterranean
peoples. Well ’
George Shaw picked up the first photograph, ‘ Italy ’
was the word inscribed on the reverse. It was the Etruscan
conception of the Gorgon he looked on, a horrific caricature
of the face of man, rounded, with jutting mouth and fangs
and snaky locks. The second picture was Greek : the
same monster, different at the eyes and mouth, but still with
drooping tongue and snarling fangs. The third was of a
different period and people, the head narrowed and more
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
104
bestial, with a bull-like skull. But it was still the Monster
of the ancient tale. So was the fourth, square-cut, more
crudely carved, a statue in crumbling stone. ... A terrible
Image that had haunted men.
And the second and third photographs were marked ‘ Chawin,
Peru,’ and ‘ Tiawanako, Peru.’ Mellison and Shaw sat
stunned. How had this nightmare everywhere arisen in
the minds of men ? . . . Shaw’s young assistant shook his
head.
‘ It makes nonsense of history—if it’s true. It makes
history itself no more than a nightmare—civilization the
nightmare of the Gorgon’s head. It makes all mankind the
victim of an accident, a delusion—Eh ? ’
It was then that the sudden ejaculation came from
Shaw’s lips. All listened. Far across the ruins of Palenque
two voices were raised, in the darkness and mystery of a
jungle that had devoured a civilization, singing—to Mellison
for a moment they seemed singing with the voice of mankind
itself:
‘ Nobody knows the trouble I’ve known,
Nobody knows my sorrow :
Nobody knows the trouble I’ve known,
Glory hallelujah ! ’
SECTION THE FOURTH
SECTION THE FOURTH
§ i
SEEN through the trees in that summer heat, the sun
seemed an open wound, you supposed it was something
in the air and refraction. Carrying the rod as they passed
through the bush Gershom looked into Ester April’s face
and saw it with a mist of sweat on it then. It looked like a
fine mist on a brown, quiet land.
He had discovered poetry by then, experimenting himself,
in his three months at Palenque he’d already composed five
sonnets, and, secretly, thought them good. “ When I
knew Ester Caldon better, I decided, I’d read them aloud to
her, some time.”
The forest was asleep. It lay and slept, with vague
motions ever and anon, like a man in dreams, the trees
moved and trilled, no wind though there was to move them.
The silence broke under their feet, they seemed almost
treading on the thing itself. Another turn in the path
and Palenque was lost behind in the bush. The girl gave
a sigh of content and ceased to haste at the pace they’d
set.
‘ We’re safe enough now ’n’ they can’t call us back.
Was your uncle asleep ? ’
‘ He was shaking the roof of Casa No. 2. . . . And
Mellison was sawing off his backbone.’
‘ Dad was a mile away—or a thousand years. We should
have gone fishing before this time, only I’ve been so busy.
’N’ you have too.’ She stroked her chin. ‘ Learning
Latin, dad says.’
‘ I wasn’t too busy ’
She nodded. ‘ I know that now, since we met and
talked about it this morning. But Mr. Shaw ’n’ my father
107
I08 image and superscription
haven’t been very keen for us meeting since that first
evening when we drank the sherry. . . . N they think it s
rather a mess, a boy and a girl of our ages together at the
ruins. Here’s the Micoh’
They squatted down in the grass in a place where the
forest drew aside its green skirts and watched them. Thread¬
ing the body of a slug on a hook the girl was intent, dis¬
regarding Gershom. He himself looked at her, remotely
curious, she was only a girl, but this was fun, a change
from that ghastly bore Causar. I he heat was stifling this
siesta hour, it was still the hot weather that awaited the
rains. Loudly and inappropriately, somewhere in the ruins,
a cock began to crow.
‘ Stand away clear now, Gershom. Oh, 111 call you
Gerry.’
‘ All right.’
The hook spun out in the eddies and drifted and flowed,
and Gerry, new-christened, glanced up as she made the
throw, and suddenly, as he tells, realized intently, the first
time in his life, the acute difference of sex. The chatterings
of the Chatham back-alleys had taught him much, muzzily,
but now he stared a moment with his heart in his throat.
For a dazzling moment the girl was a silhouette, a sil¬
houette in silver, a wild curve and flow of breast and leg
and thigh in that poise, the soiled overalls hardly a disguise
at all. Gershom Jezreel drew a long breath.
‘ I say, how old are you ? ’
‘ Oh, damn it, it’s caught. Clear now. . . . What,
Sixteen next birthday, I’ll soon be a woman.’ She steadied
the line and gossiped.’ ’N’you a man. \\hat are you going
to do ? ’
‘ I don’t know.’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
log
‘ I do, I’m to be a painter, father says that only messy
little mugwumps are painters, but that’s because he himself
can’t draw at all. He thinks women should marry ’n’ have
babies, I suppose. But I won’t.’
‘ Oh, I suppose you will.’
‘ You’re blushing.’ She was suddenly the elf. ‘ ’N’ I
don’t know. They’re fun, rather, babies. I might marry
you, Gerry, just to have one.’
He’d recovered by then. ‘ I shouldn’t mind.’
He was never to be sure of Ester April Caldon. Long
after he invented a phrase for a frame of her in those days—
‘ sophisticated innocence ’ was the phrase. But it turned
uneasily in his hands now and then while he used it. . . .
‘ There’s a catch. Shoo, only a branch— No, it’s not,
it’s a catch ! ’
The molten silver of the stream was broken, it bubbled
in miniature maelstroms. Gershom caught a branch and
leant over and peered.
The fish rose out of the stream, gleaming like an opened
sunshade. Curving, that silver silhouette again, Ester
threw it on the bank and drew a deep breath, and spat
delicately, and wiped her mouth. Gershom grinned ; so,
after a moment’s stupefaction, did the girl.
‘ It’s all run to brain, like father or your uncle. Like to
try a throw now ? ’
‘ All right.’
The Micol swept away her laughter ; repressing it, she
rolled on the grass, convulsed. Gershom, with a scowl,
climbed up the tree, disengaged the hook, and promptly
had it tangled around his neck. By the time he reached
down to the ground again Ester April seemed no more or
less than a giggling insult to be instantly suppressed. He
no
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
smacked her, half-savagely, intimately, and instantly
regretted it.
She ceased from giggling, looking up at him with a white,
still face. Fascinated, he watched that little mist of sweat
come out on the pallor now.
‘ You mustn’t do that. I won’t—no one can touch me.’
He turned from her, mumbling red-eared. ‘ I’m sorry.
Only fun.’
‘ It wasn’t fun, I saw your face.’
No, it hadn’t been fun, a flame of anger ; but she didn’t
laugh at him now, anyhow.
He cast the hook again, it glimmered and hummed like
a hornet, he heard the girl cry out and he tried to dodge.
But next minute the bait, disengaged, had struck him in
the mouth, and a blind pain swept up in his head as the
hook caught his eye. Instantly his hands leapt up to his
eye, and as instantly his wrists were caught.
‘ Gershom.’
He stood still, the blaze of pain passing a little. His
right eye refused to close. He struggled with Ester s hands.
‘ Don’t do that. Sit down. It’ll only take a moment.’
He sat. Something trickled wetly down across his cheek,
he set fast his teeth and waited, his eyelid fluttering on the
barb that nestled in the lip of the eye. Presently upon his
face, for he could not see them, he felt the fingers of Ester,
trembling, and at that knew certainly she’d blind him when
she moved the barb.
‘ Keep still.’
‘ All right.’
‘ Oh, don’t “ all right ” at me so often.’ She sobbed,
once, her fingers grew steadier. ‘ Keep still.’
It was a terror then in the sunlight, a fear that almost
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
m
turned the boy sick, years afterwards he would find his
eyelids go fluttering at memory of that fear. His hands
went up to his face, involuntarily. Thereat the pain bit
deeper down in the folds of the lip.
Ester forced back his head and put down his hands,
and suddenly her fingers were cool and quiet, she gave a
swift sideways jerk, the flesh tore a little, but the barb
was out. Gershom swore and winked his eye and the
eyelid closed.
‘ There.’
He saw her face flushed and hot, her eyes scared. ‘ I
was afraid I’d blind you.’
‘ So was I.’
She sat erect slowly, with her brown arms rigid, he saw
the flex and stiffening of the muscles as that rigidity
came.
‘ I heard—something.’
So had he also heard. It was something that moved
close at hand in the ink-jet shadows of the ceiba, moved
and was still and breathed a strangled breath. The sun
was a blaze on the Micol. They looked at each other,
looked back towards the trees that masked Palenque. And
the thing in the daytime shadows moved again, swiftly, and
a whiff of musk came out to them, and then a low, quiet
growl, a soft, searing sound beginning far down a yawning
throat. Gershom saw Ester’s face grow blanched, and knew
that his own was the same, they rose to their feet together,
looking into the shadows of the tree.
But as they rose the purring rose also, so did the swishing,
and then they saw it, the jaguar that had risen as they had
and stood with the glare of its eyes on the face of Gershom.
And in that instant he knew why it stared, why that dreadful
1I2 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
purr came from the hanging jaws, what thing it was routed
the beast’s customary cowardice.
It was the blood that welled from his face.
Smelling it, the beast crept forward towards Gershom ;
to Ester it paid no heed. The bigness of a wolf, with the
markings of a tiger, the tiger of America, the night-beast of
the ruins. . . . “ And it was day, and the blood was running
from my face, and now, aroused by that smell, I suppose,
the brute had remembered its hunger. It crept nearer and
nearer.”
And then a strange intimacy with the beast came on
Gershom as he and the girl stood paralysed, staring. He
knew himself dumbly eager to touch that coat, those gleam¬
ing eyes, to be one with that swift, slow alertness, that
slinking shape of musk. He heard himself breathe like
a drowning man, gurgling ; and then beside him Ester gave
a small, dry cough.
The beast’s head swung in a little arc to look at her,
its eyes left the face of Gershom. And in that moment the
boy awoke. The red of outrage and anger in his face, he
leapt forward.
‘ Get out! ’
The jaguar whirled and snarled ; too late. Before it
recovered Gershom’s boot was in swift and crackling con¬
tact with its jaw. The forest awoke and yelped and screamed
and screamed as the great cat spun itself in dizzying circles,
and then, miaouing, leapt aside and away. A last boun
and yelp and the trees devoured it.
The boy found himself breathing as one who had raced
up a hill in the sun from a pit in the dark. He stared
savagely into the palisaded forest; his voice was a croak
that he scarcely recognized.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 113
‘ It’s gone. Blast it, it’s gone. I wished I’d kicked its
head off. Did you see its eyes ? Damned eyes. I wish ’
‘ Like the Gorgon’s eyes.’ He found Ester’s hand on
his arm, she also was staring in the trees. ‘ Horrible eyes.
But you beat it, you were splendid, splendid, Gerry ! . . .
Oh, dash it, I’m going to cry ! ’
§2
Blinding darkness, as though ’twas your head they’d
wrapped in a hot, moist towel. And then the darkness
split, you could hear the tear and the rive of the fabric,
and then the night clove apart, torn linen, as the lightning
came slashing on the trees. It came from the Gulf, Gershom
thought, with the rain it brought, that torrent must have
risen straight up like a geyser there, and then wheeled
inwards and about and flung its lucent pillars on Palenque.
For the real rains had passed, they’d ceased the last evening,
Shaw had said that that was the last of them. “ I liked his
head in the doorway of the Casa as he told me that, it
reminded me of something that I meant to ask him, and
never had asked, seeing so his head and his body in shadow.
. . . But I didn’t ask, one didn’t, you met in with men and
with women, with girls like Ester, and behind them you saw
stand suddenly the Image—in the blaze of the sun or the
quiet of the evening, or the dawning brightness of the
white, quiet stars. And the question leapt up—but you
did not ask—had they ever seen It ? ”
But that night of the great Gulf geyser : Caldon had
gone and left Ester April to the care of Shaw. He’d gone
up into Mexico City, seeking a permit there for work in
Ocosingo when he’d finished at Palenque, he might be
H
ii4 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
gone for a good six weeks, he had said. He’d kissed Ester
absently, saying good-bye, she’d kissed him in return with
insouciant care.
‘ Take care of yourself, dad, and change your vests.’
‘ Yes, yes.’ He’d looked round as though searching for
something, and his eye on Gershom had lit up a little.
‘ You’ll look after her, eh ? ’
‘ I’ll look after her, sir.’
But that night of the great Gulf geyser : Shaw hummed
and hawed when Caldon had gone, for the rains were close,
they’d moved back from their tent into Casa No. 2 to be
ready for its coming. There was barely room for the three,
Ester couldn’t come as well, she mightn’t mind the crowding
but there wouldn’t be room—not though she slept in Shaw’s
lap, said Mellison. Ester had laughed, she’d like that,
but she weighed such a lot it would be very unkind to
Mr. Shaw. And, as Gershom records, George Shaw
grinned up at her pertness, the great moon-face relaxing,
“ he liked her as well, they both liked her too much, ‘ Damn
them, they’re old,’ I thought.”
George Shaw sat still and smoked his pipe, Latakia, he’d
old-fashioned tastes, the three others lounged around in
the Casa doorway and watched him. It was evening then,
an evening on the verge of the rains, the barred colours of
the sunset were sadder than they’d been, deeper and more
dun, the sky at night trembled and was troubled, the
monkeys had all gone south. The blue smoke ceased from
wreathing and betook a cloud-shape.
‘ Caldon really left Ester in the care of the boy, hey,
Mellison ? Right, she needn’t move from the palace,
Gershom can sleep there, out in the corridor. What do
you say ? ’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 115
Mellison raised up his brows at that. ‘ Maybe all right.
Still ’
He knocked out his pipe and filled it again, very care¬
fully, “ and Ester looked down at the ground, she’d such
long lashes, I saw then, that they swept her cheek like the
wings of a bird, raven wings. Uncle grunted and stood up
and he scowled at Mellison. ‘ Ugh, you’re still ado¬
lescent. These two aren’t.’ I didn’t look at Mellison,
I could guess how he looked, and then my uncle
glowered down at me suddenly, half-doubtful himself.
‘ Mind you look after the lady,’ and his thumb jerked to
Ester.
“ So I knew what they meant, they thought I’d want to
sleep with her, my ears went red, but they couldn’t see
that, it had grown half-dark by then. I said ‘ I’ll look after
her,’ cool as though I didn’t understand, the little-boy-
indifference-for-girls in my voice. That cheated them, but
Ester lifted her head, she smiled at me secretly, it was like
a ghost that smiled in the doorway of the ruined temple—
that secret smile that she sometimes gave me, that would
come into my memory when she wasn’t there, come vexingly
between me and the pages of Czesar.”
That night Shaw and Mellison took them up to the
palace and then went back to their beds in Casa No. 2.
Ester and Gershom stood and looked after them, and then
turned from that, watching and waiting as the stars came
clearer and clearer above the ruins, every night one would
watch for that, for a something to happen. Ester swung
herself up on a fallen pilaster.
‘ Mellison was afraid you’d want to sleep with me.’
Gershom was watching the coming of Aldebaran, a
kindling and a glow of fire out there in the wastes of space,
n6 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
the sentinel of the Galaxy’s rim. He nodded at the glimmer
of a face that was Ester’s.
‘ Yes, so I would. . . . But he needn’t be afraid. We’ve
got too much sense.’
‘ Much too much,’ she agreed, an elf in the dimness ;
and was silent a moment. ‘ Though maybe it would be
fun. But I don’t know. I think men and women compel
themselves to believe the fun it would be ! And they
dream about it and plan for it and tell stories about it. Till
they get all excited. And it’s nothing much when it comes.
‘ How do you know ? ’
‘ Well, I don’t, but I’ve that idea. Nothing to the fun
in other things : Sketching, or taking a boat on the Nile,
or finding the secret of the Mayas, why Xibalba collapsed,
or ’
‘ Or writing real poetry. Like Lucretius.
‘ Poetry ? But I can’t ever read it. It’s just words going
squiggly on the page. What kind of poetry ?
‘ Lucretius ’
‘ But I don’t know Latin.’
‘ Oh, like this, then :
‘ Dreamer of dreams, born out of my due time,
Why should I strive to set the crooked straight ?
Let it suffice me that my wandering rhyme
Beats with light wings against the ivory gate,
Telling a tale not too importunate
For those who in the sleepy region stay,
Lulled by the singer of an empty day.
Venus had come out by then. The boy saw nearly the
whole of the Galaxy filled and wheeling, it was time they
were gone to their beds. But Ester hadn t moved when he
stopped from reciting.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 117
She said, ‘ Is that yours ? ’
‘ Lord, no, it’s Morris.’
‘ But you write poetry yourself, don’t you ? ’
‘ I try, sometimes. But it isn’t much good—yet. Love
and stuff like that.’
‘ Gerry, not punk like love ? ’
He said that it had to be, it was the kind of thing ado¬
lescents did, easy stuff to handle, you just imagined your
people like lunatics or dogs in heat. Then he stopped from
that explaining, sulkily, because Ester was laughing, she
laughed and laughed while he glared at her, her elbow
leant soft on his shoulder.
‘ What a boy you are, Gerry ! Never grow old and dull
and don’t-tell. . . . And now I’m off to bed. ’Night.’
“ So I’d lived in the palace from then on, I’d no dreams
like Ester had, so she said, of those folk who had lived in
these rooms in the days of Xibalba. It was queerer in the
palace than the temple, though, your mind went back
to those folk more freshly here, you tried to reach back
through the spirals of time to their minds and thoughts and
the things they’d liked, had they ever watched for the wheel
of the Galaxy as you did now ? And you came, sleeping in
the front corridor, to an awareness more acute, it came to
you how hard and how hard you’d to think before you
could penetrate to awareness of how near after all were
those Maya, the dead folk of Palenque. That lintel and
that doorway side—they were fourteen centuries old, said
Mellison ; and you lay thinking of that and the years of it,
the sweep of the rains and the coming of the summers, the
trees rising and dying slow through those centuries, the
forest moving and changing, the Gulf moving and changing,
while the earth swept round the sun for fourteen hundred
n8 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
times. . . . And that stone had stood there, it had dripped
the rains of fourteen hundred years, scorched with fourteen
hundred years of sun ; and it was a stone they had touched,
you could touch, I could reach out my hand from my bed
to that stone, as may be those others had done from their
beds—brown, dead hands fourteen hundred years before,
quick then and moving and with never a thought of my
barbarian curiosities in the times to be. Remote and so
close !
“ And I remember that first night I lay wakeful long,
thinking of that—adolescence again, and its sadness, I
supposed !—of times far off in millenia to be. Would this
palace still stand and folk come then and touch the place
that my dead fingers touched ? Or Palenque, Chatham,
America, endure at all, man’s little writings on the face of
earth ? Perhaps he’d be dead as the dinosaur, man, beasts
prowling his palaces far and wide as a manless world swung
into the coming of the world’s last Ice Age. . . .
And that night brought the rains, they came at midnight,
his hammock sv/ung and creaked in the blow of the wind.
He woke up and looked out, the stars were veiled and then
blinded, and he heard the swish of the rain. The trees
below the pyramid, out in the dark, were crying and moaning
in the beat of the tide ; far off, up the track to Palenque
village, a beast howled long that night as the waters came.
Ester didn’t wake up, or she made no sound, Gershom
himself wasn’t wakeful for long. But he thought it fun,
it was good to hear and see it in the dark, its silvery pelting,
good that the time for men to pass like a dream from the
world had not yet come !
Next day was wet from dawn till dusk, steady, a sheeting,
opalescent flow, like a rainbow in cascade. George Shaw
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 119
and Mellison came running through the downpour in
shorts, nothing else, they gasped and laughed in the shelter,
Mellison drying his head in a towel that Ester April had
brought. Gershom liked him less than ever, standing so
and drying his head, laughing, his chest a mat and a furze
with its blue-black hair. I he sight of that made you sick
adolescence again, you supposed. But it didn’t sicken
Ester, she stood looking at Mellison secretly, curiously, her
eyes met Mellison s and he ceased to laugh, his face went
quite like a stone a moment, a gleaming stone, he forgot
where he was, all else but Ester. And then he laughed and
shrugged and he dropped the towel and was crying down
the slope for the cook, he came drenched in his poncho,
grinning as usual, out from Palenque village.
They’d a fortnight of the rains before that night of the
great Gulf geyser : Gershom was in Caesar, that cold, vile
adventurer, he’d got to Vercingetorix and the Gauls’ last
surrender—how Caesar had the captives lined up by an
anvil and pushed forward by the Roman soldiers; and
another soldier stood near with an axe ; and the hand of
each Gaul was pressed on the block and the axe swung down
and the hand fell off. . . . It made you go white, you closed
your eyes, but again you’d go back, read on, nobody
had ever felt it as you, Caesar wrote of it cool and quiet, and
his English editors penned calm notes, it was right, it was
just, it was nothing. Nobody had ever seen it as you,
the blood, how it spouted in a red-black stream, spouting
from a dozen pipettes, from the axe-sliced arteries, as the
hand of the Gaul fell limp from the block and the stump
was thrust spouting in the bubbling pitch. Nobody but
you had heard the gruntings of agony, the screams of the
weak, or thought of the horror and fear on the faces of the
120 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
men who waited by the block for their turn, and the cold,
dense faces of the Romans themselves, the axes growing
blunter and blunter at each stroke till at last they’d to hack
and rehack ere a hand came off. . . . And it was remote,
far off, nothing you could do to help them now, nothing in
their torture and pain. Long ago and far off, it didn’t
happen now. . . .
And then you remembered the face of your father and
the whip, you remembered Maquene whom the bandits
took, you felt sick as you thought, sick to be human and sick
to be living—oh, ’twould be a clean earth and decent when
we’d passed and were ended, this scum on the earth that
did such things.
Shaw and Mellison had left them, they’d gone back
to the Casa, their reports and their cataloguings, and the
palace was quiet. Ester in her room was working at her
sketches till she heard Gershom call, she leant over his
table and he read her the passage, the torture of the Gauls,
translating the Latin.
She nodded, ‘ There were worse things than that. The
Assyrians ’n’ Egyptians often tortured their prisoners.
’N’ the Maya ’
She went then and fetched out a book by Augustus
le Plongeon, Queen Moo was the book, it showed at one
page a man ground under the weight of a rock, it was a
sketch of a sculpture on a wall in Yucatan. The man was
still living, his entrails hung out from a slit in his stomach,
his eyes rolled in agony in the pain-drawn face. They
were cruel like that, all of them, the people long ago. They
didn’t think anything about it.’
‘ It makes me sick to be alive and have a body. Didn t
they think of their own bodies, those swine, while they
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
121
tortured, couldn’t they feel the pain that the others were
feeling. . . . Oh, damn, I shan’t sleep to-night ’
‘ But that’s only adolescence again. . . . Don’t glare at
me, Gerry, I’m not to blame. I didn’t live then, else I
wouldn’t have let them. It was long ago, it can’t happen
to us, only savages you know are like that.’
‘ Only savages ? Rot, these people weren’t savage.’
‘ Well,yow look savage enough, anyhow, ’n’ bad-tempered.
So I’m off.’
“ She was remoter from me then than ever she had
been, I hated her as well, sitting sick at heart and lonely,
something was missing from myself, I supposed. Else,
like others, I’d think nothing of the cruelty and the pain of
past years, I’d not waken in the night with the Image behind
me, mouthing in the dark with its Gorgon head, with its
head of a jaguar, slavering and drooling, with its head of
a Cassar, like a vulture or jackal. . . . Vercingetorix, ugh !
I could never write poetry again, I then thought, I could
never love anything in their histories again.”
But he put aside Caesar and turned to the poets, to
Morris and a beauty that was kind and uncruel, to the
Tennyson they were soon to decry ; but he loved him and
read him and looked out at the rains. The green earth had
wilted at their coming at first, but now, in a night, so it
seemed, it woke with the beat of new blood in its veins, it
surged and swept skyward with a forest of tendrils to suck a
hungry nourishment out of the sky. Vultures in the evening
planed down by the ruins, there were little dead beasts that
the rains had killed and the vultures had sighted from the
heights. And once they saw a great puma, Ester and
Gershom, the last day of the rains, near noon. It came
loping up the ledges of the palace pyramid, soaked and
122
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
hang-dog and it looked like a dog. When it saw them stand
watching it wuffed like a cur, and turned round in one
bound and looked over its shoulder.
“ I picked up a jagged stone and sent it smashing in its
rump, it snarled and fled. And I looked at Ester, she
laughed with her throat thrown back, her clear brown
throat, in that light it seemed almost opaque.”
For he’d turned to the writing of poetry again, spite
Caesar’s brutalities, he’d turned to them, words and their
beauty,—their movingness and their twistability, as he
calls them in a sudden descent to pedestrian half-literacy.
Again he was writing love-verse, it was easiest, he’d look
closer at Ester than ever before, she was there to study, her
throat, and the line of her chin, that was a strophe, and her
mouth, it was long and full, and that curve in her nose—
Guinevere had had that, you thought, in the poem of Morris.
But there wasn’t much more you could do, you couldn’t
write poetry like Swinburne unless you’d seen a girl without
clothes, you supposed, and it was a nuisance, you could
hardly ask her to let you see her so. It was all very well
and fine to write about breasts, how they curved, upwards
a little, beauty in that, and the slimness of waists and the
navel there like the pistils in the white flower petals of a
woman’s belly, and thighs that were music, knees that were
dimpled, long feet that trod in the grass at evening. . . .
You knew all of it, not a thing but you’d known—except
through your own two eyes.
And that couldn’t be, so the lines came stilted, if you’d
never lived but in a coal-mine could you write of a sunset,
though the other miners came down with their tales ? And
Ester said that last night, when the rains had ceased, the two
were alone together at the corridor door, ‘ What’s wrong
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
123
now, Gerry ? You keep scowling at me like—like anything
these days.’
He explained and she sat and listened, her chin in her
hands, not laughing, the elf face was grave as she shook
her head.
‘ It’s a shame—but I can’t very well help. Funny, but
just somehow I couldn’t.’
‘ I knew that you couldn’t. So I’ll have to get somebody
else, I suppose. Go into the village. There’s sure to be
an Indio girl there who won’t mind if I give her a peso or
so.’
‘ Sure to be,’ she agreed. And then: ‘ Let’s sing.
Remember that night we got drunk and were singing and
startled dad and your uncle and Mellison ? ’
So they sang a long time ere they went to bed, her voice
was contralto, true, and very deep for a girl of her years.
They sang ‘ Roll a man down,’ and ‘ There is a lady sweet
and kind,’ and then Ester wandered away from him in
the singing, he couldn’t follow and he knew she’d forgotten
him, songs of the negroes in the Southern States, round,
dark and melodious, sad and tuneful, sung in the quiet of
the ruins. He remembered best one from that very first
night, it caught at his throat as before it had done, and he
couldn’t speak when she’d finished with the singing of it:
‘ Nobody knows the trouble I’ve known,
Nobody knows my sorrow,
Nobody knows the trouble I’ve known,
Glory hallelujah ! ’
And when he’d looked up, throat better at last, she had
gone, he heard a scratch of movement in the inner room,
the swinging of the hammock that was there. She called out
124 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
at last, deep-voiced and clear, ‘ Good night now, Gerry.
Sleep well.’
He called back good night and went out to the door to
take a last look at the sky. The stars, fresh-bathed, were
kindling and brightening, and the earth, in the dark, sent
forth a dry scent. But at midnight he awoke with upon
him a conviction of a happening impending, tremendous,
immediate. About him was a silence so tangible he might
almost touch it, not a sound, no movement of the trees,
nothing but a ghostly sigh that was Ester’s sleep-breath in the
room next door. He coughed, with that silence in his throat.
And then suddenly the silence was not, far off towards
the Gulf rose a sound like cannon-shot, the clap of a thunder¬
ous weight flung in a reeling receptacle. He sat up and
listened, the quiet as before ; but was it ? All around was
a prickling stir as though the trees and bushes also raised
their heads and listened. And then, with deafening impact,
the waterspout from the Gulf struck on the hill of Palenque.
The palace rocked, the pounding tons of water warped
brightly across the hill, he saw them in the darkness, great
sheets, the pyramid rocked as the geyser wheeled and
returned again. The water swashed through the curtainings
of Caldon and tore Gershom out of his hammock, he rolled
and clawed and was clawed away from the rags at which
he had caught. And then he heard the buffet of the wind
that followed in the feet of the water, stones fell somewhere
with a clinkle and clatter, lightning didn’t come yet, but the
thunder growled. Throughjit he heard Ester cry ‘ Gershom ! ’
He cried ‘ Coming ! ’ and pulled himself up to his feet.
At once he slipped and went down, something caught at
his throat, a snake—no, only the hammock. Then the
lightning flashed, he was seen by Ester though not her by
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
125
him. As he scrambled up again he found her beside him,
moving, a pallor in the dark, he caught a warm wrist and
shouted in her ear.
‘ Let’s get out of the palace. It may fall any time.’
He heard her cry ‘ Yes ! ’ her wrist firm in his fingers,
he himself cried ‘ Now ! ’ as a lull came down, next instant
they were out in the open. Then the water was upon them
and the noises, undiminished, of the night. The trees
were whistling and cracking, a diapason of storm, in blow
after blow from the geyser’s wheel. But the water itself
was both warm and saline they found as they staggered
downhill. Then a thing towered up from the dark, a mono¬
lith resurrected in Caldon’s researches, and they crouched
in the shelter of that, and Ester laughed, she cried ‘ Isn’t
this fun ? ’
He felt her arm come bare on his own, they couldn’t
see the palace though they looked them back, the dark and
the water were between. Then the rain seemed to die, it
was more than a seeming, Gershom crawled erect and pulled
Ester up to her feet, and shouted in the wind, ‘ We’ll try
and make the Casa.’
She cried something to that that he didn’t understand,
then the lightning came lit, sheet lightning in a great wide
glow flowed sudden on the quietude of the sky. It was
then he saw Ester, the first time since the storm, a long
second he saw her, her face turned away, she was nude,
white-golden and terrible against that blackness where the
lightning played. And suddenly she turned her face, and
covered that face with her hands, and said nothing. And
Gershom said nothing, then fumbled for her hand as the
blackness came down.
‘ Let’s go back to the palace. Safe now.’
126
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
§3
‘ Growing pains,’ said George Shaw one night when
Gershom suddenly swore at Mellison. The latter ceased
from his teasing and stared his surprise. Shaw’s eyebrows
twitched on the great moon-face. ‘ So, soft on leg-pulling,
Mellison.’
That was spring of next year. The sun was in full
blaze again and Mellison and Shaw and their gang had
cleared and had mapped and had photographed the greater
half of the ruins, never so thoroughly was it done till their
coming. From the States and from Europe belated copies
of archaeological journals came drifting to Palenque, they
were filled with articles on the Shaw Expedition. Other
articles as well began to crop up, set out in the quiet,
careful English of Ester’s father, a rumble and a rumour
rose round them in the worlds of exploration, excavation.
For Caldon’s researches in the ruins of antique America
had confirmed his belief that the ancient culture was
nothing fresh-reared, but transported from Asia, a flotsam
and jetsam hither borne on Pacific tides. He’d returned
from his absence on the previous year and stayed two
months, had Caldon, and then vanished away to Chichen
and Uxmal, leaving Ester again in the care of Shaw. Shaw
said she was the only sane half of the Caldon menage,
but he said that with doubt, as if even so early the heresies
of Caldon were leavening his lifelong beliefs.
“ But not so Mellison. If I’d been interested enough to
pay him the heed I was afterwards to wish I had paid, I’d
have seen in him, surely, the acutest example of the human
mind frozen up in a science and a faith. He was even then
a good archaeologist, he is now one of the greatest of Ameri-
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 127
canists. But his essential conservatism blinked at Caldon
and the followers of Caldon, blinked and gulped and
stared a blank minute at the chaos that would come did he
ever admit an iota of interest in that heresy. Perhaps he
glimpsed its implications even better than did Caldon
himself, its unfolding picture of civilization entire as a
monstrous, unchancy growth, alien to men, unnatural to
man, an accident, a happening, a thing not inevitable. . . .
It meant scrapping his Huxley, his Tylor, and most of his
Darwin, it meant excursion from the safe, quiet places of
theory into the uncharted jungles of thought.”
Then Caldon came back, late April he came, and an¬
nounced he was off to Copan, down in Guat, and this time
Ester April went with him. She danced.
‘ Cheers, then I’ll see a bit of Centralia at last. My
caravan’s rested here far too long—’n’ I’ve nearly taken
root ! ’
‘ Especially in the heart of Gershom,’ said Mellison with
his teasing grin, and Gershom at that turned vividly red.
Caldon glanced at him remotely, as if hardly hearing.
‘ We’ll be back again some time, I think. But I may go
straight to the States when I finish with Copan. I can
almost add the coping stone now to the researches for which
I left Egypt.’ He smiled at George Shaw. ‘ Researches in
lunacy, eh, you would say ? ’
‘ I’m damned if I know. Moon-struck at first I quite
thought you. But now ’
But Ester April called then, Gershom didn’t hear more,
he went up to the palace to help Ester pack. The heat
was intense, windless, unstirred, he worked clad in shorts
and a mist of sweat, Ester clad in like manner with a thin
vest added. They strained and heaved at the straps for a
128 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
while, heat-swollen, and thumped bulging packs into
seemly shape, and wrapped fragile casts into layers of
grass, sweat blinding their eyes, Palenque’s worst day that
Gershom could remember, presently they desisted and went
out to the steps where the shadows crouched jet as ink-nut
juice. But there seemed as little comfort in shadow as in
sun-blaze, Ester loosed another button at her vest-neck
front and tugged distastefully at the short, soaked sleeves.
‘ Oh, to be a boy ’n’ go about like you ! ’
‘ Then do.’
‘ Don’t be silly. Young women mustn’t show their
busts—especially if they’re as nice as mine is.’
‘ It’s nice enough. But I shan’t look. I’ve seen it
already.’
‘ So you have—that night of the lightning. When I
heard you yell ’n’ ran out ’n’ you played Peeping Tom to
my little Godiva.’
He said angrily that that was a lie, and looked away
from her, and a minute went by. Then he heard a sound
of struggling with heat-wet fabric, and her hand came on
his.
‘ Of course it was a lie.’ She’d repented—violently,
whole-heartedly, as so often she did. ‘ A damn little
girly-girly lie. You can look at me now if you like.’
‘ I tell you I don’t need to.’
Suddenly she giggled. ‘ I never asked—but did you
write those poems that you wanted—after that night when
you saw me in the lightning-flash ?! ... So you did !
Why didn’t you show them to me ? ’
“ And I remembered why, and kicked at a stone, and
picked up the loosened stone and flung it at a lizard that
scuttered away in front of our feet. ... If Ester had read
129
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
those poems, had known of those nights when there were
other beasts than pumas that prowled around the palace of
Palenque ! If she’d known how I’d ceased of a night from
that cool self-scrutiny of which we both were so proud,
adolescents mocking their own adolescence, and found myself
swept away in the torrent whose existence I’d known and
derided ! If ”
‘ Gershom.’ She had ceased from laughing. Her voice
had a wondering compassion in it. ‘ Was it bad as all
that ? ’
‘ As what ? ’ he asked, intentionally dense, but something
of his own torment abated in wonder, wonder that she
should know, should have guessed; he forgot to feel
ashamed. He turned and looked into her eyes, and didn’t
look anywhere else than her eyes, they were clear and kind,
yet far-away in look, her hair in the shadow had gone almost
blue.
They held moist fingers for a minute, then she said,
What a day to make love ! Dissolve away, I should think.’
And brooded, Because really I suppose that’s what we’re
now doing. ... Oh, Gerry, it’s a shame, but I don’t believe
women have ever understood—men, what they want, ’n’
how damnable it is ! Not that we can know, we’re not old
enough yet. . . . Something I guessed, ’n’ Oh, I’m so
sorry, because I’ve never felt the same myself—about you,
about anyone. Just haven’t. Perhaps I’m not like other
girls.’ She was wistful over that.
He said, ‘ You’re better than any girl that ever lived, I
should think. They’d—they’d have been shocked if they’d
known, or giggled and grinned, or ’
Infernal things, girls,’ she agreed. ‘ But what are you
to do about it all, Gerry ? You’re only sixteen now, aren’t
130 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
you ? Fin seventeen. We can’t marry for years ’n’ for
years. Really, I suppose I ought to be your mistress.
‘ No, not if you don’t want to—really want to, not just
because you’re sorry for me now.’ Somehow at her words
all his shameful desirings and his secret angers had quite
wilted away. ‘ That would be all wrong. I’ll wait. There
are still—other things. . . . And you’d better get into that
vest of yours again. I hear somebody coming.’
§4
So that was his last talk with Ester before she went west
and south over the wild ranges with Caldon on the road to
Copan. Shaw and he rode with them as far as the village,
they started early in the cool of the morning, the smoke
rose straight as they climbed through the forest, past the
Micol, Ester in front as they rode. She looked over her
shoulder as they passed by the spot where they’d fished
and the jaguar had come smelling Gershom’s blood. He
grinned back a reassurance that he did not feel. Then the
village was near, and they all shook hands, George Shaw
with Ester and with Caldon, Gershom with Caldon. And
then Ester put her hand in his, and they looked at each
other, young and queer in their years, deep-troubled, he
saw the fine line of her brows tremble, and her lips as well.
She glanced from her father to Shaw, they sat watching,
and suddenly a banner of blood waved revolt in the pallor
of her cheeks, she leant over from her saddle, Gershom
towards her at that movement. So they kissed, kissing on the
lips, the first kiss they had ever exchanged, her lips were
prim and straight as they came to his, no more than a kiss
of friendship they came with. But they changed. For a
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 131
moment, for a second, they opened like a rose, like a flower
that was perfumed, wild, strange, and sweet to the kiss of the
boy.
And then she swung round her mule, they went riding
away, Ester, Caldon, the bearers, and their Indies with
them, one carried a silla for Ester on the ridges. Gershom
and Shaw sat their mules and stared after till the little
expedition was a ranging of dots on the mountains that
climbed to the sunset’s places.
§5
Mellison tried to enliven things with a joke.
For women must work and men must weep. We all
miss our hostess. Wonder if we’ll ever see her again ? ’
‘ Oh, I should think so,’ George Shaw said, but already
they knew he had grown indifferent. No human relation¬
ship might vex him for long, his silences were never the
silence of oppression or remembrance, but thought on his
work that was still to be done. He began discussing that
with Mellison, and Gershom went back to Thucydides.
And he slept well that night, and the next day came, and
the next, and things moved and changed, and you moved
with them, you found there was never blank emptiness in
life, it made its own measures and seasons whatever the
aches of a love-sick boy. But the heat was a flame such as
they had never known. In a week one could hardly move
amid the scorch of the burning bush, one’s eyes went
aching as though also afire, and Gershom, for the first time
since his coming to Palenque, regretted Chatham.
One evening as they sat at supper Shaw said, ‘ Like to
see the Laguna de Terminos, Gerry ? ’
132 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
Gershom thought that meant they should climb up
the hill of Astronomer’s Tower and look over the forest.
‘ Too hot for the exercise, uncle, unless you want to
especially.’
‘ I don’t mean that. It’s too hot here for work and is
likely to be for a fortnight or so. We might leave Davila
in charge, take Euriquito and his woman, and go camping
across to the Gulf. Hey ? ’
‘ That would be splendid.’
‘ All right then, we’ll go. Start early to-morrow.’
Gershom was never to be sure how much that holiday
was planned for himself, how much, and sheerly, a necessity
of the heat. They went down into forests that were dark
and quiet, so high the trees that no sunlight came in those
lonely aisles, nor any beasts either, though grey birds
croaked and went scuttering high in the dome. Sometimes
the aisles drew close, or they turned into bush-choked
culs-de-sac, the Indies went then and hacked through the
tangle with strokes of their great machetes. Three Indies
went with them, Euriquito as well, he brought his new
woman, she made the tortillas and pampered Gershom.
The first evening they climbed a slow slope from the
lowland, forested country, the land rose secretly, darkly,
into spaces more open as seen in the twilight. The Indies
said there was game to be had in this country, peccary and
turkey and deer, and they told the truth, next day it was
Gershom himself shot a turkey, the shot disturbed a jaguar
in a tree, it rose up and spat, and went slithering, silent,
through the woven tree-boughs.
They halted at noon and lay eating the tortillas that
the woman had baked, George Shaw relaxed and talked of
the jaguar, how at night it followed you, journeying alone,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 133
waiting the time when you slept. Then it came on you
secretly and struck at your face, with a stroke of its claws it
would gouge out your eyes, they liked eating eyes, did
jaguars. Gershom hardly heard, he was nearly asleep,
looking up from the grass at the etched tree-tops. And
then he sat up abruptly and touched Shaw’s knee.
‘ There’s a storm coming. Listen ! ’
It sounded like that, like the coming of the storms at
the beginning of the rains, a strange, remote rumbling and
pounding of waters, the bellowing of the bullocks of storm
as they wheeled in black droves on the waiting land. But
Shaw shook his head.
‘ It’s the Gulf, the tides surging into Laguna. We’ll
reach it to-morrow.’
So they did, and Gershom remembered nothing more of
their journeying except that as they came through the
fringing trees on the long rush-stretches that lay in the
sun, suddenly, almost on a line you’d have said, as though
slashed apart one from the other with a knife, the forest
stretch ended and the shore began. They were out in the
trees, in the smell of the Gulf, not fresh, but a smell of
hot waters and long, surf-backed nights, seas creaming with
combers, shores coated with salt. The Terminos went
rambling for miles, men said, long desolate stretches where
the sea-birds cried.
They spent nearly all that day riding by those meres,
till the surf of the Gulf itself was in sight, and nothing else
at all. It was somewhere in Terminos, Shaw started to
tell, where the Great Descent of the JVIaya had gathered,
with their salvage of culture from Xibalba’s collapse.
From here, some city long lost in the marsh, that hijra had
set out that founded the degenerate New Empire. So
i34 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
tradition told, no trace of a site had ever been found in the
Lagunas.
‘ But you can try your hand, Mellison, now you’ve the
chance.’
Mellison said ‘ Me ? I’m to lie flat on my back and read
Flaubert, or paddle in the shallows while Gershom shoos
at the sharks.’
‘ Sharks ? Are there any ? ’ Gershom asked Shaw. He
nodded. ‘ Yes, a lot. You’ll have to bathe always in the
shadow of a canoe.’
That night they slept in the thunderous beat of the hot
Gulf tide, glistening up through the dark a soft foam on
the edge of sleep, the ground shook and trembled in its
coming, shook endlessly, it rocked you to sleep. In the
morning one of the Indies went off to seek a village, canoes
and fresh milk if such were known in that region, which
seemed more than doubtful. Gershom slept the day away,
tired out with the riding from the ruins, and awoke just as
the Indio returned at sunset.
His canoe came out of the east red-ochred in the hues
of the sunset, the Indio as lonely a figure as Neptune, his
paddle a flashing trident. And then they on the shore
saw that he came not alone, the canoe had another occupant.
She had lain astern, now she crawled erect and looked
shoreward. Shaw saw her and scowled and then swore at
the Indio. ,
‘ Who the hell told you to bring back a woman ?
The Indio dropped his paddle, the canoe sagged in its
stride, so to speak, Mellison grinned, and Gershom stared.
It was no work of his, the Indio insisted, he hadn’t wanted
the muchacha, she’d insisted on coming.
Maruja herself leapt nimbly out of the canoe like some-
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
i35
thing that Gershom had seen before, he remembered in a
flash, that was how a jaguar would leap. Then she smiled
at Shaw.
‘ And why should I not come ? My father, like yourself,
was a senor Americano.’
§6
Her American father had been a chicle-bleeder, an
American strayed from Nantucket. So much she knew, and
but little more, except that he’d taken her mother as his
woman in a season when the chicle-bleeders prospected
the forests surrounding the Terminos villages. Then he’d
gone, and her mother had borne her and told her the legend,
grown to a myth, of the god who came from Nantucket. . . .
“ She was a mixture of childish cunning and charm,
vivid and wayward and naive. She was that child of nature
of whom Rousseau wrote, and by fifteen on the brink of
deeper ventures than ever childhood had held. Then the
Indio from our camp had arrived at her village with the
tale, for the first time in years, of white campers again by
Laguna. To Maruja that tale was a plain-sent call. The
village jefe had sought to restrain (there was no padre to
heed to their ethos). But she had smacked the face of the
jefe for him, angrily, but not very hard, I imagine, his
resistance had crumpled in a shame-faced grin, and here
now she was, waiting friendlily for us to befriend her.”
‘ So long as you don’t expect to be feted,’ George Shaw
said doubtfully, ‘ well, you’re welcome. We’ve a woman
in the camp already, that makes it all right.’
‘ Ah, a woman ? And whose woman is she ? ’ Maruja
asked then, and Gershom understood and Mellison under-
136 image and superscription
stood, and they grinned. But Shaw’s thoughts were already
turned away from the surprise of his visitor’s arrival, he said
‘ Whose ? Why, for all three, of course.’
And at that Maruja did indeed for a moment look blank,
she said ‘ Dios ! ’ and stared at George Shaw with large,
rounded eyes. Andrew Mellison choked, and switched
that off, and regarded the Laguna with swimming gaze.
Gershom, red-eared, spoke then :
‘ She bakes tortillas for us, that’s all.’
It is doubtful if Maruja had seen him before. Now she
did, and they liked each other at once. Sunlight, sunset
nigh though it was, kindled a candelabrum of torches in the
naive, deep eyes as she turned to look. Ah, the joven !
What is your name ? ’
‘ Gershom.’
‘ Kh’ershom ? ’ The Spanish of her speech found
difficulty in that, the underlying Indio little or none. She
said it again, making sure. ‘ It is good. I’m Maruja. I
will show you how to swim, to fish, to climb trees, to catch
the little alligators and put a cane in them and blow them
up—so ! ’
‘ By God, young Gerry,’ Mellison said, ‘ your education’s
beginning at last. And what will you show me ? he asked
Maruja.
She laughed at him then with her eyes, without coquetry.
‘ The senor, like the other old man, must know all things
already.’
Mellison stared. ‘ Well, God ! ’ and said no more.
Shaw hadn’t noticed, but Gershom had and he and Maruja
smiled one at the other, secretly ; and so she came into
their camp.
At supper a difficulty arose. Maruja had gone help
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
i37
the Indio woman make it. Mellison said ‘ And where’s
she to feed—the half-caste, I mean ? ’
‘ Eh ? The girl ? ’ Shaw hadn’t thought on the matter.
‘ Oh, with us, I suppose.’
‘ Think it’s advisable ? ’
‘ Why not ? At least it’ll give us a good name in Laguna
country.’
‘ Bit bad for prestige, I’d have thought.’
Shaw yawned. ‘ I never had any.’
Mellison looked at him queerly, he often did that, and
Gershom thought again, as he’d often thought of late, that
he wouldn’t stay long with them, Shaw’s assistant, he’d
gotten out of Shaw by now all that he wanted—though
maybe it was unfair to put it in those words. “ They had
nothing in common, these two, I thought, except the most
important thing in their lives. And that counted for little !
. . . They lacked any common essential approach, Mellison
had selected an aspect of culture and specialized in that
aspect as he might in bimetallism, my uncle, as I now
realize, followed a life-passion in his digging and research,
followed the feet of a lovely witness with a lovely devotion,
he sought to rape truth, and somewhere, sometime, he ^
believed, at last and triumphantly he’d succeed. . .
He lay on the ground that evening, thinking these things,
hands under his head, and waited for the coming of supper
and the evening star. And he thought of a sudden how
funny it was that men put always that thought in an imagery
with woman for the set piece, they sought out a new star,
they sought out a new truth—and they might never tell of
it so vividly to either their peers or themselves than by
comparing the achievement to sleeping with a woman !
But he rolled away from that thought, bored after a little,
138 image and superscription
rolling over on the grass to watch night coming darkling
down on the waters, the Gulf was a thunder out on the
point, flinging up a foam of suds on the point, you saw them
play in the gloaming. Then the supper came, a lantern
with it, Maruja as well, and swarmings of mosquitoes to
companion all three. They sat and ate and fought off the
mosquitoes, George Shaw as absent-mindedly as ever
fighting off both mosquitoes and Maruja. She sat by his
side and rained on him a torrent of question and information,
but as though she in some measure were herself absent-
minded. It was then that she told them of her father, the
myth of Nantucket, and how that word had stayed in her
mother’s memory. Mellison laughed.
‘ Probably a relation of the old man who kept all his
cash in a bucket.’
‘ And who was he ? ’ Maruja asked.
‘ It’s a ballad in English, sehorita. Gershom will recite
it you.’
Maruja turned round to Gershom. The latter lay flat
on his back, as before, watching the stars, they’d come
thick by then, and fighting off the pests that were even
thicker. He looked up at Mellison’s remark.
‘ I can’t put it in Spanish, so I shan’t bother being
clever—at Maruja’s expense. Very sorry. . . . Listen to
the Gulf! ’
He couldn’t see Maruja, outside as she was the spray of
the lantern’s radiance, she said in a drifting wisp of a voice,
like a wisp from the foam-suds out on the point: ‘ It is
said that they cry there still, the people of the cities who
long and long ago were left behind when the Great Host
sailed into the sunrise.’
George Shaw sat up. ‘ What host ? ’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
i39
‘ I don’t know. Nobody knows. But it was long ago.
And the Leader said they would march to a better place,
and the people of Laguna said Yes. All but the evil ones ;
and they feared. And the Great Host marched away, and
then a plague and a famine fell on the people who stayed
behind, and the sea came in and drowned them. It was
long ago, but they still cry there, under the mud and the
sand. My mother told me.’
‘ By God, that’s interesting. I must go and see your
mother.’
Maruja also was interested. ‘ Perhaps she will have
another baby then, as when the man from Nantucket
came.’
Mellison’s guffaw smote the night. Shaw rose to his
feet.
‘ I’m off to bed. Time you all turned in, if you’re to
get any good out of the day before it grows red-hot.’
§7
“ It was three days later, in siesta-time, when Maruja
Avales and I came wonderingly to that point of existence
which hovers as end and culmination to every romaunt of
the Western mind. And neither of us came to it inadver¬
tently, we planned it, I think, from the moment we met.
It was delight that wakened me up the next morning, and
I think it was that I saw also behind the green veils of
Maruja’s eyes when she brought us our breakfast. Suddenly
the apathies of adolescence were gone, I saw all the world
sharp and so clear, I wished I might run like the wind,
write poetry for ever, dance and spin in the sun forever like
the wheeling waters out in the Gulf. ... I finished a hasty
140 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
breakfast and went off and packed away the books I’d
brought, no need for them now, and came back and found
my uncle stretched asleep in the shade, Mellison gone off
to shoot alligator down in a creek ; and Maruja awaiting
my coming. And we touched hands and we laughed, she
was in chalece and kirtle, bare-headed, her hair was un-
Indian and fair. I glanced at her secretly, she as secretly
at me, and I spoke without hesitatings, though I had not
planned it:
“ ‘ I am glad you came.’ ”
‘ I came because you were here,’ she said slowly, earnestly,
and they laughed again, their eyes very bright. And then
Gershom went into the tent and got into his bathing-
shorts, and Maruja went with him out in the canoe. They
paddled far off then into the Lagoon, into the sunrise, into
the dazzle of the sun on the creeks, the water under the
keel as Maruja paddled was a bubble and a broken placidity,
so clear one could see far down to the lagoon’s floor. Per¬
haps if you went far enough in this country unexplored
you’d see the roofs of the sunken cities where the peoples
of old-time were whelmed. He told Maruja of that, she
looked back and laughed and shook a fair head.
‘ No one has ever seen anything of them. They are far
down, buried in the sands, years of it lie above them.’
“ I think now she’d the soul of a poet as well as of a
child of nature, I think there were wells deep and clear,
secret and secure, far within that mind and body that
burgeoned their spring in those Laguna days. But I cared
nothing for them then, I cared only and desired with the
passion of a hungry boy, she was perfect and she knew I
would yet be her lover, I knew and she knew that I knew.
. . . And for three whole days, childlike and happy, we
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
141
played with the knowledge, they played like that, I suppose,
in the Edens of the early world. My uncle slept and read
and slept again on the sands, and the Gulf came combering
on the white sand points, and far and away by some lone
creek we heard in our play, ever and anon, the crack of
Mellison’s rifle as he hunted the elusive croc. . . .
“ That first morning we did not go far, but somehow
beyond sight of the camp before I slipped overboard from
the canoe, into water so warm and so saline it kissed and
went seeping in through your skin, grown hungry and dried
in the heats of Palenque. I swam round and about the
canoe, and Maruja stood up and looked round for sharks,
and looked at me with the sun in her eyes, and laughed as
I splashed the canoe with water, and threatened to abandon
me there. And suddenly it came on me I was selfish, I
asked if she also would swim, she nodded, and we beached
the canoe by the mere of marsh while she stripped. She’d
forgotten a bathing-dress, I was glad, in the dazzle of the
sun I looked at a picture fair as a dream of old Rome. She
was plumper and rounder, maturer far than the spare
Greek lines of Ester, beautiful with a wild, naive morning
bloom. . . . She wound her fair hair up in great plaits
and we swam together out in the sea, not far from shore
because of the sharks, and floated on our backs, and talked
in whispers, it was as though I floated near to the touch of a
water-lily sleeping in the sun. And then we paddled ashore
and lay in the lee of a bush to dry, not touching each other,
not talking, content and content, I don’t think I was ever
again to attain to that gracious content, that splendour of
simplicity that must once have been the daily delight of
the men and women of the world before civilization came
on it and poisoned the world and them. . . . And then
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
142
far away across the Laguna we heard them calling us at the
camp, calling us back to lunch, that was all.”
But late that evening Mellison drew him aside at the
door of the tent as he made to enter. ‘ Come a walk and see
the combers at night.’
‘ All right,’ said Gershom, and yawned, going with him
to please him. So they came on the unhurrying scurry of
the white foam there, and stood still a while as they looked
at it. Then Mellison spoke, abruptly.
‘ About this mulatto—Maruja. I suppose you know
what’s liable to happen—if it hasn’t already ? ’
‘Eh?’
‘ Oh, I imagine you know what I’m talking about. Well,
Indians are Indians, and you can do as you like—your
uncle seems blind as a bat. But wasn’t there a girl, Ester
Caldon ? ’
Gershom began to laugh at that, and, laughing, heard
Mellison breathe angrily. “ It was funnier and funnier,
I laughed and I could not stop, pitying him and yet finding
it ludicrous. In spite of his boasted virility, he was really
no more, I saw then, in the clearest flash of understanding,
than a small boy out of a story-book—a greedy little boy,
a jealous little boy—and oh Lord, in spite of his boasted
descent, how very bourgeois at heart ! ”
Mellison wheeled away in the darkness. ‘ All right,
I suppose it’s the kind of conduct proper to the
gutter.’
Gershom sat down and wiped his eyes, he found that
last remark funnier still. When he stopped from laughing
he found that Mellison had gone ; in his place Maruja had
come slipping up out of the night.
‘ Did you quarrel—the senor and you ? ’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 143
‘ He warned me about you, Maruja,’ he told her. ‘ He
thinks that we may become lovers.’
She laughed as he’d done, they stood laughing together.
‘ But of course,’ she said, ‘ what else could the fool think ? ’
Next day went by as the previous one had, next night
came a moon, sailing great and resplendent, a golden Maya
shield on the lost lagoons. Maruja and Gershom wandered
far from the camp and lost themselves deep in a cane-brake.
Tree cats followed and mewed about them, and still they
did not touch one the other, except once for a firm hand¬
grip as they slithered in a patch of bog and mud. They
attained at last to the camp-site and the low, quiet flare of
the fires on the shore. The mosquitoes, great hordes, came
pinging through the moonlight to assail them as they gained
the beach, Gershom bade Maruja a hasty good night, and
they ran for their tents. And then a new thought came to
him, he turned as he ran, and caught her hands, and drew
her up close.
‘ To-morrow ? ’
‘Manana, joven ? ’ And she did not understand, and
then laughed with wide, wondering eyes. ‘ The time
will come. . . . And yes, perhaps ’
He held her hands still, they were panting with running,
suddenly they kissed, and still he was urgent. ‘ Say “ Yes ! ” ’
‘ I think it will come to-morrow ! ’
§8
“ And when it was over, and I a boy no longer, a man
now I supposed, and we held hands and smiled at each
other drowsily in that place we had made, in the bush far
out on the Laguna point, and I saw Maruja’s lips slacken
i44 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
sweetly, tired from their pleasure, there came on me not a
scrap of that sadness or shame that I’d read of as the neces¬
sary end to the thing. There was delight and satiety com¬
mingling one in a glow of remembrance ; tenderness and
a queer desire to laugh ; and a long, slow conviction that
I could sleep now again ; and turn to the Greeks and the
mountains my uncle thought better than women, all the
wonder of the world that burgeoned to-morrow for my
plucking.”
He put a hand out on Maruja’s heart, its wild beating
had slackened a little, he said ‘ But I didn’t know ’
She laughed, half-asleep. ‘ I knew you were. And I
I am glad for us both.’
And he said that he also was glad, they thanked each
other kindly, absurdly, and fell asleep, both of them, and
woke, and went back to the camp as the evening came, sun-
tired, love-tired. Nor, children of a chance encounter,
were they ever to know their moment tarnished, Mellison
was to see to that. For he looked up at them as they came
to the camp, and knew of the happening at once, Gershom
saw the knowledge kindle in his eyes ; and he did not care !
But next day George Shaw and the sun rose scowling
together, Maruja was dismissed to her village, out of
Gershom’s life, and the camp broke up.
SECTION THE FIFTH
K
SECTION THE FIFTH
§ i
SO back to Palenque again they went, back through the
winding stretches of the sun-splashed glades, down into
those darker aisles, tenebrous, that pointed long fingers
into the south. At a night-time camp they looked up and
saw, crowned, Palenque, its pyramids dark in their trees.
Shaw sighed at that sight, a long sigh of relief.
£ Thank God we’ve got back to our work.’
‘ And mail,’ added Mellison, his voice a little excited.
They wondered what letter it might be he expected.
They came to the city next day, it drowsed in the sun-
glare, Davila was there, he had slept in the palace, in
Gershom’s bed, without permission, the lice crawled in the
seams of the blankets. He had brought from the village an
Indio woman to cook his meals and to sleep with him, they
had used no urinal but the palace, the stench was a horror.
Shaw swore at the sight and called Davila a pig and a pagan,
till Davila’s face flushed up with dark blood, his hand
went for his knife, but Mellison interposed.
‘ Drop it,’ he said, his voice was a whip-lash, his hand
had gone to his revolver-butt, swinging loose in the pocket
of his jacket. Shaw never used a revolver, in threat or in
earnest, and he stared at the two like a red moon, startled.
Davila’s flush died away, dirtily, he muttered apologies.
Mellison’s now was the face that was flushed.
‘ All right, all right. Now bring us the mail.’
There were letters for him and several for Shaw, none
for Gershom, there never were any. But he felt as though
back in his home again, the days and nights on the Gulf
were already shutting and closing, closing up as a telescope
closes, he looked back through a narrowing tunnel at the
J47
148 image and superscription
points of light, vignettes from the days at Laguna, the high-
flung spray of the Gulf for background, fading as he looked,
and fading also, wistfully, the face of Maruja who had
taught him manhood. Standing now in the shadows of a
monolith he remembered her vividly a moment, with a wild
regret, no ache of desire, the wild regret of a child that
remembers Spring.
(So he was to remember her far in the future, in those
mornings when the earth was a-vomit on the sky as a sick
beast might, in anguish on the face of God, those nights
that were blind with the flaming lights of an unquiet hell.)
But at supper that night, in the palace corridor, Mellison
said suddenly, apropos of nothing, ‘ Mind reading this
letter ? ’
He passed it to Shaw and Shaw took it and read it, and,
read it again, and was still for a moment, and then glanced
at Mellison, surprise and a louring contempt on his face.
‘ Curator of American Antiquities in London ?—h’m,
you’ve done well.’
‘ No better job than I can hold down. And it’s time I
stopped playing at explorers.’
‘ No doubt. And you want to leave here at once ? ’
‘ To-morrow, if possible.’
Shaw said ‘ I suppose you know you’re a cheat, this is
practically desertion in the middle of a season.’ And then
he said, still more quietly, ‘ And don’t play little games
with that damned revolver. Else I’ll take it from you and
poke it down your throat and twist it into what you call
your guts.’
Mellison stood up, contempt on his face. ‘ All right,
Shaw. It’s not too good a thing for you to quarrel with
me now.’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 149
‘ You mean you’d cripple my exhibition when I bring
the casts to London ? Go ahead. I’ve had to deal with
lice before this. Though you’re not worth even an insect
powder.’
“ It was surprising, their quietness, both, and the crudity
of their retorts. I couldn’t understand, but my uncle
began to tell me when Mellison had gone. Now he’d been
left deserted, he could hardly carry on inside the scheme of
work he’d planned. The business had practically wrecked
his season. . .
But he had not yet opened all the mail for himself.
Another letter awaited him and he opened it now. He
read that for a while and toyed with it, and whistled through
his teeth and looked down on Palenque. Then he passed
the letter over to Gershom.
It was from Caldon in Guat and it read :
‘ Dear Shaw,
I’ve just left Copan and am going up-country—
Ocosingo my bourne this time. You must almost have
exhausted Palenque by now. \v^hy not give a halt there
and come down to Ocosingo ? We can work together for a
season, though not necessarily in partnership—the results
would be interesting—at least I think so. I myself will be
up in Ocosingo in May.
Let me know what you think.
There’s another matter also. You remember that night
when we talked and both regretted we hadn’t taken to the
land as a livelihood (both of us by now would have been
dead of ennui !) and I told you of the two farms, Rainier’s
and Geijerstam’s, I part-own in Minnesota ? If you’d care
to buy up the Geijerstam share you’d be welcome, I’ve
15o IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
got very low in funds with all this trapesing, and would
rather have yourself for a neighbour when and if we retire to
simplicity and bucolic reminiscence. I shall not press you
beyond my own purchase price—I remember you expressed
a wish you had some such place.
Ester is with me and is coming to Ocosingo. In spite
of her protests, I must soon take her home to the States
and some educating—she is running over-wild. She
hopes, as I do, that you’ll come and bring Gershom with
you in May.
Yours,
Reginald Caldon.’
§2
They rode out early in May and Gershom never saw
Palenque again. But he did not know of that at the time,
he gave hardly a backward look to the place where a jaguar
had hunted his blood, where, horrified, he’d met with
Csesar’s cruelty, where he’d seen daylight and moonlight
brighten and fade from the tenebrous sculpture of the
Sacrificial Cross. The rain was close, the air was close, as
they rode from Palenque, Gershom rode whistling, Shaw
was in front, Mellison had gone three weeks before. He
had said no good-bye till the very last moment he mounted
his mule and the Indies with his kitbags were already jog-
trotting away along the track to Palenque village. Then
he’d turned in his saddle, his face was white, mottling a
little red on either cheek-bone.
‘ Good-bye, Shaw, and thank you. Good-bye, then,
Gerry.’
‘ Good-bye,’ the boy cried, but Shaw hadn’t seemed
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
151
either to hear or to see, this was to him the most grievous
of treacheries conceivable, this desertion of days and nights
ardent with toil for the comforts and ease and the padded
security of a London curator’s room. So Mellison had
ridden off unblessed, and now, neither blessed nor blessing,
the palacio watched, dead, Shaw and Gershom go. And
Gershom rode whistling.
§3
Ocosingo lies at a distance of a hundred and half a hundred
miles from the ruins that men call Palenque. In the days
of the Maya Old Empire, long ago, while the Christ was
young, the tale tells there was once a great tunnel that
joined together the two cities. So Shaw told to Gershom
as they rode up the beetling tracks by day, and by night
fought off the mosquitoes and watched the forest sway and
whisper and peer at the darkling brows of the nearing
Cordilleras. ... In ancient times this was a world of even
wilder jungle and wilder paths than those they now traversed,
but hither and yon, fair, shining and splendid, rose the
strange stone cities of long lost Xibalba. The years had
descended upon them and devoured them, in a night they were
abandoned and deserted to the jaguar and the puma, like the
men of the Bible those cities had awakened of a morning
and found themselves dead. . . .
The Cordilleras towered above them, red-flowering in
that white weather, you saw the peaks like the snarling
teeth of a guarding monster high up the sierras, no man
had climbed up those peaks since the dawn of time, Shaw
told, none at least since the coming of the Spaniards to
America. Only by immense labour of mountaineering and
charting, with a little army at the explorer’s disposal, might
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
152
the venture be attempted, and the day for that attempt
was not yet.
Rain came on the last evening before they passed through
Yaholan, the mountains flung down great pealings of
thunder upon them as the barrage of great guns, and the
night was a long, livid flash that scarcely moved for hours.
But in the morning they awoke to find the earth pristine
and green and the paths a dripping joyousness in the heat
of the sun. Gershom rode humming and happy, vexed
still though his mind might be by that strange challenge of
the Cordilleras to the right, marching past and watching
him pass with its myriad wild eyes.
Then suddenly a great sheet of water was before them,
Shaw swore, seeing it in flood with the overnight rains. It
was the Rio Grande, rolling in a broad placidity through the
wilderness. The further bank waved a green jeer of trees
in their faces, there seemed no place at which they could
cross, it drew near to noon. And then Davila pointed to a
party that waited on the far shore.
One of them on a horse rode down to the brink and
gestured. Downwards and towards that gesturing Shaw’s
party drove their mules. Here they found a ridge of hard
earth, it may have been once a causeway of the Empire of
the forests, it held hard and true under the hooves of the
mules as Shaw and Gershom crossed with the bearers
plodding and splashing behind. The further bank the boy
could not see, obscured in the bulk of George Shaw, but
suddenly he heard his uncle hail the man on the horse.
‘ Morning, Caldon.’
And another voice also agreed it was morning, and that
was a lie, it was near to noon, Gershom was glad for the
water that splashed him, his mule was glad as well, they
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 153
loitered, the Indies behind them swearing. Then they
scrambled up the bank and there found Shaw shaking the
hands of Caldon and a young man in breeches. He dropped
Shaw’s hand, the young man, and swung round on Gershom,
and caught his hands in a brown, dry grip. Gershom stared
and gulped, he well might have known who it would be,
but he couldn’t speak, gulped instead like a stranded fish.
‘ Oh, Gerry, I’m glad you’ve come ! ’
“ It was Ester April herself; it was as though I’d long
mislaid some integral part of my own body, and found it
again, we didn’t shake hands, just held them, Caldon looked
at us remotely, kindly, and scowled, the sun in his eyes.
I saw Ester clearer then, she had grown, firmer and larger in
bone, her red hair was a deep, still flame, torn out of the
clouds of sunset, I thought, for I still wrote poetry, or
tried to. Her grey eyes were deeper and stranger than of old,
sprinkled with green, that terrible green that waved in the
bush of the jungle. I cleared my throat and began to speak
and tried again and croaked ‘ Ester ! ’ ”
So that was their meeting after nearly six months. Caldon
and Ester led them up the mountain tracks to Ocosingo,
the ruins, not the village, where now for a month they had
been encamped. They came on it mantled in the noon¬
time shadows, a place of great pyramids and crumbling
temples, over one hung the ruined sculpture of outspread
wings and of mouldering globe that Caldon thought had
been brought there across the Pacific, from the coronal
insignia of Ancient Egypt. Amid the terraces the jungle
whispered and triumphed, great trees uprooted the walls of
the temples, desolation abode there or had there abided
before the Caldons’ coming.
But smoke rose from the camp, a hut was made ready,
iS4 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
and when Shaw and Gershom had washed their hands and
faces and changed their clothes from the grimy enfingermg
of the Rio Grande, Ester called them to lunch out under a
ceiba. It was deer-flesh and turkey, and a pudding of rice
made with milk from a can, and a very good pudding,
Ester the cook. She also had changed her clothes from her
ride, Gershom stood in the doorway of the hut and stared,
she spread out the skirt and smiled at him.
‘ Well, like me in this ? ’
‘ I don’t know,’ he said.
And neither he did, she was in red and gold, in a frock,
the first frock he had ever seen her wear, it came on him
in that moment of appraisal that despite all their days at
Palenque together he had never yet thought of her as a woman,
despite the angry, unclean little poetry he’d made, despite
the wonder and strangeness of that night of storm when
he’d seen her ungarbed altogether. And now she.was a
woman verily and truly, dark in her beauty despite her
fair colouring, young, not yet at maturity, a flower on the
verge of its budding-time, he felt heavy and uncouth,
clumsy and a fool, before her solemn stare. And then he
saw the solemnity a mask, the laughter behind it, he said
relievedly, sitting down, ‘ Silly ass ! ’
‘ But you were scared, weren’t you—just a minute,
Gerry ? ’
‘ Maybe.’
{ Disappointed if you weren’t. I bought it in Mex the
city, you know—we went up there two months ago, father
’n’ I, oh, a gorgeous time ! I went to dances there, Gerry !
Do you know that people still dance n hold hands and men
wear black clothes ’n’ white shirts n look solemn when they
flirt, solemn as though it counted—and never trouble about
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 155
Caesar or the Mayas or Vercingetorix’ hands—or say they’d
like to see you go naked so they’d write a poem ? Well, it’s
true, it was fun, but I was glad to see the Cordilleras again.
Here’s father ’n’ George, let’s sit and be solemn. . . .
What ? I don’t know, we’re not lovers at all, are we,
really ? ’
‘ I don’t know either,’ he said, ‘ only ’
She laughed then and they kissed each other in haste,
her lips were quick and hurrying on his, the lips of a girl on
a boy, they sat down and looked at the ceiling of the hut as
Caldon and Shaw came wandering in abstractedly, they
were deep in discussion of the ruins.
There was no work possible in the ruins that day, but
Shaw, having purchased over lunch the Geijerstam farm
and become a farmer by proxy in far Minnesota, retired
then with Caldon to his hut and computations and com¬
parisons of digging and sculpture. They didn’t even halt
for siesta, these two, but Gershom lay down and was dozing
with Lucretius in his hand when Ester April came knocking
at the door-jamb and looked in and said ‘ Tired ? ’
He said he was a bit, and she said he must have been
born it, and then he saw she was again in the clothes of
Palenque, the gay frock had vanished. He sat up at that
sight. ‘ Goodness, that’s better ! ’
‘ I think so, too. Listen, Gerry, are you very busy these
days ? ’
‘ Busy ? . . . I don’t dig. Only lessons. They could
wait.’
‘ Then come out. I want to show you a thing.’
So they went out together and beyond the ruins she took
hold of his hand and they climbed a choked path up a great
terraced slope ; and Ester April halted and pointed. So he
156 image and superscription
looked, and saw nothing but the Cordilleras’ escarpments, the
sun low upon them, they rose black and gigantic, far off there
were tarns that winked a blue glister in lost gulleys of the
slopes.
‘ Well, what is it ? ’ he asked.
‘ Something with a thrill. I’ve kept it ’n’ planned it all
out till you came. You know the country back of these
mountains has never been explored ? ’
‘ My uncle told me that yesterday.’
‘ And—did he tell you about Lorillard City ? ’
Gershom shook his head, the first time he had heard
the roll of the syllables of that strange name. ‘ Lorillard ?
Where’s that ? ’
She sighed and sat down. The glow in her eyes was no
glow of either girl or woman, something greater and stranger
that made him catch breath. ‘ Sit by me. I’ll tell you.’
§4
The mountains had long gathered and devoured their
tracks before the coming of that third nightfall. They had
thought to attain to the jungle below the eastern foothills
by the second night, even, but in cracks and crevices the
trackless trail set traps for their feet that might neither be
braved nor evaded long, and for hours on end. In that
second sunset they’d gone lower and lower, once Ester
April had caught Gershom’s arm and pointed up and back¬
wards to the jungle-fringed peaks they had passed that day.
A shape of stone lay far in the west, the sunset behind it,
an Image overhanging the dark, wild lands lying shadowed
below. ‘ It looks carved,' Ester April had whispered.
They took to whispering in that voiceless land—voiceless
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 157
but on the lower slopes with the shrill of hidden streams
and the shrill of cicadas. While the second night came
Gershom searched for wood and lighted a fire ; and Ester
brought out the maps and pored above them and set the
compass afresh. As they boiled water for tea they bent
over the maps, and then peered forwards and downwards
into that jumbled desolation, it looked as though Titans
had sported there with mountains for balls in the youth of
the world. But somewhere, southwards and east, across
the jungles and the wild ravines, the lost city of Lorillard
had once been glimpsed.
It had been long ago, as Ester had told. Somewhere in
the fastnesses of that wild land a great living city of the
Mayas was hidden, a city of the Mayas, alive, no ruin, it
flung its white challenge into evening skies, glimpsed far
leagues off by the startled hunter on the upper heights of
the Cordilleras. There, still as in days before America
was named, were palaces still trod by the ancient Real Men,
priests who still wrote in the ghostly script, astronomers
who charted the skies with strange, antique rites. . . .
None had ever attempted it, that guarded city, the tale
of it had grown to a legend, to a wistful myth, but a known
reality as well. Not more than sixty or so miles it could be,
once the Cordilleras had been passed, said Ester that after¬
noon while they sat on the terraces above Ocosingo. With
six days’ trek of ten miles a day, a dash through the bush,
they two together might do what had never yet been done,
they might enter the city and return with the proofs, or
spy it out close at hand and come back for Caldon and
Shaw and a strong expedition to come to it again. . . .
Gershom had kindled to the story as he listened, though
a qualm of doubt had come on him as well. ‘ But even if
158 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
we reach it and manage to come back, what does it prove ?
. . . It’s just story-book stuff.’
‘ Oh Lord, but you’re dense. It would prove—it would
prove things so important that father ’n’ your uncle would
both give their ears to know if they’re so. Though they’d
never try to find out themselves. You’ve to be young ’n’
take risks like us to do that. . . . Nobody knows what
happened to the Mayas, why their civilization collapsed ’n’
their Empire, how they tried to save it, why they didn’t
succeed. Lorillard would tell us ! ’
‘ Eh ? Yes ... so it might.’
She brooded, lightedly, on the challenge of the mountains
above them. ‘ It would tell us more than just that. Father
says the same thing will happen to our world as happened
to the Mayas—unless we find out a way to prevent it ’
‘ I’ll come. When will we start ? ’ said Gershom.
That they’d waited three days to do, preparing. Then,
with a letter left behind, some cans of provisions, their
water-bottles, lint, brandy in a flask, knives, no revolvers
or rifles, two sticks with curved handles, a rope, they’d
crept out from the ruins at night and climbed up the moun¬
tains. Dawn found them so high the ruins below had
looked like ant-heaps in the coming of the sun. Then they
had turned their faces to the crests.
And by the third night the mountains were behind.
But they’d made a bare five miles that day, the pedometer
told. Gershom had eaten green fruit from a wild lemon-
tree and ached in consequence, Ester was wearied as well
when they camped. That was under a great ahuehuete
tree ; below it a long ravine climbed down to the edge of the
jungle bush. They lay under the tree for a while, taking
breath, a vulture came wheeling from the bush and passed
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 159
into the west, Gershom stirred up at last and shook Ester’s
shoulder.
‘ We mustn’t sleep. We must light a fire and get supper.’
‘ I know.’ She stirred also. ‘ But I am dead tired. So
are you. Let’s rest just a minute.’
So they did. It was quiet, as though the bush listened.
Ester reached for and read the pedometer.
‘ We’re nearly twenty miles behind schedule.’
‘ Two days behind ? ’
‘ Yes.’ She lay thinking of that. ‘ Turn back ? ’
I’m going on as long as the provisions last,’ I said
and I meant it, but later that evening, she had gone away to
bathe in a rill that circled the scraggy forest fringe, my
decision grew modified. I saw her come over from the rill
to the fire, the darkness came with her, she stooped and
threw back her hair from her forehead and I saw with a
queer, strange pain the lines of the breasts on her body,
realized her a girl and tireder than I, I was responsible ”
She came whistling to his side.
‘ Lovely bath over there. You should go ’n’ have one.’
‘ Yes. ... I say, I’ve been thinking. Better plan than
that we go on together. Scientific, like the real explorers.’
‘ We’re real enough. Well ? ’ She was drying her hair.
‘ You’ll stay here,’ he said, 1 three days. I’ll leave you
the half of the food and push on—I shan’t bother to make
camps. I’ll turn on the fourth day from now and come
back if I haven’t reached Lorillard. It’ll be quicker alto¬
gether, you can wait for me here.’
She said : ‘ ’N’ suppose that you don’t come back ? ’
‘ Rot. I’ll take good care of myself.’
She pondered that and then shook her head. ‘ It won’t
do. You’d go no quicker than if I were with you. Besides—’
160 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
she ceased speaking and looked round about her, the night
very close now, eerie the forest.
He said ‘ Besides ? ’
‘ I’d hate to be alone in this land.’
And suddenly he knew also that he would hate that,
either for her or himself, it was as though that knowledge
had prowled the verge of his conscious mind like a puma
prowling, seeking an opening, if it entered it might rend
and riot in there, and its name was Fear. And he shot it
out hastily, getting up and taking off his shirt and his
breeches, puttees and boots, to go bathe in the stream.
And then he remembered, stripping himself, he half-
stopped and their eyes met, Ester’s and his, it was as though
but hardly they’d looked at each other before, her brows
came together over her eyes, her eyes grown wide and most
strange.
‘ Gerry ! ’
‘ What is it ? ’ he said, and half went to her, startled by
that startled cry. But she sighed, she flung back her throat
in relief, and gave a little laugh.
‘ How you stood just now—so still ’n’en rigid—you
looked like a silhouette statue, not yourself. It’s this
country on my nerves, I s’pose.’
He’d forgotten shyness then, but paused towel in hand.
‘ You’ll be all right ? ’
‘ Course. And do hurry, there’s barely ten minutes left
before the dark comes.’
It came before that, he before it. He came back and
squatted under the ahuehuete tree, rubbing himself dry,
in the air was the drone of mosquitoes, Ester had made tea.
They sat side by side while they drank. And then far away
across the stillness they heard the first sound they had
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 161
seemed to hear since the night they crossed the Cordilleras
—a cry bleak and terrible, a cruel, harsh cry hunting outside
in the darkness.
Gershom felt Ester’s body beside him grow rigid. They
peered at each other and then sat with strained bodies
while they listened. And again, with that note of ferocity
in it, the cry echoed down through the night.
It was the hunting call of a jaguar.
§5
“ On the fifth day at noon we came on the Indians,
not intimately, we were never nearer than two hundred
yards. I saw the wave and brush of the jungle undergrowth
on the dry plateau we had crossed and pulled down Ester
April. Then I pointed and we saw them pass.
“ lt was a hunting party, I think. Tall and naked, but
for breech-clout and sandals, in single file, they might
have come from the pages of those boys’ books I had read
long before in Chatham. Their heads were the heads of the
men on the panels of Palenque, browless and chinless, over
the shoulder of three were spears that glistened a dull,
spiralled grey. And I knew that glister, Ester did too, we
both drew a long breath, they were stone spears they
carried.”
So they saw that company of the Indies of the waste file
into view and out again, they never saw them again, it was
impossible to move and follow them, so fast did they go.
These were people of the land that for four hundred years
had resisted conquest, exploration—but there was upon
them no sign that they came from any Lost City, they
seemed but the savages of a savage land. And yet 
162 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
They toiled and climbed and ploughed that day through
great cane brakes that tore at their flesh, through a swamp
that sucked hungrily at their feet with wet, emerald lips.
At evening they came to the verge of a lone, vast hill, open
and unbushed, it climbed with a ringing clamour of little
raining stone-storms to a jagged crest far in the sky. It
was then that Ester dropped the compass and broke it, and
as they stared at each other, anger with Gershom, dismay
with her, they heard the howl of the hunting jaguar ring out
high and clear up those ringing, razor-edged slopes. That
and no more. And suddenly in the sunset silence Ester
laughed.
‘ It’s only a dirty little cat.’ > ,
He laughed as well, there was some tonic quality in the
air of those slopes, the porous, granulous land up which they
climbed as the evening came down. It tore at your lungs
and made the breath come singing in your throat.. Half¬
way up the crest Ester halted to breathe, and cried out,
startled, and pointed back.
‘ Look ! ’ .
So he looked, and there, far down and behind them in
the evening’s glimmer, was the glow and the smoke of a
fire.
§6
Dvsentry had come on him, perhaps from the wild
lemons he had eaten, and sometimes dizziness racked his
head as they plodded forward. Ester’s face he saw wearied
and white by his shoulder. He stopped once, and, deny¬
ing his own illness to himself, looked down at her,
breathing.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 163
‘ You all right ? *
‘ Oh, goodness yes. But do let’s get on.’ And looked
back again. ‘ If that’s a search-party we can yet force them
on to find Lorillard ! ’
That had been their plan since the night when they saw
the fire, to draw those fire-tenders so far in the wilderness
that willy, nilly, they’d be forced to seek the lost city. “ I
wondered who it could be who followed, my uncle or
Caldon or both, I saw their faces at odd moments of my
stumbling, the worn lines deep-graved in their faces, and
their tired, close eyes, we were no more to them than a
nuisance and a bother—oh hell, what a row there would be !
And I did not care, I cared as little as did Ester care, it came
on me as we stumbled and tramped through the waste of
jungle, with a sudden lightheartedness in my pain and
w eariness, that here at last I was out on a road and a quest
that was real, no reading of the dim, sad phantoms of the \
past, or unbelieving acceptance of dull things that moved
only others to enthusiasm—archaeology and books and
money and lust, wealth and power—all the loadings of
rubbish they loved. . . .”
He tried to tell Ester of that that day, they rested late in the
afternoon under the lee of a bush, Ester lay flat and looked
at her shoes, one had almost mislaid its sole. She looked
up at him and listened and then looked away and nodded
as he spoke.
‘ Yes, I know. I’ve felt that as well. Real. Real for the
fiiSt time since I was born.’ She still looked away across
the sunlighted peace and uninvitation. ‘ I wonder—Gerry,
perhaps we’re both mad, there’s something abnormal about
us.’
‘ When it’s real? ’
i64 image and superscription
• oh, I know. It is now : we’re so young ! But I wonder
when we grow up ’
At her doubt he also began to wonder about that. When
we grow up 5 They would look back on this and laugh,
feel ashamed, you did that after twenty, they d be intent
and respectable and make money and marry, never hear the
ringing sunrises climb from the forests at dawn. They d
put that away, a memory of unease, to turn from with a
smile and red-tinted ears—when they grew up, when they
grew up 1
And then Ester spoke again, slowly. ‘ You know, we
can’t go any further now.’
Gershom said nothing; but he knew. They were
beaten, her tiredness, that shoe-sole, his dysentry. d he night
waited near while they came to that decision, new hills
rose into it, they waved in the wind of the evening their
challenge as the Cordilleras had done, no nearer they might
be even now to Lost Lorillard and its golden streets. Be¬
hind : the lighted west that lit the sane feet of the sane
world following their tracks ; in front: nothing but waste
and the cry of a wild bird. Yes, they had failed.
Yet somehow he did not believe it was failure. Only a
halt. Then his mind wandered off into abysses of pain, he
dozed and came to, to find a fire lighted by his feet, Ester
had boiled the last of the water left in their flasks, they
had met no water for two days now and their coffee was
finished. She had her arm below his head and the cup of
,warm water at his lips. She said nothing, he nothing, the
cup at his lips ; he drank. And then she set aside the cup
but left her arm still, and so for a little they both lay un¬
speaking till he said, ‘ Your arm is soft and . . . kind.’
She said in the darkness: ‘We’ve never thought of
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 165
kindness to each other, Gerry ! Funny. Kind ? ’ The arm
moved a little below him, growing softer. ‘ That better ? ’
‘ Ester. I say—you remember that night at Palenque
when I saw you . . . my poetry ’
The arm did not stiffen. ‘ I remember.’
‘ We went away when you and Caldon had gone to
Copan. George took us a holiday down to the Laguna,
and there was a girl there, an Indio half-breed, Maruja. . . .’
‘ Was it fun ? ’
‘ ^ was.’ He sought drowsily in his weakness to clear up
the tangle. ‘ But that doesn’t matter. I wanted to tell you
it had nothing to do—with what I’ve always felt about you.’
She was silent for so long then, her arm grown slack,
half he thought she had fallen asleep kneeling there. And
then she said in that husky voice he’d heard once or twice :
‘ Oh, Gerry, I know. That doesn’t matter.’ Her hand
touched his cheek. ‘ I am glad you had fun, that the girl
was nice. Perhaps I could have been. Only ’
She drew her arm away then. He heard her prowl
softly the confines of the camp. Then she came in
silhouette up against the fire glow. ‘ Look at the sky.’
It was a glow and a splendour, a dusting of stars and a
pringling of planets, a magnificence that hung low, near
and clear in the stillness of the air, a challenge and a breath¬
taking wonder about it. She said: ‘ Something to do
with that, just why—why I couldn’t. But that night of the
storm when you saw me : I went out intending you should
see me.’
It was his turn to say : ‘I know. I knew it long ago 
You should lie down and sleep.’
‘ Not sleepy.’
‘ Sing something, Ester,’
,56 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
The darkness of the wild country came close :
‘ Nobody knows the trouble I’ve known,
Nobody knows my sorrow,
Nobody knows the trouble I’ve known,
Glory hallelujah ! ’
She paused then. ‘ Silly to sing. There may be Indians
all about us. ... Oh ! Listen / ’ , , . . „ „
He rose up on his elbow. She stood by his side. He
whispered ‘ It’s the echo,’ and he knew that he lied.
No echo : far off, leagues away it seemed then, though
later they were to question that distance : Beyond the next
hill, the next gully only, over the mountains, clear they heard
it. It was a chorusing out in the night, voices from a chorus
in antique times, singing there on the road to Lonllard.
Ester knelt by the side of Gershom, the two gripped hands,
crouched listening, frightened and alone ; and sudden y
the howl of a hunting jaguar rent the air and the night grew
silent again. , _ ,, ^ ,
And in the morning George Shaw and Caldon overtook
them.
SECTION THE SIXTH
SECTION THE SIXTH
§ 1
HE train wound in days and nights up from theborders
X of Mexico, up from Laredo, up through the rich, varied
lands with a name that still could thrill you : the United
States with its history of inter-State conflict as dead as the
conflicts of the English Heptarchy. And it came on Gershom
one morning, they had stopped at Montgomery, he sat up
in his bunk and drank chocolate, ate rolls, that he himself
was no more than an anachronist savage !
He was on his way to Europe, it was 1914 ; he was a
Texan on the war-path against Minnesota, a Georgian hating
Virginia, out-dated, out-moded !
He left his coffee to grow cold in the chill of the morning
as he faced up to that wry thought out of the morning. In
the woods of Quirigua he’d thought himself remote from the
callowness that went with his years, but now  He was a
Heptarchian running hot-foot to fight in a ludicrous scrim¬
mage of the draggle-tailed tribes !
‘ Oh hell ! ’ he exclaimed with great vehemence at that
point, and the man who lay opposite, a thin, lank man,
white, with dyspeptic look and a mid-West drawl, poked
out his head and regarded him sternly.
‘ It’s early in the morning to curse,’ he said, and Gershom
saw he was a preacher of sorts, a bedraggled black coat
and a shovel hat lay over his head among other impedi¬
menta. But he felt in no temper to bandy the amenities of
sceptical apology.
‘ Cursed early.’
The preacher grunted and pulled up his blanket. Gershom
looked out on Montgomery and remembered Shaw’s face,
almost again swore, he’d mislaid now both the reasons for
169
I70 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
those insults to his uncle and the philosophy that should
have sustained him, realizing his own folly. He who’d
read in the last months so much of philosophy !
And he thought of that also, all his readings since the
Caldons went home to the States, he thought of them
hurriedly, as though searching for sustenance, while the
train drawled out a long, southern hoot and the Alabama
landscape droned past. Kant, lean, kindly and thin, argued
up the bleak knolls of Ocosingo ; Schelling and Fichte
devoured the long hours, mosquito-haunted, at Quirigua
itself, the place of the great stone stelae and the Beast of the
Earth that fed on itself; Copan was Hegel and Berkeley
and Hume, grown friends, he had loved them, laughed at
them, George Shaw would come tired at night or noon
from his work and smile on him greyly, remotely.
‘ Deep in the Absolute ? ’
‘ Monadology,’ he would mutter, a brief while with
Fichte, the hot days and the rains marched their ways
unheeded over his head with the monads for company.
And George Shaw would grin. ‘ It’s as good training as
dominoes, nearly, and just as important.’
And he remembered then, steaming up to Atlanta, that
definition that had made him laugh : ‘ A philosopher is a
blind man seeking in a dark room for a black cat that isn’t
there.’
He laughed, and crawled up erect, and sought for his
trousers, and dressed. And then for some reason he
remembered Heinrich Heine and his arguing with Hegel for
a future compensation in Heaven for this ill life of ours.
And the caustic Hegel: ‘ So you expect a gift for nursing
your mother ill—and for failing to poison your brother ! ’
And he expected a gift of consolation from philosophy to
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 171
salve up his wounded sentimentalities ! Because he had
told Shaw in Mexico City that he was pro-German, he
and his Villa, and that Gershom at least was going home to
England, he was nineteen now nearly, he was going home
to England to fight for his country !
He went and took a shower on the train, his mind crawling
with distaste for that infantile boast. But the shower
righted things. The phrase was damnable, unforgivable,
awful, but the thing he was going to fight for was real,
shining, splendid and necessary, freedom and progress,
liberality—these, or the clownish bestiality of antique
cruelty which still wore a crown and bore power in Central
Europe as once in the Central Americas. He was going
home to fight that dead bestiality which struck off the hands
of Vercingetorix’ men, which ground the man of Uxmal
between the stones till his entrails dripped out 
He watched the landscape wheel past and the day wheeled
to noon, to sunset, to starset, he slept, woke and ate, read a
book he had bought, a new book by a man he’d not heard of
before, Our Mr. Wrenn was the book. He liked it and was
sorry the page against the title had nothing to say of this
writer’s other books. So his train drowsed up through
the lands that Lewis was to photograph and dissect with a
shouting of laughter, they swerved amid the lands of Elmer
Gantry’s preaching. . . . And then he fell asleep and at
late evening awoke, New York in sight, Manhattan on her
island “ and nearly fell from the window to watch that
sight, I’d not fall now, it came up and blinded the sky of a
sudden ; and then I turned to an orgy of packing and
found the train gathered to a stop in Grand Central.”
Shaw he knew had written Caldon, had a telegram from
Caldon, he’d said Gershom would be welcome to stop with
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
172
them till his boat went. He was sailing on the Triassic on
the fifteenth : it was then the third. So he kept a look
about him, there were taximen innumerable, strange crowd¬
ings, in a momentary shock of agoraphobia he realized how
unused he was to white faces, how beastly they were ! Then
he got out to the main halls at last and stood there and so
was standing lost and badgered in the hurrying throngs when
Ester April Cal don came at last and found him. For a
minute he didn’t believe it her. And then he said, queerly :
‘ Miss Caldon ? ’
‘ Don’t be silly, Gerry, it’s just me,’ she was grave. She
dropped his hand hurriedly, and didn’t look at him. ‘ I’ve
an auto out by. Call that boy and we’ll get in your bags.
Hi, boy ! ’
Gershom felt frozen and a fool, following her to the
Stutz, he stared at her frock, at her feet, her hat; it was
impossible to believe this the Ester Caldon of that last
night before the pursuers overtook them in the Cordilleras
country. She was in green, some kind of green, he didn’t
know the shade, her cream skin was strange in that depth of
green, her bronzed hair nestled by her ears in thick plaits. ...
He sat down beside her, the chauffeur banged the door.
They were off.
‘ How’s George ? ’
‘ Oh, fine,’ he said. ‘ Is that the Woolworth building ? ’
and stared at the monster. Ester peered by his shoulder.
‘ So they say. . . . We’ve a house on Long Island now,
you know. Hope you’ll enjoy yourself with us. You’ve
a fortnight, haven’t you ? ’
‘ That’s right. Yes, a fortnight.’
“ We sat and said nothing for a long time then, I did
not sit with her, with the corpse of an illusion, a memory
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 173
that had cooled me and comforted me all those months
down in Mexico, all the journey up from the mezquite
borders. I had expected the Ester I had known . . . and
here was a distant young woman, with glass behind the grey
of her eyes, pointing out to me the sights of New York. I
looked at her sideways and secretly, that body that had once
been a dream’s revelation against the sunset of the lost,
lone land, was firm and young and very beautiful still, but
no part with any dream that I had ever dreamt, she was
friendly and cool and no part of me.”
So he said nothing at all and her talking tailed off as they
sped through Brooklyn and down Manhattan, they came
to Long Island and the noise of the Atlantic, the Caldon
house was out by Southampton. Behind them, the night
coming down, Gershom glanced back and saw New York
like a second Sodom.
‘ Cold, Gerry ? ’
‘ Yes, a bit,’ he lied, and was suddenly resolute. He
took her face in his hands and kissed her, she gasped and
was still. So still that he dropped his hands awkwardly,
chilled and polite.
‘ I’m sorry.’
‘ Oh. . . . We’re almost home now.’
§2
He was long to remember that last night in Long Island
before the Triassic sailed. He didn’t sleep till near five
in the morning, aprowl by the window of his bedroom.
There was no moon that night, no star ; only the noise of
the sea. “ And I couldn’t sleep, prowling not only these
hours, but back through the hours of the days I’d lived in
i74 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
the company of Ester and Caldon, they came in long stretches
like a swift-run film that sometimes went blurred and
sometimes was bright, and once it crackled and broke on
the screen of my memory. And at that I found myself
halted, biting my pipe-stem, willing to forget the horror of
that picture ”
He had met with a Caldon grown older, remoter, deeper
than ever in his theory-obsession—at work on a book that
was finally to synthesise the spread of knowledge all about
the Old World. Coming down to dinner the first night he
was there, Gershom had seen himself in a mirror on the
stairs, the first full-length mirror he had seen for years, and
had stopped on those stairs to stare at himself. He was five
feet nine inches in height, as he tells, and slim, he supposed
that they called it that, and his face was quite Indio-dark
with its tan, deep layer on layer, healthy enough—a matter
of constipation or no constipation, Shaw said, and his
stomach was as good as a mule’s. (Perhaps that was why
he could laugh at Schopenhauer.) His eyes were too light
for that dark face, his hair was as well, there was something
that was faintly negroid in the ensemble 
Then he heard the sound of low breathing above him,
and looked up and saw Ester in evening dress, it was low-
cut at breast and upon her white shoulders, sweeping
baggily to the ankles in the fashion of that time. She was
staring at him almost startled, he thought.
She said slowly: ‘ You’ve grown good-looking, you
know, Gerry. More than that, too, when you stood looking
in the mirror. Queerest notion I had ! ’
* What ? ’ he asked.
She wrinkled her brows. ‘ I hardly know now. Some¬
thing silly—that you weren’t just Gershom, but any boy,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
i75
white, black, or brown, and that something that was ter¬
rible was going to happen ’ she looked away quickly.
‘ I suppose it’s my liver ! . . . Yes, you’re quite good-
looking—if it wasn’t for your nose ! ’ And suddenly smiled
like an elf, the Lorillard smile. ‘ Like me ? ’
They came down to Caldon, there was another man
there to whom the latter turned when he’d spoken to
Gershom, a tall, thin man. ‘ Gerry, this is Eustace, my
brother. Eustace, this is Gerry Shaw, George Shaw’s
young nephew.’
‘ Jezreel, not Shaw,’ Ester’s cool, amused voice struck
in.
Eustace Caldon said ‘ Eh ? ’ and looked hard at Gershom,
his hands and his eyes and so plainly believed what he
saw without putting that belief into words that Gershom
was moved to denial.
‘ No, I believe I’m Nord—quite a hundred per cent.
The tan comes from four years in Mex.’
He said ‘ Really ? ’ with an English drawl. Anglophile
though he was, he’d at once disliked Gershom. Nor did he
thaw in the least when he heard that the latter was on his
way home to enlist as a private. He was tall and thin and
Virginian, a Virginian transplanted to Kentucky, more
vinegarian even than Virginian, said Gershom’s mind with
a chuckle.
Gershom cheered up at dinner, sensing that antagonism,
Vinegar or Virgin, he was merely comic opera, and beside
the hurt of Ester changed was a comic relief. . . . Ester,
clean and sweet as a maiden out of Malory—oh, cleaner, no
doubt! Her shift was quite probably clean—uninfested like
the shift of a Malory maid !
He grinned at that thought, and Eustace Caldon, who’d
176 image and superscription
been deep in War strategy, paused and asked coldly:
‘ You’re amused, Mr. Jezreel ? ’
‘ Very,’ said Gershom, and met the glance of distaste
with an impudent contempt. (“ I knew his type well
enough, too antique to frighten, they’d carved that long,
agressive head a thousand years before on the murals of
Chichen.”) ‘ But neither at you nor the War. I was thinking
about shifts.’
He said ‘ Uh. Suppose it’s a considerable change,’
and then Ester struck in, she was eating a peach, her teeth
even and ivory biting in the fruit.
‘ Probably not that kind of shift at all, Uncle Eustace—
if I know anything of Gerry. And I don’t know
much.’
He said ‘ Eh ? What shift, then ? ’
‘ Probably mine.’
Gershom said ‘ It was.’ Eustace Caldon looked from
him to Ester with an acid distaste, and turned to Ester’s
father. ‘ Extraordinary the manners of the young these
days.’
Caldon blossomed a dry humour.
‘ They always were extraordinary. Read the Egyptian
codices on the young and their impiety. . . . Though I
don’t see anything impious in Gershom thinking about
Ester’s shift. He’s seen her without one before this time.
Eh, Gershom ? ’
‘ Once, sir.’
‘ Ah ha. On the road to Lorillard, I suppose ? But he’s
quite a decent boy, Eustace, Lorillard was what he was in
search of. Shift or no shift I can hardly suppose he ever
noticed Ester.’
Ester and Gershom said nothing to that, Gershom eating
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 177
with a new twist to his thoughts. Had he ? Busied with
the Road to Lorillard when he might have 
And somehow, as he remembered padding the dark
hours of the last night in Long Island, he had shivered away
from that thought. When Ester rose from the table he went
with her, they went up and sat in a cool, blue room that
looked over the waters of the Sound and its dipping lights,
the noise of the Atlantic came up to them, the cream of the
shoom of the sound.
Sitting next to her, he saw her then as never before,
in the radiance of light other than candle or sun or moon,
lying back, a symphony of long, smooth curves, chin to
shoulder, shoulder to breast, and breast to thigh, thigh to
knee, in pale green, that fair corona of her hair gone jetty
black as of old. He lighted a cigarette she refused, and they
sat in an awkward speechlessness a while.
‘ Gerry, what have you been thinking about me ever since
we met at Grand Central ? Truth.’
‘ That you’ve changed.’
‘ I know. But truth.'
‘ All right. That you’re lovelier than ever ; that I was a
fool to waste those days on the road to Lorillard ; that
you once said you’d be my mistress when I wanted you.
All that. . . . And that somehow you aren’t that Ester at
all, you’ve lost all that made you her, you’re a stranger, I
can feel it even now, speaking the truth to you about it as
you asked.’
She was leaning her chin in the fingers of her long right
hand, he was to remember the pose that last night, she
leant there and said in a still, dead voice : ‘ It’s true. All
true. And I’ll tell you why. Have you ever yet seen a
man killed ? ’
M
178 image and superscription
He was startled. ‘ No.’ >
‘ Well, I have, since—since we came back. That’s
what’s made the difference. . . . Only, it wasn’t a^ man.
It was a woman. Would you like to heai about it ?
‘Why, no.’
‘ Why, yes. I’ve never told anyone about it. Father
even doesn’t know that I saw it; Uncle doesn t. . . . And
that’s what’s made the difference, all the difference, why
I’m not the same person as climbed the Cordilleras with
you. I don’t know why I’m not mad, I go from room to
room and into the streets and out to parties and every time
I look in the face of a man I feel—sick, oh, sick and sick !
I’ve been near to suicide sometimes, Gerry.’
It was almost as if the sea had soothed its sound as he
stared at her, she put up her hand against her face. And
‘ Don’t look at me, else I’ll never be able to^tell you. Oh,
turn out the light ! Yes, there. It was this .
And that last night, padding to and fro the bedroom
with the carpet soft as Usamacinta moss, he tried not to
remember the horror of that story she had told him, of the
visit she and Caldon had made to her uncle’s, his place in
Kentucky. There had been a lynching there a week before
they arrived, a negro had been drenched in gasoline and
burned, he was suspected of raping the usual white woman
So that had blown by as quickly as usual, the police traced
nobody, also as usual. Ester and her father heard remotely
of the thing, a rag-tag of the tale, and had shuddered, and
put it from their thoughts.
But the wife of the negro had been heard to curse the
crowd of white men who had murdered her husband, she
was with child and lived in a shack a half-mile from the
Caldon house. And the crowd had not forgotten that cursing,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 179
though Ester knew nothing of that fact the night when she
could not sleep. Too hot it was, she’d picked up a blanket
and cushion in the easy, free fashion of Mexico, and gone
out of doors into the garden to sleep in the shelter of a tree.
It was a Sunday night, very still, with no drone of insects,
the trees in the Caldon garden were velvet-soft in the
darkness ; and as Ester spread out her blanket she raised
her eyes and saw those trees lighter tinted. She looked
further, walking to the end of the garden.
And then she saw the flare of the fire that burned in the
heart of a wood, not three hundred yards distant. And
it called to her to see what it was, she felt light-hearted and
eager and curious, and got out of the garden and went
through the trees. . . .
So they had the negress there, had the crowd, they were
pulling her up to the tree when Ester looked, she felt her
eyes grow blind for a minute, but her throat was too dry
to scream. And then she saw that the noose was so adjusted
that the woman was not dead, was not being hanged except
slowly, she was mouthing and mowing, her black body
swaying as the rope rose higher above the tree-bole, her black
body bloated with pregnancy, the rags almost stripped from
its sweat. And then a man ran forward with a torch, an
acetylene lamp, its flame flowed up, the black body jerked
and a slaver of words came from it, and the flame from the
acetylene lamp ran up and caught on the rags of the negress’s
clothing, they flared and burned, smouldered, there rose
around a low chorus of laughings and gruntings like swine
that were feeding on dead men’s flesh.
Half-charred her back, still the negress lived. But that
was only the beginning. A man rose directly in front of the
bush behind which Ester had crouched, he ran forward to
!8o image and superscription
the dangling body of the negress, it was a neighbour of
Eustace Caldon’s, a bluff, kind man, Ester had met him at
dinner. Now something flashed in his hand as he ran,
and then he cut into the bloated body on the rope, cutting
into the womb, it split redly and black and something
tumbled out—something that wriggled and gave a queer
scream, a scream like nothing ever heard, but not long, the
bluff man stamped on the thing with his boots. . . -1
It squashed up and Ester heard a man being sick, and
then she couldn’t bear more, she tried herself to be sick
and couldn’t, and choked, and then later supposed she
fainted. For when next she woke the dawn was in the sky,
coming sailing over the rich, wooded lands, the dawn on the
bluegrass, the clouds of the morning like gilded galleons,
they shook out their sails in amber and purple, birds were
about them in long morning flights. And a wind had come,
it was smooth and quiet, almost warm already from the places
of the sunrise. ,
And Ester lay and looked at the dawn and knew she had
dreamt, horribly, dreadfully, in her uncle’s garden. And
then she raised herself up on her hands, the grass crackled
and moved with a queer sound of laughter, and she looked
through the trees and amid their shadows saw something
mutilated, with hanging bowels, hanging and swaying and
turning then in the moving passage of the morning air.
And, raised on her hands, she had looked and looked at the
thing, filling her eyes with it, impressing it deep in her
mind that never again might she believe with a full and
glad heart in truth or beauty or the crying loveliness of
dawns on the bluegrass, or poetry or painting or Peace> °y
the love of God or the fellowship of men. So she had
1 This lynching belongs to fact, not fiction—J. L. M.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 181
looked, long and long, and then got to her feet and turned
about and made the house of her uncle, no one was stirring,
she made it unseen, though twice she fainted on the way
through the garden. . . .
And Gershom, tramping his hours of remembrance,
switched away his thoughts from that horror. The telling
finished, they had sat together and stared out to sea in the
darkness, the plangent plash of the tide of the Sound came
up through the night—the sea that cared nothing, that was
neither cruel nor uncruel, insensate, remote, mother of men
and mother of life, unknowing, uncaring the horror of this
Thing that had crawled to being from the moving slimes of
the ancient shores. Then a queer memory came on him.
‘ Remember Vercingetorix’ men ? ’
‘ I know. And I said that kind of thing didn’t happen
now.’ She laughed, a dreadful laugh for a girl. ‘ It happens
everywhere, all over the world. We’re beasts, cruel beasts,
worse than any other beast, and that’s all that the War is,
you know. Sadism and cruelty, beasts tearing and stabbing
in slime and blood. . . . Oh Gerry, and you once wrote
poetry 1 ’
‘ I’m tired, Ester. I think I’ll go up to bed.’
‘ Why, sure.’ Her voice was suddenly calm. ‘ After
all that journey you must be dead-beat. Put on the light
now, will you ? ’
So he put it on and they glanced at each other, then
away, she was neither paler nor more flushed than before
she had told him of that horror in the bluegrass. But he
saw in her eyes his own face still livid, he knew he would
never rid his memory of that ghastly figure swinging dark
and torn in the morning colours amid the trees he had never
182 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
Nor had he, he remembered, all the fortnight that followed.
Ester took him to see the sights of New York, skyscraper¬
appraising, he cricked his neck, they shopped and talked
and bought a new camp-bed and sent it to Shaw, down
to Belize, he was outfitting a new expedition there to
search in the ruins around Bacalar. And Ester and Gershom
lunched and talked and danced, and forgot in their ways,
he at least for a while ; and drank cocktails and heard of
the War. The sound of it filled the air of rumour, a deep
boom over there in the east, the unease of it gave ease and
zest to America’s security. Friday came and Gershom’s
last day but one, they passed it as they had the others, till
Ester drove him out by the Palisades and they sat long
there, looking and looking, she turned to him at last, her
hand on the wheel.
‘ Gerry, have you thought—if you’re going to soldier—
what may happen to you ? ’
‘ That I’ll maybe be killed ? ’ he asked.
‘ Yes.’
< Well, it won’t matter. I won’t be the only one.’
‘ Will that help ? ’
And he knew that it wouldn’t. Killed ? Finished and
put by, riven flesh grown black and then shrinking into
bones and dust and manure this thing that was himself,
that sat here alive, this thing that was “ I,” hungry for food
and air and light and ease and the wonder of dead men’s
thoughts, books and books and long treks in bush and the
sound of the sea. . . . Killed, he might well be killed, never
again make love to women as once he had done, with
Maruja that day by Laguna de Terminos, never again he
with a woman in kindness and delight. Never at least with
Ester, chance and not only the War had seen to that. And
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
183
he looked at Ester and found her look at him, suddenly she
put out her hand, it touched his, for a moment the glass
went from behind the grey eyes.
‘ Gerry, I didn’t mean to depress you.’
‘ I’m not depressed. Only, I was thinking: No, it
won’t help me to die better that others are dying. There’s
so much I want to do ! . . . But I wasn’t being morbid,
much, I was merely being sensual—wondering who you’d
marry in the end and go to bed with some time.’
‘ Did you want it to be you ? ’
‘ Yes, once.’
She didn’t speak then, and then suddenly leant her face
in her hands, she took them from the wheel, and was
weeping and weeping, quietly, dreadfully, he stared at her
aghast. He put up his hands on her shoulders.
‘ Ester, I’m so sorry—damnably, oh, I’m a fool ! Don’t
think I was trying to hurt you.’
‘ Go away. Oh, go away. And take your hands from
me else I’ll go mad.’
She shivered. And then : ‘ That’s better. Ugh ! Don’t
look at me, please.’
She dried her eyes. ‘ All that’s finished, Gershom. . . .
Oh, it’s so long since we went—’n’ I’ll never go again—on
the Road to Lorillard! . . .’
§3
‘ The night has a thousand eyes,’ he whispered to himself,
and stood still and looked.
It had never been true in the hot flare of the Mexican
nights as here on Salisbury Plain, almost he’d forgotten
the feel and the look of an English night, and that cold
splendour of the English stars, great eyes from the Beast
184 image and superscription
that laired in the sky. He stamped his feet and clicked
his heels, bringing his rifle painstakingly to his shoulder
in the motions taught him by Sergeant Sebright.
“ Like a monkey ascending a stick, I manipulated my
arms, wheeled, clicked my heels together again, and resumed
the pacing of my sentry-beat. It was March on Salisbury
Plain, in Bulford the huts stood shivering and cowering
in the blow of the night-time wind; it was March of
nineteen hundred and fifteen and scores like myself tramped
sentry-go. Overhead came the stars, bright, cold, and
impersonal as the eyes of an army doctor inspecting a
naked squad in search of venereal disease.
He found that funny, and grinned in the darkness,
wheeling away from the drive of the wind up a lane of black
huts, with fast-closed windows like glazed dead eyes. It
was the saddest hour, this, of sentry-go, the hours between
twelve and two, he was to know those hours more intimately
still, how close, when men lay sleeping, death came then in
the silence and weariness, a blowing-out to the dead wastes
of space, one walked the world the last man left alive till
you heard the tramp of relief. But sometimes one tried in
that very hour, the only time one might think alone and at
peace, out of the squalor and smell and filth into the silence
with oneself, to stand amazed at one’s self, to ask ‘ Is this
true ? Is this I ? ’
And you said to yourself in those dark, quiet hours,
‘ it’s a lie. Or at least it’s a thing that passes, it cannot
endure, only for a little while, and then—and then ’
And you took them to pieces and squirming fragments, the
patterns of the days, the brutality and filth, the squirming
indignity of this act and that, and looked at them calmly,
forgetting anger and rage and fear.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 185
You thought of a barrack-hut at morning when you
awoke under the shivering scrape of the blankets, thin and
envermined, there was a smell in the hut like an ancient
offal-pit, it came from the breaths and bodies of the men
who lay packed about you, most slept in the grey hideous¬
ness of their underwear, most suffered from appalling food
that enstenched their stomachs and throats, it was like
swamp miasma, but sour. And you’d lie and you’d come
to awareness of that, your mouth begrimed, your eyes
begrimed, against the window the driving sleet of Salisbury
Plain. So you huddled close up, your greatcoat still wrapped
about your feet, still and silent the hut on the edge of
reveille. You saw that in a glance at the watch still strapped
on your wrist, strapped there overnight lest it might be
stolen. And you’d remember other things that were
stealable as well and search back under the bolster for the
few spare shillings hidden there in a sock. Safe, still
safe.
And then reveille. A trumpeter slept in your hut:
He’d be shaken awake by a messenger from the guard-
room, he’d yawn and curse, blink blearily, and then scramble
wildly and in haste from his blankets to the nearest window,
a thin youth, hairy and unfleshed ; and he’d raise up the
swinging half of the window and project his trumpet there¬
from and blow reveille and bang down the window and
seek his blankets for the blessing of ten minutes more.
You rarely got out of your blankets before you were
forced. The orderly corporal came on that mission, he
banged portentously on doors and trestles, and pulled off
blankets and men awoke and swore and stood in the litter,
and got into trousers and got into boots, nothing else dis¬
carded, and then ran at the sound of a whistle.
186 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
That was the morning-time physical-training whistle.
You stood in long rows and shivered and then leapt like
dart-pricked frogs with up-flapping arms, and bent and
unbent your posteriors, wriggling your stomachs, posturing
pathetically in the danse de ventre the while Sergeant
Sebright walked the ranks and inevitably stopped at your
back, and you knew him there even when you couldn’t see
him, cold, with eyes like a pig and a face to match. You’d
falter and fail from the rhythm of the group and then his
snarl would come through his teeth :
‘ Now then, Jezreel ! Waken up there, Jesus ! ’
For Sergeant Sebright had disliked you from the moment
he saw you in that hasty squad that came up from London ;
and dislike had increased in the cold, pig eyes as he read
your name from the nominal roll.
‘ Gershom Jez—Jesus ! Jezreel. Who the hell’s he ? ’
‘ I am, sergeant.’
‘ Stand to attention then, when I speak to you ! D’you
hear ? ’
‘ Yes, sergeant.’
‘ Jezreel ! ’
‘ Sergeant ! ’
‘ “ Sawjint ” ! None of your bloody la-de-da airs here.
Yell. You’ve to let your voice be heard in the Army.
Now then ! ’
‘ Sergeant.’
‘ Right, my cock, I’ll keep an eye on you. What are you,
anyway ? Half-caste ? Mother a wazza-bint ? ’
‘ I beg your pardon, sergeant ? ’
‘ Oh, you begs my pardon, does you ? Some missionary’s
bastard, I’ll bet. Right. Fatigues : Brown, Mollison
cookhouse. Kemp, Crawley—littcr-picking. Wrench
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 187
guardroom fire. Jesus—latrines. . . . What the hell are
you standing still for ? Double to it, man ! ’
‘ My name is Jezreel, sergeant.’
‘ None of your bloody lip, or you’ll be for the guard-
room so quick your feet’ll never touch the ground.
Double ! ’
He was convinced from the first of an ancestry half¬
negroid, and you made no attempt to explain away your
name, either to him or the strange admixture of humanity
crowding the barrack-hut—that strange, heart-breaking
mixture you found so obsessed and so dominated by one
obsession, one thought, one idea.
And that was Fear. You feared. Inexplicably, by the
strangest paradox, you had volunteered to have your body
clad in garments ludicrous and of hideous discomfort, to
live like a beast and be fed as no beast would ever be fed,
to be taught the technique of killing, to go out to France
and kill or be killed : This you had done and it was a thing
put by and a thing forgotten. You’d forgotten it in the
shadow of the Fear that dominated the camp, that dominated
the Army, that men called Discipline, Fine Spirit, and
many another fine name, that was a crawling dread of the
dark cells, of the filth and heartbreaking weariness of the
punishment drills, that in its utmost resolve was a Fear of
no definite thing, a shrinking from thought and revolt and
responsibility. . . .
And then the whistle blew again, P.T. was done, thank
Christ, race, into the hut again, the fug a little thinned, an
outbreak of jesting and reminiscent thumping and ‘ Christ,
ain’t it cold ! ’ You polished buttons and you polished
boots and you scrambled around with a tin of cold water
and you sought to shave in front of a mirror with a dozen
188 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
others, there was a great scraping and scratching, the
frozen discomfort of steel on your face, you swore to your¬
self By God, you’d grow a beard when you were ‘ out.’ And
then 1 cookhouse ’ blew, there rose a rush and a clatter of
tins and mugs, and a race to the hut where the three uncleanly
cooks yawned, and wiped the moisture of the cookhouse
from their faces, and ladled out the strange, curdled mess
of bad porridge and thin treacle, incurious bacon and dis¬
couraged potato. With this mess went a thin, stale wash of
tea, and on this you fed and prepared for the day, the march¬
ing and drilling and the hours of Sergeant Sebright s
‘ Instruction.’
Dummies of men, sacks filled with straw, were hung
from low gibbets in the training-field. At those dummies
you ran with your bayonets fixed, and plunged those bayonets
into squirming stomachs and chests that caved in with a
crackle of bones, the filth came spurting up on your hands,
you saw the face of the man whose flesh you so tore and
dug—you saw it contract in a passion of pain, then blood
come up in his eyes. You saw all that had you the making
of pictures apt in your mind, and stopped, half-sick, Sergeant
Sebright behind you. ‘ What, scrounging again, eh Jesus ?
Jump to it! ’
You lay flat on your stomachs and fired at concentric
circles of colour, you knelt down to fire, you stood upright,
you fired with rapidity, you fired with deliberation, and
markers hidden in the butts behind signalled your abilities
or failures. And you were again a curse and a disappoint¬
ment to Sergeant Sebright, a first-class shot from the first
you were, he had thought you would fail at this also. Pig-
like, his eyes protruded their wonder that a half-caste
could shoot as but few of the Real English. He d find
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
189
nothing to say to you then, wait later, till the drills of the
afternoon it would be, when your feet were clumsy and
your mind astray, it was then he came into his own.
‘ Pick them up, there ! You, Jezreel, up ! . . . Halt.
Private Jezreel, one step forward, march ! Mark time.
Left right left right. Forward march. Double ! Double !
leftrightleftrightaboutturnleftrightleftright ! Halt. About
turn. One step forward march. Halt. About turn. . . .
See if that’ll warm you a bit.’
And, panting from your racing round the mud of the
‘ square,’ with your rifle on your shoulder, you’d look at
him with eyes of hate that he couldn’t mistake, his face
would grow mottled with anger.
‘ None of your damn dumb insolence, either. Hear ? ’
‘ Oh, I hear you, sergeant.’
‘ That’ll do. Private Jezreel—under open arrest. Office
in the morning. Insolence on parade ’
§4
He secured one week-end a pass that took him to London.
In a little hotel in Bloomsbury he’d left most of his civilian
clothes when he joined the Army. He went there again,
and booked himself a room, and dressed once more in an
unaccustomed comfort. It was strangest of all, the walking,
almost he fell for lack of the clump and drag of the heavy
Army boots on his feet. Then he went out to discover
London, London hysterical and darkened, War-time
London with its shoddy crowds and its thronging soldiers,
its pimps for the women deserted, its prostitutes for the
men who so soon might well be deserted of even the flesh.
He drank in a little pub in Piccadilly, there was a girl there
19o IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
who looked at him invitingly, hot-eyed, he bought her a
drink and she nodded and took it.
‘ Here’s what. Why aren’t you in uniform ? ’
‘ I’m on leave,’ he said, and she nodded.
‘ I thought that you were. . . . Your hands.’
He said ‘ Eh ? ’ and she pointed to his palms.
‘ Plain, you know. White hands with new blisters fading
from them. Lots of the boys have that who’ve never had
hard work before.’
‘ Let’s forget it,’ he said. ‘ Have a drink ? ’
She nodded. ‘ Don’t mind another. . . . My father
was killed in France four days ago.’
He was a little taken aback ; he said he was sorry. The
girl nodded. ‘ You can’t be, you never knew him. But
I did—a lot. Mother and my brothers don’t mind, you
know, he died like a hero, they think. But I don’t. Most
likely he died like a cow in a slaughter-shed—father ! He’d
hair half-grey, he was quiet and kind, and his eyes twinkled,
joking and kind, lovely eyes, you know. I can’t forget
them. . . . I’m trying this, they say that it helps.’
‘ Nothing helps,’ he told her. ‘ Except to be like your
mother and brothers and the rest.’ He was a little drunk
and paused to clear the coming haze from his mind. ‘ Be
like them, hero-worship like them, there’s no safety at all
but by going with the mob.’
‘ Have you found safety that way ? ’
‘ I’ve found I was once a fool. . . . Drink the only way
you’re trying to forget ? Ever been seduced ? ’
Her face was drink-flushed, she shook her head, a deeper
flush came. He drank up his whisky and laughed at her.
‘ Then you haven’t begun to know how to forget.’
She said : ‘ Is that an offer ? ’ and he said : ‘For what
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
I9I
it’s worth,’ and they looked at each other in the sweating
little room with hot, restless eyes. Gershom stood up.
‘ Come on. We’ll go somewhere else.’
Near midnight he brought her to the Bloomsbury hotel,
they avoided the porter with a drunken caution and climbed
the stairs to his room. And there she was suddenly frightened,
and refused, and he found himself frightened as well, and
consoled her and unlocked the door. Thereat she broke
down, weeping, kneeling in a chair, and then a blaze came
white in his brain, he had closed and locked up the door
again, his hands were upon her, she ceased to struggle after
a little in the dark, ceased to weep, they held each other
in a kind of fear, London wheeling in its darkness into the
East, London silent, a mad city on the verge of a wTorld
gone mad.
Towards dawn he awoke and found she had gone, she
left no message or token, she had asked him for nothing,
he was never to see her again.
§5
That day he took a train out of London, from King’s
Cross northward, he got out at a station called Welwyn
and walked and walked till late in the day in the rich wooded
lands round the heights of Herts. And he saw it was Spring,
the teams out in the fields, the sun was a bright Spring
shining, you could hear in the rustle of the paths, hidden
in the woods, the streams trilling their ways newborn from
the overnight rains. Larks were out, shrilling over the
labour of the plodding teams, in green and ochre lay the
fields about him, walking slow, without thought, with the
feeling upon him of a prisoner escaped.
I92 image and superscription
And all that day until late afternoon he avoided the
faces and greetings of men, he slept a long hour in a park,
Brockett’s Park, the young pheasants came twittering and
pecking around him, there was a great cackling of geese by
a river that flowed and foamed amid the pilasters of a wide
and deserted bridge. Towards evening he awoke and did
not for a while know himself or the place where he lay.
And then he lay thinking, unmoving, and watching the
evening close in. He moved aside from himself, so long
since he’d done that, and asked as of old ‘ Who am I ? ’
And he saw the Gershom of Chatham, of Mexico, of
Salisbury Plain. Gershoms in a blur and a shimmer of
vignettings that brightened and faded into the quiet of the
Hertfordshire evening. Which of these ‘ I ? ’ Which, if
any, the reality ? What reality was there in or behind those
shapes so changelessly changing ?
‘ Man that is of woman born . . . hath but a little
while. ... As a flower he passeth. . . .’
‘ The burden of much gladness. Life and lust
Forsake thee, and the face of thy delight ,
And underfoot the heavy hour strews dust,
And overhead strange weathers burn and bite ;
And where the red was, lo the bloodless white,
And where truth was, the likeness of a liar,
And where day was, the likeness of the night ,
This is the end of every man’s desire.’
Reality? What reality might the universe ever hold
that was a stay and a guiding star for man, for himself,
for the slavering hordes of the barrack-hut, the men w o
lived and dreamt and died like rats in that sweating rat-run
beyond the horizons of the south ? Up from the beast we
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 193
had come, beasts ourselves and no more we were, cruelty and
lust were our heritage, in our bones delight in torture and
tears, civilization had shaped and slowed and restrained the
brute that was our essential self; except when war and
promiscuity released him floundering, slime-dripping, from
his chains. And even that brute was no being everlasting !
Life was no flower, it was mindless, the crawling of a
mindless fecundity, changing and passing, changing and
passing. Man was a beast who walked the earth, snarling
his needs and lowing his fears, and with other beasts he
would perish and pass, a ripple on the cosmic mind that
itself was mindless. . . .
And a great amazement came on him there that evening
in the Hertfordshire woods, that so few of his fellow-men
should ever stand agaze on this horror of the Wastes he
beheld so plain. If they should, if they should !
It would mean world-madness, world-suicide, to look
in the freezing abyss either side of the path that men climbed,
poor, blinded beasts. An end altogether of surely the
strangest, most grotesque of adventures Life had ever
attempted throughout the universe. . . .
And it came on him that this indeed was what he wit¬
nessed, this was the evening of the world, the sunset of
mankind that he sat and watched. Some other life-form
might yet arise and essay the adventure, some beast or bird
or insect, life in a form unguessable, but one with a steadfast
beacon of surety in mind and in heart, not a torn, tormented
thing, dragging clanking the chains of its ancestry, blind in
the glimpse of a possible morning its bestiality might never
essay.
N
SECTION THE SEVENTH
SECTION THE SEVENTH
§ i
THE guns were a lullaby on the horizon that first night
as the long columns straggled up to the Somme. The
battalion had halted near Amier, it slept in a barn, but he
found the weather too hot for sleeping and went out,he’d taken
off nothing but his boots. Dead tired though he was he could
not sleep because of that heat. In the sky, it was near to
morning, there flickered a line of light, pallid and strange,
and, muted in distance, the thudding thunder of the guns
rattled the window-panes of the dawn. To the right, he
could see them but dimly across the huddle of the brown
farm-buildings, unending, with hooded lights, the transport
and the guns crept up to the front.
He went back to the hut and sat on his pack, he was
near to the door, and lighted a cigarette and looked round
at the huddled shapes of the sleeping men. The air was
foul with their breaths and the smell of their bodies, some
moved in dreams and unease, yet a strange, quiet sleeping
it was that held most, as though drugged to indifference,
awaiting their sacrifice under the pits of a Punic Baal. In
one corner was a huddle of men, their rifles were piled, and
that piling over-draped with packs, it looked in the dimness
of the light like a drooping figure, an obscene crucifixion
caricatured. . . . Very near to morning, very near, and he
was wasting it staring and listening when he had been
better asleep.
But he went to the door again, looking east. Now amid
the dunness was a lightening pallor, momentarily it grew
and it spread, then abruptly a thing great, like an open hand,
spread and unclenched there also, he watched it with
sombre eyes, sure and aware of his own anthropomorphism,
197
198 image and superscription
yet stricken to quietude as others had been who looked on
the Angel of Mons. A Hand ?—and why might it not ?
Might not the Gods descend to the battles as of old, the
innumerable Gods of the Christian world ?
Jehovah, the Christ, the Quetzal, the lesser gods and
attendant saints—perhaps they were more than dreams,
they had life indeed, the waste and spume of the thoughts
of men, they moved and they drifted far in the sky, great
clouds of thought, strange, blossomless flowers without
root or stem, blood on their petals, awake, as hungry polyps
awake, pullulating, smelling the incense of blood as below
their creators fought and bellowed in the slime of the little
planet. . . .
And suddenly, sharp and clear in the hot, waiting morning,
the notes of reveille came shrilling in the air.
§2
He was upon the barbed wire, held in five strands. He
had ceased to scream, buoyed up on a surge and a shoom
of pain that was merely a pedestal, merely foundation and
base for those waves of agony that smothered him every
two minutes or so. Waiting the coming of the next, he found
time and wit to wonder at that, had it something to do with
the blood’s circulation, was he losing blood as he hung ?
He knew he was whispering and mouthing in delirium,
yet kept clear his mind and determined still, rocked on that
combering play of pain against the shore of his flesh. He
must not scream, he must not scream. .
For they would shoot him, some Jerry sniper, or the
machine-gunners back in the batt. He had seen them
do it before to the men who were caught in the wire in the
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
199
futile attacks. You heard them screaming till they wearied
you and then you fired when no officer looked and they
ceased to jerk, they were better dead. But he did not wish
to die, hanging though he did, one strand was between
his legs, the spikes of it updriven deep and turned there,
two bound his chest and one his shoulders and one had
tangled and twined, living, like a snake that scoriated,
about his legs. And he would not scream, he must not
scream.
He had been swung away up from the ground when the
strands eased themselves from the weight of others, he
hung three feet or so now from the ground, like a rat, half-
naked from his first wild smugglings, he could see his chest,
it was black, caked, like a lava-slate, with veinings that were
blue and veinings faint red, these where the blood-sheet
had cracked. He could see the Jerry line, his head forced
back, he could see it when the haze cleared a moment from
his eyes, when he strove to clear them to fight the return of
that breaker of pain with its hissing of spume ; even the
flat caps of the Saxons he saw now and then in the dull,
quiet light of the afternoon. . . .
And then the rain came, that was close on sunset. It
drenched the ground and himself and suddenly, through it
and the coming of the darkness, a machine-gun began to
bay like a jackal from the German parados, suspicious of
sunset raids. He saw the red flashings and then disregarded
them, fighting, tormented, in the breaking spray of the
white-hot wave. And he screamed at last, wildly, oh God !
oh God !
And perhaps they would think it was someone else.
They were firing measuredly from our line in return,
he heard the easy sing of the bullets go by, he wriggled and
200
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
shrank and at that Agony itself sent searching fingers,
long-nailed, far up in his body, they scraped his pelvis and
tore at his entrails. “ I think that I fainted then. It was
quite night when I woke again, hearing my own moans..
The pain was vivid as ever, in chest and in back and in
legs. But between his legs it had ceased, a dead region
suddenly there. He was sick for a moment at the smell of
excrement and the smell of caked blood on his chest. And
then thirst came on him, suddenly, overpoweringly, he tore
his arms seeking to reach to his water-bottle, he could not.
“ And then I managed to lower my head and suck at my
tunic, it was wet where the rain had drenched me. But
the rain was salt, I drank it and spat, it was salt and thick,
my own blood I drank. . . . And I must not scream A
Then presently the star-shells began to rise, far up the
line, they rose and fell without ceasing, shedding a corpse-
glow on the land below. Far in the north some bombard¬
ment rose in a farmyard cackle and then changed from
that, it turned to the leaping of elephants, the ground
listened and trembled as the thudding drew near. High up,
he was flung to and fro on the rocking wires. Quite close
at hand a stanchion fell and the wire caved forward, half-
flinging him clear but tangling his legs. But his arms
were free, were free ! And as he kissed them and slobbered
upon them he fainted again.
“ Late in the night I had freed my legs and began to
crawl. There were raiders out in no-man’s-land, a party
went past me, crawling, once, and I tried to call, and a
hand reached out, and a bayonet came thudding in my
body, but my haversck caught and jarred it. I crumpled
and lay still and the raiders, I think they were English,
went on.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 201
“ I found a dead man in a little pit and felt over his body
and up to his face, but his face had gone, my hands at his
neck fell into a cavity, a pitfull of cold, chill slime, he had
been dead for many days and the rats had taken away his
head. I laughed and mumbled over that, I remember, I
was very hungry, I lay and laughed and laughed, my hand
in the dead man’s neck. I would be unable to eat him,
anyhow!”
He had begun to bleed again, he knew, and set out
crawling once more. Somewhere then in his meanderings
it was that he came on Sergeant Sebright. He did not see
him, he was never to see him all the time that followed,
the man lay groaning and whispering unendingly, ‘ Water,
water. Oh Christ, some water.’ Gershom crawled and
came on him and squatted and listened.
‘ Sebright ! ’
‘ Water, Oh Christ, some water ! ’
‘ I haven’t any water. I’m only Jesus, Sebright, Gershom
Jesus Jezreel. No water. ... I bring not peace, but a
sword.’
‘ Oh Christ, some water ! ’
‘ No water, no Christ, either, Sebright. I’m only Jesus.
Remember him, you’ve learnt your Swinburne :
‘ Between us and the sunlight swings
The phantom of a Christ-less cross,
Shadowing the sheltered heads of kings,
And making with its moving shade,
The souls of harmless men afraid 
‘ That’s the Christ you’re wanting, Sebright, but I’m
only Jesus.’
‘ Water, water.’
202 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
And after a little, startled to awareness by a burst of
insane laughter in his ears, and realizing that laughter
came from himself, Gershom made search for Sebright s
water-bottle and found it lying a little beyond the latter s
reach. He wanted to drink of the water himself, but he
could not with that moaning so close at hand, he thrust the
thing into the sergeant’s hands and crawled off, he heard
the soft gurgle of water falling from the bottle-neck in the
darkness, but he did not know if Sebright ever drank or
not, he never knew what happened to him after that.
The next thing he remembered was the dead Saxon
crucified up against the breaking of the morning.
He was crucified on the wire, in the tangle by two great
stanchions. A shell must have lifted him and flung him
up there, in the nest of wire, and there Gershom saw him,
like Saint Peter of legend, crucified upside down and with
head to earth. He was close to the figure before he saw it,
busied as he was with discovery that all night long he had
crawled in a circle, and was near again to the place from
which he had started. And then he raised his head and,
the morning behind it, looked on the crucified German.
It was the Image, dead and uncrowned and quiet, snar¬
ling, a beast no longer, murdered by God and the cosmos,
pitiful, fearful, and purposeless. “ There was hardly a
twitter of life in the lines that morning I squatted and looked
up at the thing from my childhood, the Image itself, super¬
scribed with murder, foolish and dead against the dawn.
And at the sight I remember I fell in delirium again, I was
found by an early search-party, I was whispering and
mowing and pointing to the Image against the morning.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
203
§3
Trains and their shoom and rattle, unending days of
them, the flash and flow of broken images out of their
winking windows. Sometimes they loitered by leafy banks,
the spare green banks of the lean French land, once they
hid and quivered hour-long in a tunnel, and far at its entrance
an explosion roared, and you dozed and you did not care.
Then hands were on Gershom, torturing him, he was
crying in the deeps of pain, crying and crying, and voices
and hands were about him, and again the sway and quiver
and flow of the train. He knew in a moment of clarity
that the man in the rack above him had a stomach-wound,
bandaged, the blood oozed from it and through it, dripping
on Gershom’s face. He lay and awaited those drops of
blood, unceasing, continual, he was neither frightened nor
angered in that slow dripping, it was his own blood, the
blood of the Image, if he moved and cried on the horror of
the thing his own blood would flow 
They came to the Channel, he supposed. There was a
moment when he saw the water, darkened, harbour-dark,
and heard the lap of it. And then pain, excruciating, was
upon him again, again the world commenced expanding,
outward and out, his hands grew, his nose, his arm, the
universe expanded and again exploded. . . . He saw and
knew no more of the Channel passage nor the journey that
followed, he awoke in a stretcher in Aberdeen station,
being carried from the train to an ambulance.
And the thing that had wakened him was the hand of a
‘ volunteer ’ male thrusting into his hand a cigarette.
204
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
§4
The ‘ volunteers ’ were everywhere, knock-knee’d, in
khaki, perspiring with amity, patriotically beaming. On
each stretcher that passed a cigarette was thrust, so Gershom
saw as he stared about, and then stared down at his own
awakening gift. An ambulance nurse stood near, that he
knew only later, and she saw what he did. He flung
away the cigarette, feebly, yet with fury, and cried
after the volunteer, shrilly, an obscene phrase of the
barrack-hut.
The nurse was beside him in an instant.
‘ Now, now, Tommy, you mustn’t go on like that.
You’ll be better and in bed in ten minutes.’
He looked up in a plump, pretty face, it was honest
and fair, and he looked as a man coming back from the
dead.
‘ God, a girl ! ... My name’s not Tommy, and I
know what I’m doing. Do you let skunks like that wait
about and insult the fools who come back half-murdered to
your damned town ? ’
‘ Now, now. All right, then, what is your name ? Jez-
Jezreel. Corporal Jezreel, you’ll be fine in a minute. . . .
Careful with that stretcher, there ! ’
‘ But what is this place ? ’ he called after her.
‘ This is Aberdeen, Corporal,’ she said.
He said ‘ Good God ! ’ and then went to sleep. He
slept from then until the moment that he was undressed.
His awakening came with the bandages’ unwinding, he
clung to Nurse Simpson’s hand the while they unwound,
biting in the pillow while she patted his hand, and the cool,
bored hands of the doctor cut and shaved and applied a
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 205
thing that stung up through his body like the bite of a
snake.
‘ You’ll need no operation with some care, No. 8. Are
you married ? ’
He twisted his head to answer ‘ No,’ and the doctor
laughed with a thin salacity.
‘ Well, well, when you are you’ll not be incapacitated
from performing your conjugal duties—if that’s been a
worry.4
Gershom lay thinking of that. It had never occurred to
him. And suddenly he was afraid, dreadfully afraid, he
lay and shivered, and when next Nurse Simpson came to
take his temperature that temperature was up and the nurse
very grave.
‘ Hello, hello, what’s this you’ve been doing to yourself
now, Corporal ? ’
He whispered, ‘ For God’s sake tell me, nurse. Tell
me the truth, not a medical lie. Was that true what the
M.O. said about—about me being all right ?4
She patted his hand, she was cool and collected. ‘ Of
course it was. I know—I helped to dress you. You’ve
nothing to fear.’
“ But I think I looked still my terrified unbelief, and
suddenly she did the thing that made her strange and
beautiful to me, bent close above me, her eyes warm and
kind.
“ ‘ True as I’m a woman what I say.’ ”
§5
But later that night he awoke and remembered and
laughed and laughed till he wept, and the patient next cot
2o6 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
was alarmed, and called the night-nurse. And Gershom
buried his head in the pillow and wept with laughter over
that fear that had been his—fear he might never be able to
father his kind in the world that waited to murder them
§6
It was the convalescents’ dance, and the last of the
dances, and the night so warm he remembered Mexico.
Tired and yet eager to dance, he had danced five times
already, he was searching the place for Nurse Simpson.
He found her at last at the foot of the gardens, she was
seated there by the side of the guardsman who would
neither walk again nor see, his chair a strange, black chariot
in the flow of light from the room where they danced. It
was September, hot as the Scotch nights are in that month,
the trees about Mill Hill stood tall and black, their foliage
still bright green. Coming down to Nurse Simpson,
Gershom heard unendingly about him the whispering of
those trees, whispering in a wind too high to cool the levels
by the grass. He called out ‘ Nurse ! ’
‘ Hello. Oh, it’s you, is it, Corporal ? ’
‘ This dance was promised me, Nurse.’
‘ So it was. Just a minute.’ She bent over the shapeless
bundle in the chair and murmured to it, soothingly, then
rose to her feet. ‘ Dance ? Goodness, it’s almost^too hot
to sit. But then you don’t feel it much, do you ? ’
‘ I’ve known it warmer. But it’s almost Mexican to¬
night.’
She sighed. ‘ Mexico ! My, I wish I could see it some¬
time. You’ll take me there after the War, won’t you,
Corporal ? ’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 207
‘ Anywhere you like.’
‘ That’s fine. Well, what about this dance ? ’
There were two deck-chairs under a tree. He pointed
to them. ‘ Let’s sit it out instead.’
‘ Well—Matron will have a fit if she sees me. Still ’
‘ A fit would do her good.’
Lots of good. Two fits, in fact. And what are we
going to do now ? Gossip ? ’
‘ I thought of making love to you instead.’
‘ I shouldn’t mind—but for the Regulations. “ Para¬
graph XXX: Corporal patients shall not—yes, kiss
V.A.D.’s.” ’ She considered that, somewhat hampered,
and breathing a little more quickly. ‘ Well, since it’s under
compulsion, just once.’
They sat in content and quiet after that, holding hands,
listening to the music of the new dance in progress, down
and beyond the hospital grounds a tramcar sprayed the
quiet of the air with a frost-flight of sparks, the lights and
the lighted clock-towers of Aberdeen were a shimmer down
to the left. Nurse Simpson stirred.
‘ You’ll be going soon, Corporal ? ’
‘ Day after to-morrow, the M.O. said.’
‘ Passed A 1 are you ? ’
‘ I think so.’
‘ I wish you weren’t. And that’s not patriotic, is it ?
But sometimes I’m not so patriotic.’ She sighed. ‘ Especi¬
ally when I see boys brought in the mess that you were
that morning. Keep away from wire in the future.’
‘ Anyhow, it led me to knowing you.’
‘ I think I should blush here, Corporal. Just a minute.
. . . It really is too hot.’
‘ I meant it.’
208 image and superscription
She said nothing then for a little, and then spoke ve^y
quietly, without her usual banter. # ,
‘ Yes, I s’pose you did. But there’s nothing more tha
that, is there ? Just a boy grateful for a nurse who s helped
him, and finds her in the dark almost human, a woman
he can cuddle ’
‘ That’s not true.’ . . 2,
‘I thought I was cuddlable. . . - Well, what is .
‘ That you saved my sanity here in this hospital. wa
sick—sick long before I was caught on the wire—sick wi
the world, myself, and humanity. I saw it a collection of
beasts and I thought I must sink to the beast myself, or
else go mad. Now I know I needn’t do either I can stand
aside and not care-except stand aside and keep a look¬
out for the few others left who are neither moron nor
mad. Sane, like Nurse Simpson.’ .
‘Me? Oh, I’m nothing special, you know. A
men aren’t beasts—or woman either. Just muddled an
m“Tdon’t take that. But once or twice there have been
exceptions. Pitiful little dreams that mankind has dreamt
in the lair of the beast. Christ and Bruno and Shelley and
Nurse Simpson—freaks and sports of the species.
‘ Goodness, now I’m a freak.
‘ You’re a dear.’
‘ You mustn’t.’
‘ Why ? You’d like me to.’ ,
‘ Yes That’s the worst of it. But I really can t
her voice was troubled. ‘ My dear boy, I like you too much
for you ^o be a patient of mine. I’m glad you’re going.
^rw her dabbing at her eyes. And then she stopped
U
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
20 g
from that because he was kissing her, her skin was soft
and cool, yet kind, like her soul. He kissed reassurance
and sanity on that cheek, a kissing that strayed to the waiting
surrender of her mouth.
‘ We mustn’t. Not here. Let’s be cool and think.’
“ So we were cool, and thought, and she laughed ; but a
little wistfully.
“ ‘ Look, you can come and stay with me to-morrow
night. I’ve a cottage out by Bridge of Dunn. You can
get out on a pass—if you like—and chance getting back in
the morning. And that’ll be that, and you’ll feel better.’
“ ‘ And ’
Eh ?’
“ ‘ So will you.’
“ She sighed, and then suddenly kissed me again. ‘ So
will I.’ ”
§7
Early in the Spring of 1917 he was loaned to the French
Foreign Legion as interpreter and went to Sidi-bel-Abbes
to spend two months of boredom in unfamiliar uniform
and foul-smelling bazaars. The men he found mostly
Alsatians in his company, loyal enough to Germany, but
escapees from Germany’s peace-time conscription, according
to that peculiar code of lunatic freedom that appeared
to obsess Alsatians. Now, freemen, they were brutally
trained to fight an unfree brutality.
October of that year took them over to Marseilles,
through the fears of a Mediterranean haunted by U-boats,
English destroyers convoyed them across, Marseilles was a
city of shabby crowding and shady rumours. The further
up country they went, so those rumours grew, out of the
o
2io IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
East blew a breath of something strange and new in that
world on the verge of destruction. “ It came like a thing
blowing up like the pipes of Spring, the rumour of it blew
all over the earth, even up to the front lines it blew, where
the long, grey armies lay in the mud and rains of that
stagnant autumn. In Russia Revolution had come, the
officers done down, the fighting finished, peace, rest, and
ease from the fear of death had come there for all men.
In Russia : Why not in France ?
But Gershom never reached the French regions of
tentative revolt. He heard of the mutiny of the Russian
Brigade, wearied and desperate they refused their officers
commands, the French army brought up its artillery and
shelled them into submission. Then revolt among Scots,
Australians, days when the little towns of Northern trance
travailled in the birth of stillborn sovyets. “ And presently
the rumours died down, apathy came and indilference
again, one hoped that many military policemen had been
shot; and turned to other things; I to the stories
Ekman, my sergeant, had to tell of the district where we
lodged.”
It was the Champagne district. Here the fighting had
ebbed and flowed on the near horizons, yet never too near,
and underfoot, in miles on miles of long hidden tunnellmgs,
were the cellars of the Champagne companies. Ekman it
was who told of these, a Swede from Hernosand, once he
had worked in them, he swore there were men sealed down
in those catacombs, food for two years went with them,
and every fortnight they passed by a given place in the
tunnel, turning the bins on the racks. All entrances were
sealed up and hidden, but one he knew near at hand, an
entrance from the back oi a farm-house.
211
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
So one night he and Gershom and two others, two
Alsatians, broke in the doors of that deserted house and
found their way down to the cellars. Great hungry rats
they found there, watching with a green, macabre flicker in
light-caught eyes while the four men worked ; and the
work proved arduous enough. They found at the cellar’s
far end the wooden door Ekman had told of; and that they
broke down with ease. But ten feet beyond it the passage
was blocked, sealed up with concrete, they left two bombs
with a time-fuse and ran. Presently the farm rocked, a cup
fell from the dusty dresser in the kitchen and smashed near
Gershom, and a rush of bad air and worse rats came pouring
up from the cellar.
So they waited a while before they went down, Ekman
said it would take half an hour yet to clear, and they searched
through the house for loot. In an upstairs room Ekman
came on a woman’s photograph hid in a rotting chest—
a tall woman, red-haired or yellow, the photograph was
crudely tinted. But spite of the tintings she was hand¬
some, she lived, Ekman said ‘ God ! to sleep with a tart
like that ! ’ Then Gershom looked, and flung the thing
back in the chest, and sat down on that chest and looked
sick.
Ekman stood staring. ‘ What’s wrong ? ’
‘ Nothing,’ said Gershom, and was presently better.
Together they went down to the champagne cellar. The
air had cleared, the sealing of concrete had gone, beyond,
half-wrecked, was another wooden door. They pulled
that down and they stood and listened.
Below, it seemed deep, a sheer drop from their feet,
was the tunnel in darkness. And that darkness was un¬
quiet, visually and orally. Far off was a flicker of light
2i2 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
and there neared them the sound of slow footsteps. Ekman
swore and extinguished his torch.
‘ It is one of the watchers on his rounds ; or he’s heard
the explosion.’
‘ Not him,’ said Gershom. ‘ He’d run.’
‘ Lie down ! ’
So they did and the man came pacing below them, and
paused, and they held their breaths. But he did not look
up, he did no more than adjust the flame in his lantern and
then went on ; and presently they heard a swinging and a
creaking of turning frameworks, Ekman whispered the
watchman had turned a framework of bottles almost under
their feet.
The two Alsatians and Ekman climbed down while
Gershom stayed on guard in the cellar. When they came
up each brought with him three bottles, scientifically
pilfered by Ekman from the racks. Then they closed up
the wooden doors with much care, and retreated into the
farm-house again, and drank far into the night and far into
the morning.
And while the others lay drunken and asleep that morning
Gershom crept up the stairs to that dusty room and stared
again at the photograph Ekman had found. . . .
§8
Nor, a curious interlude in his saga, did the matter end
there.
For, a week afterwards, he marched a party over to a
wood three miles from the hutments to bury some dead of
whom the peasants complained ; their complaint was not
conduct, but odour. The place was a wood of poplars,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 213
slim and serene, grave in their grace against the smoky
colourings of the autumn sky. And presently, following a
path, they came to the place where the dead men lay.
They had been dead for long, they sprawled, more
vegetal than animal in the passing of the years, half-hidden
in the undergrowth, some twenty in all. A French and a
German party had met here and mutually exterminated
one the other, and now Gershom set his men to collecting
and burying the bodies. The men swore and jested and
were sometimes sick. Then one of them called out to
Gershom and he went and looked at those mouldering rags
on two mouldering cadavers.
“ Amd how they came to be there that day I do not
know unto this, those two Argyll and Sutherland High¬
landers, in kilts they had been, not the tartan apron of later
times, they lay athwart and upon each other, as though
one had flung forward his body as a shield for the other, I
thought. But perhaps that was no more than fancy, the
attitude accidental, I went through their pockets and found
there nothing, robbers had been there before me, even the
metal identity tags were gone. Somewhere in Argyll or
Glasgow there were still perhaps folk who believed that
behind those notices of Missing these two lived unknown
in some German prison, these two who had escaped even
the prison of flesh. So we buried them, and the wet night
came crawling down over the scene, and I fell-in the men
and we marched back through the ruins of the village—
Le Fere, I think it was, but of that Fm uncertain.
“ And it was then we came on the woman chased by the
negro. She emerged of a sudden from the ruins of a house
directly in front of our line of march, she was naked, she
ran and screamed, a white woman with red-yellow hair ;
214 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
and behind her, naked equally, sinewy and black, ran the
negro. They ran, they were real, yet strangely unreal, the
negro silent, the woman’s screams the staccato screams of
a marionette startled. And as she ran the woman looked
over her shoulder, and I knew her instantly before she
vanished, for in that gathering dark we could not follow,
we never knew what happened at the end of that chase.
“ But it had been the woman of the champagne farm¬
house. And it had been my mother.”
§9
Even after the lifting of the frost-mist that February
morning the frost held fast, rimed and webbed, like a
spraying of fine steel wires across the churned chaos of
the roads. The morning was a symphony in winter. Through
it and about it rose staccato the thuddings of that barrage
that all the past week had crept nearer and nearer. Now,
the reverberations of the guns were curiously sharp-limned,
like the pinging of hail on a frozen roof, all the air clear and
bright, each sound smote your ears with a needle-point
sharpness. Gershom sat in the ration-hut he controlled,
and yawned, and stared out at the morning. Next
room the clerks were busied at their ledgers ; beyond,
bells tinkled unceasing in the telephone-exchange.
Up and down the road a few yards away, churning the
hard earth into chocolate, wound the transport, camions
loaded with infantry, ambulances wheeling and bucking in
the mud, occasionally a limber, trailing east with staccato
jerkings on its caterpillar wheels. Here the front was doomed
as everyone knew, the week before the Algerians had
revolted and come swarming down that road, looting, and
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
215
murderous, they’d attempted to burn the store and exchange
and might well have succeeded but that Gershom succeeded
in finding and turning a machine-gun upon them. He
remembered this morning, with a yawn of distaste, the
surprised dismay on a face that had ceased to be a face at
the first whirring crackle of the gun, the front ranks had
crumpled with spouting bodies, the remainder had broken
and ran. . . . And the line was failing, the end very near.
About noon the snow came on and Gershom returned
to the window to watch that unending up and down flow
of the traffic. It had thinned a little, the snow had thickened,
and it was as he stood and looked out that the American
Red Cross ambulance going up to the line came into view,
its driver an evident novice. He had switched to the right,
seeking surer ground than the churned-up quagmires of
the roadway proper ; and in the doing so was driving
unaware the snow-covered shell-holes that pitted the fields
outside the road’s radius. Gershom lighted a cigarette and
smoked and watched, and watching, saw the catastrophe.
The front wheels of the ambulance abruptly vanished, a
spout of black water and thin ice-cakes rose geysering in
the air, the ambulance stood solemnly up on its head, its
rear wheels spinning ; the driver was certainly drowned.
And then Gershom saw that as certainly the driver was
not. He scrambled out of the seat and the pit, mud-
plastered, limping, and gained his feet and turned and
stared, first at the wreck of the ambulance and then at the
passing camions. But none of them halted, none of them
heeded, the soldiers sat fast therein with their heads drooped
forward against the wind, you could see them like dummies
inside the camions through the whirl of the snow. It was
no concern of theirs that an ambulance had overturned or
2i6 image and superscription
its driver almost died. They went east to their own sure
certainties.
Nor did Gershom think it a concern of his, he watched
the scene, smoking, and then crossed to the brazier and
warmed his hands. And it was as he warmed his hands
that Ester April Caldon came knocking at the door.
Or rather, it was a kicking, not a knocking. He went to
the hut-door and opened it and there she stood, dripping
and desperate, furious as well.
‘ Why didn’t some of you come out to help ? You must
have seen the accident, damn you, damn all you French ’
in her anger and excitement she mislaid the French and
used English instead, beating against the door-jamb with a
muddy hand. Gershom opened the door wider.
‘ Come in, Ester. Change from Palenque, isn’t it ? ’
§ io
She stared, she put up her hand to her forehead and
wiped aside her hair escaping her cap. Her face was pale,
paler than ever he remembered it, altered too, the lips
painted, the cheek-pallor leprous. And she did not know
him, she said, puzzled, ‘ Palenque ? ’ And thought, staring
at him now from head to foot.
And then : ‘ Oh, but it can’t be ! Gerry ! ’
He had her hand in his own, unhurried. ‘ Yes, you’re
damned. So am I. But it is. Come in. What the devil
are you doing in France ? ’
‘ My bit, mister—wrecking autos ’n’ sich.’ She sniffed :
her hand was frozen. She stood soggily in the midst of the
hut-floor, water rivuleted from her. ‘ Ugh ! ’ she said,
and shivered like a cat from a pool.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 217
It was no time for recognitions and remembrances.
‘ Stay here.’
He went through to the clerks’ room and through beyond
that to the store, and found a wearable uniform there, a
poilu’s, and with it a shirt. Then he came back and found
Ester April crouching over the brazier, it was spitting and
smoking with the water that fell from her on it.
‘ Get up and get out of those clothes. Don’t heed the
brazier. Hurry up.’
‘ But I can’t. I’ll have to get back and report.’
‘ I’ll try and do that through the telephone exchange.
It’s next door to here. Here, sit down.’
So in a minute she was undressing, he loaned a hand
to pull off the mud-caked puttees and boots ; and then at
the more intimate moments went and looked out of the
window, and heard Ester stamp, still more like a cat, as
she crept from the wetness of her nearer attire. It was
snowing still, indeed, it had thickened, he could see nothing
of the hole and the half-drowned ambulance, the sky
seemed to have caved in on itself. Once a great flame and
a flump arose, a dose of H.E. dropped near to the store by
some optimistic Bavarian.
Ester called to him.
‘ Well, I’m respectable now. ’N’ you’re a dear.’
He said, not turning, ‘ All right. Wait till I get you
some coffee.’
He went and told a clerk to make that, and came back,
and the poilu by the window turned to him, twisting up
her hair on her head. They looked at each other a very
long moment, “ I’ve told of such changes as I noted in her,
and now there are others to tell, though hardly in that
moment I was aware of them all. Eyes and mouth were
2l8
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
the things most changed, I think, the eyes with that grey
glass quite lost now, warm, lax, and unaustere eyes, the
mouth with a droop at one corner, an upward tilt at the
other. And she smiled at me, the smile of a woman who
had smiled on many, the smile of a woman who had long
forgotten that other woman hanging murdered against the
dawn on the bluegrass.”
‘ Still Gerry—even in a Frenchy uniform. ’N’ however
did you get in it, or wangle this soft job here ? ’
‘ That’s a long story. How did you get to France ? ’
She sat down by the brazier, her shoulders curved
forward, in the absurd red trousers, even, that fine line of
old was unguised. ‘ By boat. Haven’t you heard ? We’ve
come over from America to win the War.’
‘ Good luck.’
‘ Well, I’d been training before—in spite of father. He’s
turned pacifist, very sensibly, ’n’ thought that I shouldn’t.
... So I came with the first contingent ’n’ was loaned out
a month ago to a French hospital back at Le Fere. This
morning Lower Base rang up for an extra, I volunteered ’n’
took up the ambulance. ’N’ here I am—and there is the
ambulance. . . . Glad to see me ? ’
‘ Ave post secula. ... If it’s you.’
A slow wave of crimson came over her face. But she
laughed. ‘ Not certain ? What’s wrong with me then ? ’
And thought for a little. Suddenly : ‘ Of course, poor
romantic Gerry ! But not such a bad psychologist either, I
suppose. You’ve remembered me still as that girl who
told you the story of the woman in the bluegrass clump ’
He said ‘ I’ve remembered you as Ester April. I didn’t
realize she’d evolve into smart Miss Caldon of the American
Red Cross, having such a lark out at the front. So sorry.’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
219
‘ Oh yes ? Well, if it’s consoling, I’m also appalled.
I’ve remembered you as that boy in Mexico, a poet ’n’
kind ’n’ lovely you were then. I didn’t know you’d evolve
into a smart under-officer with beastly eyes ’n’ a frozen
face. ... As though something was dead in your head.
So sorry ! ’
They were looking at each other in a flare of enmity
when a clerk from the store brought in the coffee. He caught
sight of Ester, exclaimed, ‘ Sacre cochon ! ’ and coloured ;
grinned. Ester smiled back, a smile that made the middle-
aged clerk preen himself absurdly, as a quetzal preens.
Gershom stared his cold disgust and the man wilted a little
in that stare, and went out of the room and closed the door.
Ester’s voice :
‘ He’s brought in two cups. Aren’t you going to drink ? ’
They drank, not looking at each other now. Again the
hut shook as again a shell landed over to the north. They
were finding the range. . . . And then Gershom’s cup
rattled on the brazier as he set it down.
Ester April was humming, humming a tune he had
heard before, and still, not looking at him, she slipped her
hand into his :
* Oh—nobody knows the trouble I’ve known,
Nobody knows my sorrow,
Nobody knows the trouble I’ve known :
Glory hallelujah ! ’
§ ”
“ I think we built after that, calmly, deliberately, our
plans for possession of each other. We were not in love,
if love were anything apart from desire, from resolve like
220
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
a bright keen blade, that somehow, out of the wreckage of
the months that thundered their guns about us, we’d salvage
to hours of our own, in security and delight, that vanished
spring that had once been ours. ... So we planned it and
so we secured it; suddenly the War fell away from my
consciousness almost entirely, I was aware as one half-
heeding a distant rumour that the front had straightened
and that it still held, no catastrophic spate was anticipated
in this sector, and I set about granting leave to myself.”
It was a complicated matter, he being on loan. But
the complications gave to it ultimate simplicity. A fortnight
from that day when Ester had overturned her ambulance
in front of his hut, he was down on the way to Paris for
a full week’s leave—a special leave granted for ‘ family
reasons—urgent.’
St. Lazaire came greyly out of the evening, he found
himself a little hotel near the Mich’, and spent that evening
in bed with a bottle of whisky and a book for company.
Meanwhile the hotel rushed his uniform to a dry cleaner,
had it cleaned, and rushed it back and draped it over chairs
in his bedroom ; and knocked at his door in the morning
and shook him awake as he had directed. It presented itself,
the hotel, in the person of a pretty girl with a pretty smile.
‘ Sunshine this morning, M. I’officier. And your uniform
—see ! ’
It was speckless and seemly, blue and gold-braided, the
hat also cleansed and stiff and upstanding. He admired
it from the pillows and sat erect to drink coffee and eat
miraculous brioches—miraculous in war-time—while the
pretty face watched him and the pretty hands displayed
unnecessarily the beauties of his uniform and tall boots with
their fasteners—‘ le zip.’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
221
‘ And the big bedroom will be ready by noon. Madame
comes at noon ? ’
‘ Yes,’ he told her, ‘ my wife will be here by noon.’
At eleven he himself was again at St. Lazaire, the train
he found late, but at last it was signalled. And to herald
its coming the sun came as well, a saffron flow over the
pale Paris roofs, he hung by the barrier till he caught sight
of Ester, and then waved to her, she saw him and waved
back. And then she was through the barrier and coming
to him, she was in civilians, the fur of her coat-collar
cradled her face, the painted lips and the gay grey eyes.
‘ Hello, been waiting me long ? ’
‘ I’ve waited you years.’
She laughed and flung her arms round his neck and
kissed him, and he kissed her in return. They held each
other and kissed, and pushed each other away and laughed,
“ and I think we hoped we would shock the onlookers.”
But they did no such thing. An entraining squad had seen
them, they cheered, they laughed, and a woman near at
hand dabbed at her eyes and looked at them kindly. Paris
liked them, thought them seemly and proper to kiss and to
love, the young sous-officier and the girl so chic, his wife it
might be, better his mistress. So he explained to Ester
when they ceased from kissing, and she raised mocking
brows in reply.
‘ ’N’ I’m neither.’
‘ I’ll remedy that before another morning.’
She laughed and took his arm, still gay and herself.
‘ Will you ? ’N’ where are we to lunch ? ’
He’d arranged for that—out on the Boul’ Mich’ itself,
no quiet place, one gay-crammed with soldiers on leave
and the women they had with them. Gershom saw an
222
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
Australian he knew and waved to him, the Australian
waved back, too drunk by good fortune to attempt to do
more. And Ester sat down and took off her hat, her hair
flowed free and was dark in the shadow, she buried her face
in the flowers on the table, orchids that Gershom had
ordered ; and then leaned back and drooped her long
lashes over her eyes.
‘ ’N’ now keep it going. If the lunch is anything like the
flowers ’
And it was, generous tipping in advance had made
certain of that. It was served slowly, efficiently, they had
even caviare, in those years an impossible luxury ; the
chicken was a dream, the coffee was excellent, that drink
that no Frenchman can make. They went into the lounge
for the coffee and liqueur, and Ester in a large chair curled
herself up, and nodded to Gershom a mocking approval.
‘ Fine, Gerry. I’m too full of good things to think of
any to say. But you’re doing very well—for an amateur.’
‘ Amateur in what ? ’
‘ Seduction, of course.’
‘ Why presume my amateur status ? ’
‘ Intuition. Your eyes ’n’ your hands. . . . ’N’ what do
we do after lunch ? ’
‘ We go to a matinee of ’
‘ Yes ? ’
‘ Brieux’s Damaged Goods!
She widened her eyes a little at that. ‘ Now, that’s very
good ! Damned good, in fact. Perhaps not so amateurish
after all, Gerry.’ >
‘ No,’ he said. ‘ We’ve both had experience, haven’t
we ? ’ .
She blew smoke through her nostrils, lazdy. The
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
223
virgin’s confession is an overdone part. But I like your
hair, Gerry, ’n’ those cheek-bones of yours, they’ve a
fascinating jut; ’n’ that tunic of yours is fine on your
shoulders, I remember you had a good chest ’
‘ So I remember about you,’ he said. ‘ And your throat,
it is still as long, and has still that dimple to the left. There
was another dimple, on your right knee, I remember last
time I saw you in shorts. And perhaps still others ’
They had lost something of their coolness, both of
them, by then, they played the pose, an apertif, but their
eyes were bright.
‘ Perhaps. . . . Isn’t it time for that matinee ? ’
They laughed very much at Brieux, and so did the
audience, all of it which was not French and affected, which
was nearly the whole. After the second act the proceedings,
as the journalists would have said, grew riotous, and ended
with two Americans dancing upon the stage while their
compatriots and a dozen Australians pelted them with
indiscriminate litter, and yelled war-songs of doubtful
authenticity and lugubrious pessimism. Something of the
riot spread to even the staider sections of the audience at
last, and when Ester and Gershom got out they were
slightly less immaculate than when they got in, Ester pale
with excitement and delight.
‘ That was good, Gerry, damn good ! Did you see me
hit the fat actor with that bunched-up programme—the one
that was moaning over his ruined che-ild ? . . . Quite as
damnable in French as in English. ’N’ now ’
‘ Now we’ll have a drink. I’ll try for a taxi.’
He found one, with some effort, and they drove to
Montparnasse, Ester knew a place there and they sat and
drank absinthe, he had never tasted the thin, vicious stuff
224 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
until then. Ester pushed back the straying tendrils of her
hair and he stared at her ears, transparent and tinted, he
had read the poets on women’s ears, he remembered,
poets wrote on those things in English in the days when
they hardly dared write of women in possession of anatomy
at all from the neck-bones down.
Ester picked up an Anatole France he had bought, and
sniffed at it, he was out of date and of fashion, she said;
and told him an absurd story that he had not known, of
the doddering greybeard who tried to enlist as a poilu when
the War broke out. They laughed very loudly over that,
“ the laughter of people who fling mud in the face of a god
shown up for a crumbling image. Anatole France ! And I
thought of the pity and beauty in his pages, Les Dieux ont
Soif, the shy dreamer Sylvestre Bonnard, the trumpeter of
the Angels' Revolt. France a slimy, shivery patriot ! ”
‘ No worse than they are in America now. Oh Gerry,
you should see them—’n’ smell. All blah, blah, blah,
boom, boom, boom. Every half-wit ’n’ half-moron on top
’n’ rampant, ’n’ the people below like wasps round a honey-
pot. Buzzing little brutes. . . . ’N’ the honey’s blood,
’n’ they know it.’
‘ Let them. What’s it to do with us ? ’
‘ Nothing at all. But it’s interesting to see civilization
cutting its throat like this. Remember long ago at Palenque,
Gerry, those talks that father used to have with George
and with Mellison ? About the Old Empire of the Mayas,
the lost civilization of the forests, how it rose n climbed,
then fell to bits in a night, no one knew why ? But we can
guess why—now. The same thing’s happening all over
the world-soon be like Copan and Quirigua, all of it.
Our civilization’s falling to bits.’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 225
‘ Let it.’
‘ Yes, I know it’s a joke. Only, sometimes it’s as tragic
as though it was my own arm rotting from the armpit.
Men ! Oh, the fools that they’ve been throughout their
history ! ’
‘ Fools ? They’re merely beasts who are naturally
beastly, tigers and apes.’
‘ But are they ? ’ She leant forward. ‘ I think that’s
just a fool lie. We’ve been reared up on lies like that, you
’n’ I. Darwin began it, Haeckel—all those folk with Man
the raving primordial beast ’n’ his slow climb up to—t/n's !
This, Gerry ! No beast was ever so beastly. . . . ’N’ I’ve
always known it a lie. Men were decent, women decent,
until civilization got them. Even now. . . . Even the
worst you have met have had streaks of that primal decency
left. Think—have they not ? ’
He stared at her, fuddled, and he thought. . . . And
yes, maybe some of them had. Some ? . . . Queerly, like
light from a window tight-shuttered, there had fallen grace
and good-fellowship now and again from even the lips of
dead Sebright, from the actions of a multitude of those he
had loathed. Queerly, as he thought of it now, he remem¬
bered the women he had had—how little of the vile in that
girl in London, in that nurse. . . . What indeed if it was
no more than a lie, belief in Man’s innate foulness that
modern science proclaimed ?
He laughed.
‘ Rousseauism and a rotten romanticism. What else are
men but beasts ? All history, anthropology proves it.’
‘ Beasts, yes—but once kindly beasts. Remember the
Golden Age of the poets ? Supposing that wasn’t a lie,
but just the plain truth ? ’
p
226 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ If it was true I wouldn’t be sitting here half-drunk.
I’d—I’d be telling the world ! If it was true in the past, it
could be true again. 1/ ! ’
She had forgotten Montparnasse, War, her own weariness.
‘ But it’s more than just “ if ” ! Remember those researches
of father’s that proved civilization an accident, it rose of a
sudden and spread over the world from the Nile n it s
cities ? An accident that started the gods ’n’ the kings, the
wars ’n’ the cruelties—well, what before that ?
‘ Rape, lawlessness, murder, the savage in his slime.’
‘ Just rot. Listen : there are other people than father,
Englishmen like Elliot Smith ’n’ like Perry, researching
along the same line. ’N’ they’ve gone even further. There
are still primitives who survive, lost tribes here and there
in the wastes of the earth—Eskimo, pygmies, little folk like
that, like our own ancestors were once long ago. Without
jaw—the better without it; decent and jolly, hunters and
heroes, communistic ’n’ godless ’n’ kingless n free. N
all men were once as they are—Man's a hero, not a, beast by
nature V intention. . . . Read up the explorers n those
Englishmen I’ve mentioned. Father’s terribly excited
about them. . . . Did you know he’s gone back to Mexico,
father ? ’
‘No.’
‘ ’N’ you don’t much care ? Well, he has ’n he told me
in his last letter he met with George Shaw, they fell in with
each other, both with boats, out at Cozumel Island, he said.
George said he hadn’t heard from you for over a year, he
was worried about you. . . . Not very decent not to write
to him now ’n’ then.’
‘ I’ve stopped being decent. Decent ? What the hell
do you know about it, what does any woman know about
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 227
it—War, the things we’ve seen and done and endured ?
Women—hell, I’d be ashamed to wear a woman’s body !
Women—they’ve been the curse in this civilization that’s
tumbling down now—and a damn good job that it’s tumb-
ling. Down in the pit and back to barbarism, the whip
and the hoe and children for women—no Golden Age for
them, let’s hope. They’ve egged on men to half the bestiali¬
ties ever committed—committed to aid their conceit that
they’ve given their husbands, given their lovers, given their
sons For the Country ! God, can’t you hear the brave-
brave, mealy mouths that are moaning that at the moment
—in France, in England, America ? So brave—that they
gave their men to be hung on the barb wire alive, with
their guts out trailing in the mud—oh, brave ! ’
‘ All true, if muddled. You’ve had too much absinthe.’
‘ Drunk, eh ? Why, I’m a Brave Man and my Brave
Woman is about to go to bed with me. That’s all.’
‘ Poor Gerry.’
“ It struck me like a blow, that compassion in her eyes.
I caught sight of my face then in a long mirror, saw myself
unaccustomedly, flushed of face above the high-collared
tunic, surely the face of some one who was other than I.
And suddenly, staring at myself, I grew shadowed, face,
shoulders grew black in a silhouette shadow. So, for a
minute, I saw myself the Image—that Image inexplicable
that haunted my life.”
And then he was wiping his face and Ester on her feet.
‘ Quite a good band. Let’s dance.’
When they left the place the rain had come on, a fine
drizzle in the evening dullness. And it was then, as Gershom
stood swaying uncertainly, and Ester April was buttoning
the fur at her throat, that the maroons went. They sounded
228 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
quite close, a dreadful bellow as a sick calf bellows, and
Ester caught Gershom’s arm.
‘ That was an explosion next street. Look—I say !—
the airplane with crosses on its wings ! ’
He said ‘ Air-raid,’ thickly, and they blundered back into
the restaurant entrance. But already it was crowded and a
seething jam. He caught Ester’s hand, she held firm, and
they ran. Two Frenchmen were running in front, the
hooters still screamed. They came to an abutment of
wall, scrambled round, and found themselves in a struggling
crowd. They jostled and called. Suddenly it was quite
dark and Ester’s hand wrenched from his 
Suddenly the air about Gershom expanded, it was visible,
and frothed and flamed. He fell and was picked up and fell
again and ran. The street seemed to cave in, he saw a
house topple above him, it paused till he passed, almost
he laughed, then he heard it crumble. In the dark he
blundered into another man running, they struggled with
each other, above them the sky broke flaming again ; and
he saw a doorway. There was a crowd in there, he added
himself to it, stood panting.
Under his arm the Anatole France was still clasped,
but something else was missing, he wiped sweat and dust
from his face, and was dazed. And then he remembered.
Ester.
§ 12
Declaves, the captain, decent, he’d been almost human.
. . . and now you saw his face, bending over him with
the sergeant who’d summoned you. A bullet had driven
through his nose, his face was splayed out like a pool of
black mud with a stone dropped in it, but he still was alive
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
229
in spite of that wild flutter of eyes that reminded you of
the fluttering wings of a strangled chicken. Gershom knelt
beside him.
‘ Mon capitaine.’
He mouthed and spoke, blood came welling from his
face, he whispered ‘. . . sous-oflicier. This is a bad ending
to our debates, not ? And I shall not know for certain of
your Golden Age after all—Sous-officier ! ’
‘ Mon capitaine ’
The little sergeant pulled at Gershom’s sleeve. ‘ He is
dead, that one.’ He was bearded, round-shouldered, the
sergeant. ‘ There is a nest of them on that ridge—the
captain looked out from the passe and—pif ! ’
It was close on the hour of stand-to, on the verge of the
coming of the morning, and one Brandenburger, keener
than his fellows, keen yet in the hours of aching retreat,
had sighted the white of Declaves’ face while the dark had
barely lifted. Now, with more caution peering himself
from the trench, Gershom levered himself up on an im¬
promptu foothold and saw the space between him and the
German sandbags littered with rubbish, like hell’s back-door,
no wire, French or German, no time for that now. But the
enemy position was better than the Legion’s, occupying
the old Brandenburg trench. Here the dug-outs now
faced the wrong way, and unnecessary casualties numerous
in consequence. November and retreat 
Gershom bowed his head, he was only in time, it rang
on his helmet, the force of it flung him back into the trench,
the little sergeant swore and caught him as he fell.
‘ Hit ? ’
‘ No. Near enough, though. Find Lieutenant Morceau
and call the stand-to.’
230 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
The little sergeant shrugged. ‘ The lieutenant is drunk—
or was so half an hour ago. He had brandy sent up last
night.’
‘ Well. Call stand-to without him. There may be
counter-attack this morning, misty enough for it here.’
But no counter-attack came while they stood and waited,
instead the morning cleared with great swiftness and was
very still but for the raving of a Lewis gun down to the
south, and then a series of legato wumpfs ! that told there
were still minnenwerfers in the enemy’s hands. In the
stand-easy Gershom went down to the dug-out he had
shared with Morceau and Declaves for the past three
nights. Morceau was drunk but asleep, a single candle
guttering in the bottle on the table. Gershom found his
cigarettes and went up from the dug-out. The little
sergeant, the senior, came and saluted.
‘ I will relieve you, sous-officier, for your coffee.’
‘ Thanks, I can have it here.’
So he did, the morning still quiet. A flying scud of
clouds went over the sun and passed. The poilus squatted
round their fires and made coffee, eating the stale ration
bread and staring, sullen and bearded, at the ground at
their feet. Their equipment and leather and rifles were
grimy, they did not bother with these things and the in¬
sanities of bright polishing as—Gershom remembered it,
far back, when he was young !—he had been forced to do
with the English in the long ago. ... A batman, a young
soldier, brought him a second cup, and he took it from the
boy and saw his slim shoulders. Ester had had shoulders
like that.
Ester.
He had spent three days searching in Paris for her ;
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 231
and perhaps she had spent them in searching for him.
She was not among the killed, he’d made sure of that; but
her leave was unauthorized, and he didn’t dare tackle the
American Red Cross. She hadn’t known the hotel where
he’d booked their room, he hadn’t known where she was
likely to go. And at the end of his three days’ leave he’d
left Paris, and found himself transferred to the front line at
last, and waited for a letter to come from Ester April; and
none came. Retreat came instead, the spring horrors of
those months, retreat and retreat; slow advance. And
Ester and her memory had ebbed from his mind, some¬
thing that was past, something that was finished. But
she’d given him more than perhaps she’d ever know,
something that yet he would test to the hilt if this War ever
ended and he should escape.
“ I remember that I sat and thought long of that, my \
coffee grown cold. Men lived by Faith, my father had
proclaimed, my father and his crazy Tower and belief.
And I, hating the belief and the Tower, all it stood for, yet
knew his kinship to myself at last. Jezreel I was as well as
Gershom. . . . Far more than ever I was Shaw ! ”
And he goes on to tell how in those wild months, chance-
born from a casual debate in a cafe, there had returned to
him his old eager questionings—and more. Sanity, and
something that was near to Faith. Fantastic is the reading *
of how, up and down the squalid roads of the spring-time
retreat, in this and that dug-out and hut and sodden shelter,
he immersed himself long stretches in the books he had
sent for, books and journals filled with the writings of
Perry, of Jackson, of Elliot Smith, this new school of students
and historians who proclaimed that men were once sane,
once kin and uncruel—who proclaimed these things and
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
232
backed them with proofs in battalions, proclaimed them,
seeming unaware they proclaimed the greatest tidings to
Mankind since the Buddha in Benares !
Man—once he was so. He might be yet again ! And
Gershom’s hate for his fellow-men had withered and
shrivelled while hate raged about him in the clamour of the
guns. All children bedevilled—his father, himself, Sebright,
Mellison, the brute farmers who tortured the negress that
night—Images of darkness whom Nature had planned for
Images of light, uninate their cruelty were the Cause
removed.
Civilization—that was War, Religion and Kings, Classes
and Envies. None of them necessary, none of them in¬
evitable, cancers on Mankind infecting him from the
sprouting spores of an accident not more than six thousand
years old !
And somehow, were that cancer to be cured ?—Some¬
how, another Road followed through the wastes to another
Lorillard. . . .
He awoke with someone shaking at his shoulder. The
little senior sergeant was gesticulating, weeping. Some one
else laughing on a high, cracked note. Not the sound of a
gun.
The little sergeant thrust on him a paper from the signal¬
lers’ booth.
‘ Armistice signed at eleven o’clock. Await orders. Vive
la victoire ! Vive la France ! ’
SECTION THE EIGHTH
SECTION THE EIGHTH
§ i
HE had not seen June come in England for so long that
he might not remember the last time. He leant from
the carriage window like a tourist to stare at the wonder of
Kent in its apple-blossom, white orchards littered as with
fleecy clouds and a trailing of clouds in the sky. And in
green and cobalt marched the woods, unending, on either
horizon, gulls came wheeling against the sky the last few
minutes, they were nearing the sea.
And at last there was Chatham, hill-guarded, gleaming,
the train wound downwards and wheeled and the harbour
was in sight, choked with its shipping and its smudges of
smoke. Far out lay an anchored flotilla of stark, bright
shapes, so many in number that the further off were blended
and lost in the bright June haze.
He asked a man who sat opposite what the ships were.
‘ Eh ? Them ? Destroyers.’
‘ But ’
‘Eh?’
‘ Oh, nothing. Many thanks.’
Destroyers. And they were signing the peace-terms
now in Versailles. . . .
He took his bag and went out through the station, and
got to the entrance and stood there undecided. Then a
cabman had his hand on the bag.
‘ Where to, sir ? ’
‘ I don’t know. Oh, drive to the “ Marine ”—if there’s
still a “ Marine ” ? ’
‘ God, yes. Been away a long time ? ’
‘ Ten years.’
‘ Oh. Over there, eh, sir ? ’
235
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
236
‘ Over there.’
‘ Same here. And blimey, for all you get when you
come back, I sometimes wish that I’d stayed. No offence,
sir.’
‘ None taken. But you’re better in the sun than under
the dirt—over there, now, aren’t you ? ’
‘ And my blasted wife nagging every night like a blasted
cat on a blasted ash-can ? And the kids squealing and the
prices going up and the wages coming down ? Sun ? To
hell with the sun ! . . . And now I suppose you’ll want
to get out ? ’
‘ At the “ Marine,” yes.’
So he drove to the “ Marine,” a new twist to his thoughts,
and hired a room there, and came down to lunch. There
were early strawberries on the menu, and he ordered fish
and those strawberries, and he drank a Burgundy, and
tried to read the flare of headlines in a news-sheet. But
presently he tired of that, he tired very readily of every¬
thing these days, and just sat and looked out from the
window on the froth and flow of pedestrians and traffic in
the hot, old streets, out to where the destroyers still squatted
in the sea, their sharp snouts bared in the sun.
He fell asleep then and slept till a waiter came wakening
him ; and went up to his room and continued the sleep
there, taking off his clothes and getting in the bed, not
waking till late in the evening. Waking, he did not remem¬
ber for a moment the place he was in, and then did so,
slowly, staring at the room and his clothes draped over a
chair—the civilian suit he had purchased in London.
Full memory came back as he stared at these things. Back.
He was back from it all. ...
He got up and dressed and went down and out into the
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 237
streets, and turned and climbed through the evening
throngs, so changed and different from his last time in
Chatham they might have been throngs from another
millennium. Never before had the changes so impinged on
his imagination, or were ever again so to do. Short skirts
and reliant looks had displaced the draggle and giggle of
the women of old, men had found shoulders, some even
chests, it was like looking on a community surviving from
a biting winter after the drowse and the smell and the ebb
of a flea-bitten autumn.
But had they survived ? Was the winter past ?
So he came at last, after ten years’ absence, to Magpie
Hill Road, and stood confused and could not remember
the house number. But after a little, number or no number,
he knew the house and stared at the door and saw a thing
depending from the letter-slit, a string, a white string with
a spooling of red through the texture, he stood staring and
staring at that. It was the string he himself had fixed there
ten years before !
But an old woman whom he did not know came to the
door when he knocked. For a moment he wondered if he’d
made a mistake, her rheumy eyes and the tight-drawn hair
above the still face had no clue at all to his memory of
‘ Ma.’ And then he knew her, he held out his hand and he
waited, and she peered at him, her hand on her stick.
‘ Now then, what is it, young man ? I’ve nothing to give
you, you’re the fourth ex-Serviceman come begging to-day.
And I draws the line at the fourth.’
‘ I’m sorry to hear that, Ma. I wanted a cup of tea—
with three lumps, though it is so bad for my juices. And
those rock-cakes—do you still make rock-cakes like those ? *
‘ Gerry ! Oh, lorngoblimey, Gerry Jezreel ! ’
238 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
They stopped from hugging each other at last, the wind
blew-to the door behind him. In a kind of sick wonder
he held that shrivelled and yet gnarled body in his arms.
Jane Anderson—this the Jane Anderson he’d known !
‘ Come in and show yourself, Bill’s in. Damn it, I’m
crying.’ She wiped her eyes with his handkerchief, helping
herself to the thing as it jutted from his sleeve. She sniffed
deeply, and then flung the door open. ‘ Bill! Here’s a
young chap to see you. Says he once knew you and you
owe him money.’
And she chuckled deeply and stumped inside, into the
parlour, and Gershom followed, and looked, and couldn’t
see anything a moment in that half-dark room. There was
a smell of lavender, blindingly powerful in the seep of sun
from a vase in the window. At the far end of the room he
saw something stir, and went forward, and looked.
And it was Bill Anderson.
He was seated in some kind of basket bathchair, and as
he raised his head it reminded Gershom of a Mexican
lizard, that slow raising up of the hairless head, it was
hairless as a Mexican dog, and shrivelled and red—the red
of one scalded intolerably, with no inch-space spared, his
eyes were hidden back of blue spectacles, you could guess
they were lashless and horrible, those eyes. But his voice
sounded almost as ever, he was turning and peering.
‘ Ay then, who’ll it be ? Some young chap, you
said ? ’
‘ ’Course he’s young—and impatient about that money,
like. Here you are ! ’
Gershom went forward and reached out and lifted Bill
Anderson’s right hand. The scalded face moved upwards
in that lizard-like glance, the hand was horny as a lizard’s
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 239
foot. And then the hand tightened, he said, very slowly,
‘ Ay, but who is’t ? ’
‘ It’s I—Gerry—Bill.’
‘ Gerry ? Oh, ay. Gerry ? And who’s he ? ’
Gershom heard something like a sniffle behind him.
‘ Who’s he ? Well, lorngoblimey, I’m danged ! That I
am. . . . Damned I’d be too, if I’d been born a bit later.
Don’t half swear, real and good, the girls nowadays, and
I’ll say it must be a real relief.’ This aside to Gershom.
Then : ‘ It’s Gerry Jezreel, Bill, don’t you mind him now ?
Oh Lord, them Scotchies are all danged slow ! ’
‘ Gerry Jezreel ? Oh, ay. But he was killed, you ken,
I didn’t like to tell you he was killed. He was killed when
the Osprey went down and the boilers burst up. I tried
to get at the bit lad but he hadn’t a dog’s chance down
there. Ay, I tried, tried as though our own Will he’d
been ’
‘ Lorngoblimey, you ain’t half a heathen ! Here’s Gerry,
and you won’t believe that it’s him. He got clear away
from the Osprey—didn’t you ? ’
‘ Right clear,’ said Gershom, hardly understanding at
all; and thought quickly. ‘ Jumped and I swam. Picked
up by a Danish boat and interned. And I’ve just got back.’
‘ Well, well, man, that’s fine, that’s fine. Make some
tea, Jane lass, and we’ll all hear the story o’t. . . . Ay,
Gerry, it’s fine to see you, lad, and to ken that you’re
well.’
‘ Give him a chance, then, dad. He’s all asweat with
trains and with muck. Here, come and give your hands a
wipe in the kitchen first. All right, dad, he’ll be through
with you less’n a minute.’
Gershom touched her arm when they’d come in the
240 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
kitchen. His hands were clean enough. She turned her
rheumy face, a finger at her lips.
‘ I’ll have to tell you—quick. Dad was in the Osprey
when it was mine-sweeping. Boilers burst up and Will
was there. Will never seen again. But he doesn’t know.
He went kind of crack. Always swore it was you that was
killed, thinks Will’s still alive and out on a voyage ’
And suddenly her face crinkled up, she wept dreadful,
slow tears, facing him, he took her in his arms again and
patted her shoulder and sought her his handkerchief. And
then in a moment she had pulled herself away from him.
‘ Lorngoblimey, I’m as bad ! It’s all over now and I’m
glad you’re back safe, Gerry boy. Go into him and play
up about the Osprey, do ; I’ll bring in the tea in a minute.
Only don’t give away all the real news till I come. He’s
crackers only on the Osprey and Will.’
So Gershom went through to the parlour again, and the
lizard-like head rose up at the sound of his coming.
‘ That you, Gerry lad ? Well, well, shut the door. You
mustn’t come home and sit down in a draught ! . . . Draw
up your chair nearby.’
‘ We’ve had worse than draughts, you and I, Bill. Cold
enough out in Denmark there since the Osprey sank ’
His hand came wavering out and found Gershom’s.
His voice was a whisper. ‘ You’re a fine lad. Aye was.
And you played up fine. Gerry, I ken fine that Will was
drowned in the Osprey, I aye kenned it, but I ve made out
that I didn’t, so’s Ma would think me half-daft and keep
her mind off it. She fair worshipped Will. . . . And it’s
worked, as I kenned that it would.’
‘ Then you know ? ’
‘ Aye, I’ve kenned all along. But this was the play that
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 241
I played for her, and it’s worked fine. I kenned if I didn’t
pretend, there would be no pretending with her.’ For a
moment the spectacled, ruined face sank in his hands.
‘ Mind Will ?—how bonny he was, his black hair, and
young and fine. Oh, laddie ’
He raised his head again after a minute. ‘ She mustn’t
see me at that. Tell me where you’ve been yourself then,
Gerry. Quick, before she comes and you’ve to spout off
the Danish stite and the Osprey business for me.’
So Gershom told him till he heard the shuffling outside,
and went and pulled open the door, and helped Ma in with
her laden tray.
Here you are, if you’d ever tea like this among your
Danes, you didn’t do bad for a prisoner in war. And how’s
your uncle, Mr. George ? . . . Lorngoblimey, sit down and
be^ quiet. I can still give a man his tea without help.’
‘ She’s aye got an awful gab, Gerry lad. Well, well, and
how is your uncle, then ? ’
‘ He died six months ago in Mexico.’
‘ Poor chap.’
‘ God be here ! Well, well, it wasn’t in the War ? ’
‘ Oh no. Fever at some ruins. I only heard of it a month
ago when—when I came to London from Denmark.’
He wondered if ever two people had tried to live a stranger
lie than these two. And the weariness at the back of his
mind stirred to wonder while he drank Ma’s tea of such
excellent brew and listened to her volley of questions.
‘ And what are you doing now, then, Gerry ? Coming
back to Chatham ? You can easily have the spare room till
Will comes home.’
‘ Fm leaving Southampton to-morrow. George Shaw
left me all that he had—not much, but it included half
242 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
shares in a farm out in Minnesota that s in the U.S., you
know. I’m going out to try my hand on a farm.’
They talked of that for a while, till Gershom saw Bill
nodding in his chair, Jane saw him also, she said nothing
till the nodding turned to a drowse.
‘ Help me wheel him through, will you, Gerry ? He
sleeps in that chair in the kitchen—the back lowers down
and the foot comes up, fair a treat the contraption, ain’t it ?
Good as a circus, I say. And he makes a fine clown. . . .
Gently, and I’ll hold the door open.
He wheeled the chair through, the window was opposite,
that window through which he’d so often climbed in after a
midnight adventure in the streets of Gillingham. Then he
stood back and watched Jane, quick enough and able in spite
of her rheumatism ; and presently Bill was asleep, a lizard-
man with a face that you knew you would meet with in your
own sleep that night. . . . Jane whispered to Gershom.
‘ Come back to the parlour. Let’s hear all you’ve done
and how you won the War.’
Children were playing outside as they talked, whooping
down the steep inclines of Magpie Hill Road where once
Gershom had visioned the rhinoceros astray in the jungles
of antique time. And Jane sat and told him, when he’d
finished with his telling, of that sinking of the Osprey and
how they’d brought Bill into Chatham Hospital, him and
his obsession he started to mumble the first time she sat by
his bed. .
‘ Funny that that came on him, wasn t it . And that
Will should be in his ship, almost the same job they were
on, and Will stood a better chance than his father did. I
looked out one of the other men who was there, he told
me he saw Will right at the last, there was a fire broke out,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
243
and Will was back of it and he waved his hand to that chap
and cried something about his father, his face was all lighted
in the flame, the chap said, and he couldn’t hear, but some¬
thing about Bill. And then the decks went up, they just
blew them all up, and that was the end of the Osprey, and
here was Bill, skinned and screaming, they’d to keep
pouring oil upon him, months they did that, till that queer
skin came. Him, Gerry, that’s been mine, that’s lain in my
bed and fathered John and Will, and more’n them if the
chance had been that way—and I—I was nearly sick every
time that I looked at him, weeks after he came home. Still
am when I touch him—sick !—I could sometimes scream.
Him that’s mine. . . . Funny that folk are.’
She stooped with groaning body to poke even the smoulder
of the coals, and straightened with a flush in her face.
And suddenly the humour and calmness dropped from her.
‘ And they didn’t ought allow things like that, wars and
killings like that, did they, Gerry ? Will—what harm had
he ever done anyone ? Or Bill—Bill that would give away
his own shirt to a beggar at the door—tormented and
screaming, boiled and broken till his own wife feels sick
to look at him. They didn’t ought ’
§2
They didn’t ought. No one had meant it, they said,
no one planned or foreseen the butcherings and torturings
of all the simple folk like these. No one : and over in
France even now they were planning and plotting, in a
blaze of uniforms, glory, and diplomacy, War and War
again, that murder again might be done 
“ I remember that I walked and walked up through the
244 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
Gillingham evening, for a time in a blind anger and fury,
pitiful, helpless, remembering Jane and that whisper of hers.
No one had meant it—the agony and travail through six
long millennia, or that culminating horror of those last four
years. No one had meant it, it was merely we were beasts
trapped and lost, prisoned in state and religion and patriot¬
ism, the kindly human beast a tormented brute, a brute
diseased, with a cancerous brain and the slime of six thousand
years a dripping mask on his face. Unmeant, unplanned -
and it still went on ’
He found himself at the head of the long hill then, it
was quiet there in the evening light, a sailor went past him,
whistling, two girls, they left a trail of cheap scent and a
memory of long, slim legs, and they looked at him from
kind and impertinent eyes, one laughed a little, he came
out of his thoughts and looked over his shoulder and smiled
in reply. And then he walked on, he took a little side street
and went right, and then left, not raising his eyes from the
level of the house-fronts. But at last he was come in a
narrow lane, and looked up, and in front, upthrust of a
sudden against the lowe of the evening, the quietude of the
sky, was Jezreel’s Tower.
Unchanged, immense and useless, it rose black against
the waning light and the quietness of the evening. He could
see on its fafade, up there to the right, the carved scroll
with the Flying Roll upon it, the centre-piece with the
feathers, and the crumbled Ich Dien, even he could see the
foundation-stone laid on behalf of that hundred and forty-
four thousand of Revelation who were to survive the
coming of the Christ. Unchanged and grim still, it stood
builded with the blood and sweat of the man whom he had
called father, with the hopes and the blind beliefs of all
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 245
those peasants and workers who given it their last shillings,
who’d forgone their lives, loves, and delight in the sun that
this Thing might be built. Useless and hideous, blotting
out the wonder of the sky to this day. . . .
And suddenly he saw it not only Jezreel’s Tower, it was
Civilization and its superstitions, its blind follies itself,
a dream dreamt by a beast captured and tormented in a
by-pass of Space and Time.
A little wind came wandering up the hill as he stood,
the trees about him quivered and rustled, a dog, a terrier,
came sniffing up to him, and cocked bright ears, and received
his pat, and whipped about and shot off on some errand of
its own. He looked up again at the mass of the Tower, it
had grown sharper and blacker against the deepening
azure and the oriflamme splendour of the sun’s still
setting. . . . This Thing—and how might he help its
overthrow ?
He was going out to Geijerstam’s farm in Minnesota to
think over that. Somehow he would help ; there was no¬
thing else left that he wanted to do. In one way at least
those Four Years were no waste ; they had taught him
what in other times he might not have known in forty.
Lust of women—weariness and boredom, satiety ; love of
power, achievement, pride in himself—he’d left them with
the rat-gnawed cadavers back in Le Fere. How shall it
profit a man though he gain his own soul and lose the whole
world ?
He smiled at that heretical text and its truth, and looked
up again at Jezreel’s Tower. And then he noticed, he
took other pictures from the memory of his childhood and
compared them, that he had imagined wrongly. For
changed it was. The upper stories had began to crumble,
246 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
he saw the ledges lower than once they had been, the whole
thing older, the bondings deep-weathered, and there to the
right a slow subsidence. Jezreel’s Tower that was to outlast
the Flood : the first wave of the Flood had come and
passed and already it was shaken !
§3
Great Dipper lies some seventy miles or so north-west
of Minneapolis, it lies where the geologic strata falter a
moment and are uncertain in all that rolling immensity of
plain, and there the land curves in a shallow cup, curves
momentarily and then swoops to the level again. It is as
though a great fire-column had once hung there, and
flickered and moved and mown at the earth in the days when
the great plains were making, in days when the Titans
were still at experiment. So the early folk who drove their
wagons that way, and fought the Crows, dispossessing those
children of the earth and the crude agricultural method
that had come from the Maya Empire long years before
perhaps those first pioneers had a poet with them, and he
saw the Great Dip and called the halting-place Great
Dipper, and linked it so with the stars.
But Gershom never could find the exact spot where that
poet must have halted his horse or his wagon, and seen
the wide, shallow depression, and said in his mind ‘ Great
Dipper.’ Certainly by no point on the present railroad did
that halting happen, Gershom had watched all that after¬
noon as they neared, and no great dip had dipped as it
should. When the train came clanging to a halt at Great
Dipper, he saw about him merely the corrugated roofing
and the weathered wood of the usual straggle of plains
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
247
frame houses. Then the coloured hierarch of the baggage-
wagon was smiling on him, richly.
‘ Great Dipper, boss. Here you are.’ And smiled with
a richer appreciation. ‘ Thank you, sir.’
His bags in the dust, a bale of goods lowered down
beside him, the train gone on, he looked round about and
found himself the cynosure of two pairs of eyes, regardant
below two hats that seemed couchant in exactly the same
angle, exactly the same shape. He went towards the hats
and the eyes, and the owners of the twin pairs nodded to
each other. One of them came dawdling forward.
‘ You for Geijerstam’s ?—Shaw’s the name, ain’t it ? ’
‘ Yes. Is it far from here ? ’
He was a tall, lank man. He might have come out of a
film of the hayseed comedy variety, but he bore a dis¬
coloured badge on his shirt, which hinted he was either
the local sheriff, or possibly a railroad official, or perhaps
the organizer of the local Elks. Gershom felt sure that the
man was an Elk ; sheer waste if he wasn’t, with a face like
one. ... He pushed his hat back, scratched carefully on
a spot so left exposed, dismissed the irritant, and ruminated
with caution.
‘ Guess five-six miles. Yes, quite a way. Britisher,
ain’t you ? ’
‘ More or less. Any place where I can hire a car ? ’
‘ Car ? ’ He was lost in survey of Gershom’s feet; and
Gershom recollected that they possibly owned different
vocabularies.
‘ Auto, I mean.’
‘ Well, maybe. But what d’you want an auto for ? Old
Geijerstam’s here with his buggy.’
‘ Is that Mr. Geijerstam ? ’
248 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ Sure is. Sprechen the Deutsch some ?5
‘ Eh ? ... A bit.’
‘ Then you’re all set up. He’s still a bit weak on American.
Boy was better, but he never came back. Well, say :
Mr. Geijerstam, here’s Mr. Shaw.’
They shook hands. Gershom said ‘ How are you ? ’
‘ Nicht sehr gut.’ He was bearded and dirty. He might
have been fifty or perhaps sixty years old, he regarded
Gershom with a cold, grey eye, he had large grey eyes and
a heavy face, with a nose that curved like the beak of a hawk.
He might have been six feet in height. And his eyes were
steady enough in spite of his mumble ‘ das Bergnugen sie
zu sehen. When you come nach Hause—now ? ’
‘ Yes, nothing to keep me in Great Dipper, Mr. Geijer¬
stam. I can see it later.’
‘ Mir ist Alles einerlei. Borckman : I will the cases now
take.’
‘ Okay, Geige.’
They proceeded to load themselves with the baggage,
Gershom did the same. They watched him expressionlessly,
Geijerstam indeed with a hint of impatience, and then bore
the bags through the railroad shed to the dust and the sun
beyond. There a fat horse, well-groomed, was hitched to a
staple, the buggy behind it already bristling with rough
parcels. To these Gershom added his bags, then himself,
the farmer climbed up, the horse shook its head. The
phlegmatic Borckman stood watching, chewing.
‘ ’Dersehen.’
‘ ’Dersehen, Geige. See you again, Mr. Shaw.’
‘ Oh yes.’
‘ Oh yes.’
He was in America at last, he realized with a grin. He
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
249
had never been in America before, spite his years in Mex’
and that trip through New York in the late months of
’fourteen. This was America, astounding and foreign, and
only to be learnt slowly and with care. But he meant to
learn it.
And, sitting beside the bearded German, he reflected
how much easier was the process now than ever it would
have been before. For he’d found a touchstone of reality he
believed could apply to every living human being he might
meet. So the brusque unwelcome of Great Dipper left him
neither sulking nor resentful. He’d find out that reason,
a reason there was, and deal with it, plain enough what to
do. He’d come here to live, not to feud like a freak. And—
this was his country.
It was alive and awave with its harvest. They drove
slow down a long, wide stretch of road, and presently
turned and were climbing the shoulder of the Dip to a spot
where a signpost reared up, unpainted. One wing said
‘ Geijerstam’s,’ the other ‘ Rainier.’ They took the track
with the Geijerstam pointer, the farmer stroked his whip
over the mare’s plump haunches, and the mare paid him no
heed at all, plodding steadily till they were on the level
again. Then she broke into a clumping trot.
Acre on acre of yellow, green-shot, lay around the track,
bright lucent the stalks, an enheartening jungle. Here and
there long patches had drooped in the rain, Gershom
thought that these patches would make hard harvesting.
He voiced that opinion to the bearded Adolf.
He said ‘ Ja ’ in reply, he could scarce have said less.
‘ You’ve been long in America, Mr. Geijerstam ? ’
‘ Seventeen year.’
He turned away his face, yet not so quickly but that
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
250
Gershom, looking, saw a thing unexpected, tears were
trickling down the coarse, bearded cheeks. For a moment
the newcomer sat in that shocked silence with which men
greet the tears of other men ; then curiously, in his fashion,
debated the matter for and against a voiced comment.
Then he looked away swiftly, shifting in his seat and reaching
out a sly hand to topple from their piling the erection of
parcels behind them. With an immense clatter that erection
fell off the wagon, Geijerstam swore barbarously and halted
the mare, he and Gershom climbed off to re-right the
damage. ... A counter-irritant effective enough.
The corn round about them seemed thick enough to
Gershom to have moved even Ruth to unalien gladness.
It was very still there, in the wave of the corn. And then
once again a curious thing happened, they were swinging
the last fallen package aboard, they slung the thing up on
the footboard between them, Geijerstam’s eyes came
suddenly to Gershom’s, he stood still, the big German,
staring at the newcomer, staring in his face, in his eyes, at
his hair. Then he muttered ‘ Sehr verbiinden,’ and climbed
back aboard the buggy.
‘ Either,’ Gershom thought as he too climbed up, ‘he
hates me like hell over some matter or another ; or he’s
drunk ; or ’
There seemed indeed to be a second ‘ or ’—the truth—
but it was outside immediate comprehension. Nor was
Gershom greatly worried by that puzzle, he rode curiously
light-hearted as the afternoon waned. The mare plodded
on through the harvest-waiting wheat and presently Great
Dipper vanished in its dip, the sun they faced into had the
look and appearance of the mouth of a cave through which
the light streamed, they trotted forward untiring into that
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
251
stream, Geijerstam with his hat pulled down on his eyes,
there emanated from him the strangest of smells—a smell
as of cattle and of the earth commingled. In an hour’s
driving he pointed with his whip across a stray straggle of
junipers.
‘ That is sie Hause.’
It looked to Gershom like many another he had seen
along the railroad track since they left Minneapolis—a
straying of sheds and of corrugated roofs, with crazy lines of
fencing and dyking commencing as definite thoughts once
in their builder’s mind, and then straggling to vagueness
and indistinct purpose as though the thought had wearied
and retired with a yawn. Smoke rose in the air in a still,
straight line, a pencilling blue against the sun’s setting,
corn-crakes sounded in a dip, water gleamed. As the mare
trudged up to the buildings the figure of a man, brown¬
haired, with a meditative straw in his mouth, unlimbered
from a fence and stood waiting their coming. Geijerstam
grunted.
‘ It is Betz, the hired man.’
‘ Have you only one ? ’
‘ I have the other dismissed.’
Gershom nodded : at a thought grinned down at his
hands. Was he to take the dismissed one’s place ?
‘ Hello, folks. Pleased to meet you, Mr. Shaw.’
‘ Same here, Mr. Betz.’
‘ Take round the wagon, Pa ? ’
‘ Ta. Mister Shaw, you with me come.’
‘ Right.’
Geijerstam lowered himself from the wagon, went round
to the rear, loaded in a single twist on his shoulder the
trunk that George Shaw had bought Gershom in Mexico,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
252
and went trudging away through the dust and litter. Ger-
shom took up the two remaining bags and turned, Betz’
eye was upon him, speculative, bright. The hired man
nodded.
‘ See you later.’
‘ Fine.’
Gershom followed through a courtyard, a chirawk of
chickens, and a multitudinous grouping of mud-begrimed
implements. Then a door of the house opened and Anna
Geijerstam stood looking at them.
A queer compassion, a queer pity came on him, he could
hardly say why. . . . Only the usual farm-woman, grey,
faded and stoutened as farm-women were, she had hair
drawn back from a heavy peasant face, a wide mouth,
indeterminate eyes. She stood awkwardly, still, and looked
at them as they came, looking over past Geijerstam at
Gershom as he came, hardly moving aside to let the farmer
pass. Geijerstam muttered inaudibly, a gabble that Gershom
took for introduction. He halted with the sun in his
eyes, scowling gently on that still, unfriendly, frightened
face.
‘ How are you, Mrs. Geijerstam ? ’
‘ You are tired with the journeying ? ’
‘ Oh no, and I like your country here.’
‘ It is good. I ’ she stood still. Suddenly she faltered.
Then, ‘ There is your room.’
She stood aside to let him pass by, but Gershom stood
waiting for her to move. So she realized in a little, with a
slow flush across her dull face, and went in in front of
him up the bare stairs to a room where Geijerstam already
had halted, lowering the trunk to the floor. He turned
about, the farmer, having finished with that, and Gershom,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
253
putting down the bags he had brought, glanced from one
to the other, husband and wife.
They seemed to be waiting. Waiting for what ?
‘ This looks fine,’ said Gershom, and chose his words
carefully. ‘ I hope I’m not putting anyone out of a room ? ’
‘ Nein. It was Helmut’s.’
‘ Helmut ? ’
Anna Geijerstam nodded, still with that stare. ‘ He our
son was. The English him murdered.’
So that was that. A son killed in the War—but how
killed by the English if his father and mother had been
seventeen years in America ? Gershom scowled at them his
questioning scowl.
‘ He was a soldier in the American army, your son ? ’
The woman gave a choking sound, turned away, the
farmer’s red face flushed redder still. He also turned and
went. They closed the door behind them and left Gershom
staring. Then he shrugged aside the matter, looked out of
the window and pulled aside the curtains of shabby cretonne,
and surveyed the sweep of the Geijerstam land.
It lay listening below him in its peace and immensity.
He grew at peace with himself as he looked, his first long
look on corn at evening as it cloaked the pastures of the
Middle West. It was as if you had lived your life in a cell,
and were suddenly told a great room, cathedral-like, was
your room and habitation in the times now come, you
stood like a man at the edge of Space. Gershom was after¬
wards to remember how that evening he shot a glance
upwards to make certain that still the sky was as before, not
lifted and levanted to impossible heights !
But the rim of the great bow stretched unbroken, un¬
altered, in his arc of vision. Then he lowered his eyes at
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
254
a sound below. The exiguous Betz was riding out the
mare to its pastures beyond the straggle of the fence, he
was swinging lop-sided on the mare’s broad haunch, hat
still at a tilt on his eyes, the straw in his mouth. Cattle
were lowing somewhere beyond though Geijerstam had only
the rudiments of milch stock, Gershom was to find.
And then he felt hungry and peered down undecidedly,
and decided against immediate descent of his body in the
wake of his eyes. First unpacking to be done.
He turned about from the window and surveyed the room.
It ran lengthwise the house, twelve feet by eight, the
narrow bed that had no doubt been Helmut’s was against
the far wall, away from the window, itself fast jammed.
In one corner was a chest of red-painted deal, topped by a
garish mirror much decorated with floral sprays and fading
pictures of unlikely children engaged in the herding of
improbable flocks in the lee of impossible mountains. A
table, round and claw-legged, a good table of another
culture, carted and dragged across the great spaces when
the pioneers came, it might be, choked up the room’s
centre. There were two chairs as well, neither seemed
apt to cry the busy to a slothful ease ; and that was the
room’s contents but for Gershom himself and the trunks
and the bags that Geijerstam had brought in his buggy from
the Great Dipper depot.
‘ We’ll first proceed to make it half-livable.’
But he paused and stood looking at the room’s only
picture, he’d not seen it till then, it hung opposite his eyes,
on the opposite wall, his shadow was upon it from the
window.
‘ That was Helmut.’
He went over the floor and looked up at the photograph.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
255
The young German gazed back his undying gaze. Gershom
shook his head.
‘ Not my doing, and you know it. But they don’t—•
down there. And why did they leave you up here, I wonder?’
He listened. ‘ But I don’t think they’ve left you for long.’
The toiling steps halted on the landing outside, the
knock that followed was commingled of timidity and pur¬
pose, Gershom called out ‘ Come in.’
It was, as he’d known it was, the farmer’s wife. She
looked away from him swiftly, at the window, not at that
which she’d come for ; and after a second, still scowling
abstractedly, he took down the photograph and held it out
to her. For her part she saw perhaps merely his brown¬
ness and slimness, his sad Englander foreignness, that
frown and quiet eyes, not the friendliness he felt. Her
hands shook as they took the photograph from him.
‘ Ich danke Ihnen.’
The door closed behind her.
He set to work re-arranging the room. First he dragged
the bed over so that it’s place was directly under the new-
opened window. It jammed and jarred and went out with
a creak, and showered him with dust in its opening, that
window, and he smiled at it thinking of those slow, dour
Bavarians who had brought from their uplands far across
the great plains their dread of the draughts and the colds of
night. The claw-belegged table went into the second
window-corner, the chest he dragged over against the far
wall. So things were bettered. Then he set to unpacking.
He was half-way through that when they called him to
supper, it was Geijerstam who called, in his English-
German, and Gershom answered in his German-English.
The kitchen was already dark as he came to it, Geijerstam
256 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
had his eyes and his hands in attention to the lighting of a
small oil-lamp. The flame speared upwards and was
crowned with a funnel, then the lamp hung up to a hook
in the ceiling.
‘ You will here sit down, Mister Shaw.’
‘ I’m hungry. Supper smells good,’ said Gershom.
He discovered then the hired man, Betz, in a corner,
regarding him over an over-chewed straw with a grin.
Now, abandoning the grin, Betz also removed the straw
from his mouth.
‘ Sure. Ain’t a many in Great Dip can beat Ma Geijer-
stam as a cooker. Eh, Pa ? ’
The farmer made no answer, already seated at table.
Gershom, at a gesture, had sat down opposite. Mrs.
Geijerstam served them the food, stew with lentils, hot
biscuits and butter, and excellent coffee. But first, the
woman still standing, Geijerstam bowed down his head
and broke into the drone of a long ‘ grace ’ in German.
Gershom politely lowered his head with the others, and
set to a cool dissection of the prayer, and after a moment
found the clue.
The Geijerstams were Lutherans.
But, with the ending of the prayer, he had raised his
eyes and met the gaze of the woman who stood so still. If
the thing in her eyes were not hate, it was something worse.
A curious, deep compassion came tugging at his heart.
She was afraid—she was afraid of him !
§4
He went strolling by the edge of the picket-fence, coming
off the bar where he’d sat to smoke ; probably the fence
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
257
engirdled a corral—or were such impedimenta known only
to the films and the Further West ? In the sky was Jupiter,
broad and embonpoint, a corpulent luminosity against the
slim sentinels of sidereal space. Far off the southern shield
of the arc reddened in a flying train of sparks.
The railroad.
Abruptly he became aware of companionship—com¬
panionship announced by a cigarette-glow. It was the
hired man, Betz, still in his hat and possibly in his straw.
Possibly he went to bed in both. ... He also was seated
on the fence.
‘ Well, been admiring your farm, Mr. Shaw ? ’
‘ My farm ? ’
The cigarette returned to the silhouette’s head, darkened
its glow, and brightened again. ‘ Guess so. ’
‘ ’Tisn’t mine. I’ve half-shares in it, that’s all.’
‘ Say, that’ll relieve Pa Geijerstam a lot.’
‘ Why should it ? ’
‘ Oh, nothing to do with me. Ain’t my look-see, now,
is it ? ’
‘ No, I don’t suppose that it is.’
‘No.’
There was an unambitious silence on the part of Betz.
Gershom scowled at him thoughtfully.
‘ Look here, you were going to tell me something—
something I’ve not heard about the farm. I put you off.
Well, I’m sorry.’
‘ ’S all right. Only the farm half-share don’t belong
to the Geijerstam herr any longer. He borrowed from
your profits three times last year, the banker in at Great
Dipper told me. When it comes to the clear up next
week you’ll find he’s so much in your debt that
R
258 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
Geijerstam’s’ll belong to you, entire. . . . Going to keep
me on ? ’
‘ He borrowed off my profits ? ’
Betz explained, languidly, between smoke-puffs. The
half-shares business had worked in the compass of such
complicated code as was beyond the understanding of
Gershom. But questioning, he gradually excavated the
fact that yearly, since George Shaw had taken over the
share, the nett profits were banked, Shaw’s share in a
separate account. Adolf Geijerstam had the option to
borrow from this account—to borrow up to twenty-five per
cent of the total, for farm emergencies. And Geijerstam
had borrowed, had borrowed three times, unwisely, and in
the last year made no profits at all, was now so heavily in debt
that Gershom could foreclose when he liked and take over the
farm. Every soul in Great Dipper now knew about that;
and all imagined that the reason which had brought out
Gershom on his trip to Great Dipper.
‘ And that is why Mr. and Mrs. Geijerstam seem upset ? ’
‘ Well, it ain’t likely they’d meet you with harp and
psaltery. . . . And of course, there was the killing of young
Helmut.’
‘ The son ? ’
‘ Yes. He went off to the War in nineteen fifteen, got
smuggled in a Norske boat somehow. Limeys boarded the
boat when it was a good ways across and found him and
two—three more of the square-heads, trying to get home to
help their Kayser. Limeys took them all prisoner. Young
Helmut tried to escape and was shot.’
‘ And they hold me responsible ? ’
‘ Aw, ’tisn’t that. They think you know the whole story
and are dead against them. And when Ma Geijerstam
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
259
went up to your room this evening and you handed her
Helmut’s photo from the wall—well, that just clinched
things. . . . Say, surely ain’t going in yet, are you ? ’
‘ I am.’
He found them sitting together at the table, the lamp
between them, in crouched attitudes of tiredness, Geijerstam
with a letter-block and ink-bottle in front of him. At the
sound of his footsteps they both looked up, Geijerstam
stared dully, then the woman looked away. And Gershom
suddenly was angry.
‘ Can I speak to you both for a moment ? ’
The woman raised her head, Gershom saw her lips
tighten. The farmer continued to stare, unwinking.
Gershom pulled forward a chair and sat down and faced
them.
‘ Betz has been speaking to me.’
They took no heed a long moment, then the farmer nodded.
‘ He’s told me all about this business of the half-shares,
and your borrowings from my account, Mr. Geijerstam.
And all the business about Helmut, Mrs. Geijerstam. And
that you think I’ve come to claim the farm on these accounts.
. . . Well, I haven’t. I never heard of either of the things
before, and now that I have they make no difference. Not a
damn bit. Is that plain ? You’re the farmer here, Mr.
Geijerstam, and I’mthe apprentice-partner. As for Helmut—’
And he wished he’d prepared more carefully the things
he might say now of Helmut; suddenly he was aware of
the aching misery he was stirring to life even while he
tried to console those twTo frightened souls. Suddenly he
found himself out of his chair, standing at the side of the
woman.
‘ It wasn’t my fault, Mrs. Geijerstam. Nor Helmut’s.
z(x> IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
It was just part of the madness that came on the world,
that is still on the world. But I at least have escaped the
madness. ... I never knew Helmut, but I wish I had ; I
think that he’d have been a friend of mine. Can’t you be
now ? ’
§5
And, quietly and evenly, after that first plunge into
the darkness and unease the War had left their lives, he
went into the Geijerstams’ friendship. “ I had never made
friends very easily, I had been too busied with myself, I
suppose, hating and approving and tormenting myself.
But now there came into my life a thing of a beauty once
perhaps common enough in that Golden Age that the
poets remembered long after the night of civilization s
savagery descended on earth. But I had never met it before,
this thing woven of quietness, content, comprehension,—I
suppose the thing that has kept mankind from a wholesale
suicidal despair. Never, except perhaps in the case of one
gone from my horizons, Ester April ”
And he turned from that memory swiftly, no ache at
his heart, to the friendship and kindliness met in the
Geijerstams. Their gratitude for imagined benefits at first
angered him and then touched him with a passion of
shame. They were too close to their time and their epoch,
as they tried to tell him in their own slow words, to find
it not strange for a man to claim the fruit of their woik in
the sun and rain—^because he had loaned them money for
that work ! And he told them they were too modern, that
was the trouble, it was he who was old-fashioned, he went
back to a fashion six thousand years old, when men were
still men and neither the victims nor the masters of usury.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 261
And that the great, slow farmer understood well enough,
with a nod of his head.
‘ Ja, the Golden Age it was—in sie Eden Garden. It is
allim sie Bible. So ? ’
‘ Not quite,’ and he’d be troubled about that, and amused
too that it should be a matter so complicated, explaining
the simplicities of the Golden Age’s proof. . . .
Cured though he’d thought himself, the memory of
the War came vivid at times, he’d those dreams of wild
horror that many had brought from the thunder and un¬
ending flare of the guns. There came one night when he
dreamt himself back on that ridge on the Somme, struggling
in the torture of the wire, round his throat, the spikes drove
deeper and deeper, and he struggled and he must not scream.
A scream would awaken the snipers. . . . And he opened
his eyes, he was lying in his bed, he had twisted a sheet round
his throat; and Anna Geijerstam was kneeling beside him,
an arm on his shoulders.
‘ Nein, nein, it is nothing, it is nothing. Do not fear,
it is nothing ! ’
He clung to her, glad and terrified a minute, and then
laughed and sat up and her arm dropped from him. She
had lighted a candle to guide her in running to quieten his
moaning.
‘ Often you it do but to-night to Adolf I say you die
unless you shall wakened be. Nicht was, Adolf ? ’
Gershom saw the farmer himself in the door, and the
tousled head of Betz over-topping his shoulder. His eyes
went from one to the other in slow memory.
‘ I was on the wire,’ he told them. ‘ The barbed wire
in France. Or was that just a dream as well—were we ever
mad enough to do that ? ’
262
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ It was that, nicht was ? ’
He looked down at his chest then, where Adolf pointed,
and saw it bared in his struggles, with the cicatrices across
that the wire had left. Real, but long past. Ended. Escape.
... He patted Ma Geijerstam’s hand.
‘ Go back to bed. Oh, I’ll be all right.’
So he was, and next morning was roused too early to
help in harvest to have any chance to supplement his
laggard thanks. “ But after that night I think I grew closer
still in Anna’s regard, she in mine. And the days of work
such as I’d never yet met, back-breaking, unending, went
on and I with them, till there came a time, the winter was
close, when I looked at myself in the gaudy mirror and
saw a face browned deep as in Mexican days, the pallor of
France quite gone, filled out, and I liked my eyes, I liked
myself altogether. I was finding—I had found—salvation.”
An old salvation he had found, he reflected, looking
out on the harvested slopes and the rain coming over those
slopes in a whirling wash. The land and its servitude,
that—and the books and researches of those people whose
writings still reached him, who were rousing up the sleeping
archaeological dovecots all over the world. Perry and
Massingham, Elliot Smith, their names lined his book¬
shelves, they were brandishing a torch in the deeps of history
and the must of museums, its light the only light Gershom
saw for to-day, and a light to illumine the defiles of the
future. Yet—how did he help ? Wherein was his part ?
Long weeks of vexed brooding he spent over that. Some¬
how, there was something he knew he could do : it waited
his doing and was set for his hand. Somehow, he’d caught
once the glimpse of a road, now he’d lost or mislaid its
direction awhile. . . ,
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 263
It came on him then how little he knew of himself,
his own life, the things seen and done. And this offered
a plan, and he set to with vigour, to write his own history,
explicit, unashamed, to retell minutely all the hours he
had lived. . . . Ma Geijerstam, astounded as the winter
wore on, saw the scrawled sheets pile deeper on the claw¬
legged table.
‘ It is a story you write—a love-story ? ’ she asked, one
evening when she brought him his supper.
Gershom fell companionably into her German. ‘ Well,
that and other things. Love and hate and despair, and
comedy and clowning. I’m seeking to find out myself, and
my future, Anna, in a story I’m writing of the past.’
Anna Geijerstam shook her head in dissent.
‘ Love-stories are best.’
§6
And once, very vividly, he met with the Image again,
and knew neither terror nor hate.
He was riding back from Great Dipper on the second¬
hand motor cycle he had bought—he and Betz had both
motor cycles. He’d gone in for Ma Geijerstam’s weekly
stores and he came on the figure of the farmer himself,
silhouetted on the bluff that topped the buildings. And
instantly : the old, miraculous change, though he struggled
for a moment against it, the world re-focussing in and about
him, the Image sky-towering and startling and dim, the air
vexed with the rumour of a voice.
He halted and looked : then he knew.
“ Geijerstam : Man—That was the Image. I remember
how clearly it flashed on me then, even while the vision
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
264
endured. And then, in a spurt of light from the sunset,
I saw that the cloaks and skins had fallen from It, It stood
naked and tall and with head thrown back to breathe in the
wind of the sunset, it was God, unchained and tremendous.
And then, while I looked, It turned Its head, and smiled on
me with a Face that I knew, with a Face I had known, or a
Face I would know. . . . Then It was gone, Geijerstam
only, bearded and shabby, hailing me as I came up the
hill.”
He supposed his own anthropomorphism was changing
the Image, terrible, obsessive, implanted in childhood,
form the likeness of Fear to the likeness of a Friend. That
or—how might one know ?—the Image was a dream and
yet more than a dream, now tearing from its body the veils,
the clotted rags, wherein men had bound and imprisoned
It. . . .
And still, he reflected, riding up the slope, the words of
that voice, superscription with image, escaped him. But:
some day he’d hear them, some day. And then he knew
that the Image would cease, he’d be full-grown at last,
with a vision completed and clear.
SECTION THE NINTH
SECTION THE NINTH
§ i
THE rain had cleared that morning, it was Sunday,
there was a wind as fresh as though newly ground,
like Ma Geijerstam’s coffee, thought Gershom. Coming
down to breakfast he found Adolf, black-clad, looking over
the rises to the swamp.
‘ Duck-shooting to-day ? ’
‘ Nein, nein, we to church go—himmel, no duck-shoot
im Sunday.’ He sighed. ‘ Nein, except for sie pagan.’
And grinned at Gershom with a slow good-nature. Once
Betz had been forbidden that sport on a Sunday, but it had
been forced upon Gershom.
‘ Stay and shoot duck instead. Your God won’t mind.’
But Anna Geijerstam had heard. ‘ That was just like
Helmut. He said God would not mind though he never
went to church.’
‘ And did he never go ? ’
‘ No, often. He came to please me and his father.’
‘ Would it please you if I came ? ’
‘ Ich verstehe nicht Alles.’
‘ Well, I’ll come. Right to-day. I will. Ich werde es mit
Bergnugen thun.’
‘ Ach Gershom, sie scherzen ? ’
But he had convinced her before they had finished with
breakfast that he didn’t joke, abruptly he’d lost interest in
duck-shooting. He’d understand the Geijerstams from all
angles, even their religion, if he could get at it. Betz the
hired man came with his grin to question Gershom as he
hitched up the buggy.
‘ Getting religious ? ’
‘ Heinie, push off and look for a straw.’
267
268
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘Eh?’
‘ A straw. You haven’t got one in your mouth and you
look half-naked in consequence. You’d be arrested for
indecent exposure by anyone who didn’t know you.’
The grin widened. ‘ Indecent exposure, huh ? Plenty of
that in Rainier’s.’
‘ Where ? ’
He waved vaguely, grinning, and Gershom shook his
head, uninterested, and turned and helped Anna Geijerstam
up, and Adolf beside her, and took the reins and drove
plashing off down the ruts, Anna crying to Betz to milk only
two of the cows—Berstehen sie ?
Adolf grunted to her to have silence : was it not the
Sabbath ? Anna chuckled. ‘ Now you will hear us quarrel,
as when we had a driver . . . long ago. Adolf has been
too busy driving each Sunday until this.’
Gershom called ‘ Go ahead,’ and drove on, and at eleven
they passed through Great Dipper and out to the further
side, two miles on the further side, to the little Lutheran
church builded there nearly fifty years before. There
was a sprawl of buggies, two or three Fords, a Teal
bug from remote antiquity parked in the laired space
without; and a slow throng of stolid Germanic folk on a
drift to the door of the church. Anna behind Gershom
breathed satisfaction. £ Now Gershom can meet the people.
He didn’t understand what she’d meant till the mare
was hitched and she’d taken his arm, Adolf with a slow grin
coming behind. And then she made plain her intentions,
from the first acquaintance who hailed her.
They exchanged news of the weather, cattle, and Frau
Liebe’s stomach, she’d a large, bland face and the sleepy
eyes of one addicted much to over-eating and the bearing
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 269
of children, Frau Liebe. Then Gershom was thrust to the
fore.
‘ And this is our guest, the Freiherr Shaw.’
So, with half a dozen others, Gershom protesting in a
whisper against the Freiherr, but unavailingly. It was a
conviction of Anna’s that he came of the English nobility,
a conviction stressed by his frequently being addressed on
envelopes by another name : the puzzling Jezreel. He
found the Lutheran farmers and their heavy wives as
unexpectedly interesting as he now was finding all people ;
but the service that ensued was a different matter. The
pastor was a mean-faced little man, he’d a narrow, lank
look and the steely eyes of the monomaniac, his rusty black
had the look of integument rather than clothing, his voice
rasped your skin like a file. . . . There were still, you
concluded, people in the world beyond either liking or com¬
prehension, and switched your thoughts off from the little
pastor as you stood in the splendid bass of the German
hymn-singing, a force and a beauty in the heavy, strong
voices that was strangely stirring.
Then came the discourse.
It was an airless little church. Presently, in spite of the
strident rap of the German that was almost Low German,
Gershom saw Adolf’s head begin to nod. In another
quarter of an hour he saw a score more, nodding with the
slow ubiquity of buoys on an incoming tide, the tide the
herr pastor’s voice. Anna sat and listened with a patient
interest, “ but my German was too faulty to do that without
effort, and presently I found my own eyes closing. But that
would not do at all, I decided, shaking myself and moving
with a scratch and rustle that brought Anna’s anxious eyes
upon me at once. Sleeping was a privilege of members
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
270
only. If I went in a doze here and had such a dream as I
once had at Geijerstam’s ! I remembered a story by
Joseph McCabe of a monk who was dismissed his Order for
snoring during the half-hour of morning silent prayer—he
disturbed the sleep of his superiors ! ”
So he shook himself awake and listened again to the
strange old ritual denunciations, the strange old terrors
that the pastor threatened, he wondered how many of the
farm-folk were affected. And it seemed to him with a
glance around they indeed were few. They accepted the
pastor and his weekly threatenings, this Sunday pilgrimage,
as a fixed and enduring thing indeed. But it left their
workaday lives untouched. He was listening to the fading
end, here as elsewhere, of religion’s long saga in human
affairs. Here, in the seep of wintry sunlight that the window
sprayed him, the pastor was preaching from a Gotterdam-
merung he did not suspect, from the shadows of Ragnarbk,
the Twilight of the Gods. Religion, its terrors, its hopes
and its hates were too remote from everyday life ever again
to affect it greatly. . . .
But I was wrong. Quite suddenly I was aware I was
wrong, of a stir of interest throughout the gathering. The
pastor had abandoned divine concerns for terrestrial. ‘ And
those who profane the country-side so close at hand,
shameless and naked, are mark of the time when the Scarlet
Woman herself is in the land. Unless the citizens of Great
Dipper stir to stamp on the foul head of this thing, it is
yours—and yours—and your daughter’s shame that will
next be told ’
‘‘ I think he found the gasp that greeted this prophecy
satisfying, he switched to other things and closed abruptly,
leaving the warning unclouded and effective. I myself was
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
271
puzzled. ‘ Gymnosophists ? ’ I had never heard of such
chaps.”
But he had full details the while he drove home with
the Geijerstams. Five miles south of Geijerstam itself
was a farm that a colony of artists had bought 
‘ Rainier ? ’ Gershom remembered that word. Strange
how he’d forgotten it all these years ! ‘ Wasn’t it once owned
by a man called Caldon ? ’
‘ Ja. But now he is dead, so they tell.’
‘ I once knew him,’ said Gershom, and rode a while,
brooding. ‘ And these artists ’
They left Rainier to a drunken Frenchman, the artists, to
care for throughout the winter months. But in spring and
summer they came down, a colony, and lived there, and
walked about naked.
‘ Sun-bathing,’ Gershom suggested, and lost interest.
But Adolf shook his head, combing his beard with his
fingers.
‘ Nein, nein.’ And went on in the German they both
found it more fruitful to talk. ‘ It is not sun-bathing, the
bathing with a costume. They walk naked, they sit at
meals unclad—men and women. They walk together in
weather without sun, and read books : they remain unclad,
they call themselves gymnosophists, as the pastor said.’
‘ And is this farm on the roadside ? ’
‘ A mile or so from it ? ’
‘ But how then can it give offence to any ? ’
Anna struck in here. ‘ But they walk about naked,
Gershom.’
Another taboo. . . . Gershom laughed and shook the
mare’s reins ; they went on. Gymnosophy sounded good
fun. Some time he’d look up the artists at Rainier. Perhaps
272 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
they had glimpsed, or were trying to glimpse, in their way,
the same road as himself. . . .
§2
Spring was crying its first song across the Middle West,
the days lengthened, grew burnished, and this Saturday
noon had brought a wave of heat that ebbed like a liquid
up from the hollow of Great Dipper. Gershom had gone
to his room after lunch, and came down with a book, and
heard the telephone. He went to the thing, picked up the
receiver, waited for the cackle of ringing to cease, and then
took a short message that a drawling voice gave him for the
ear of the hired man, Betz.
Outside in the yard hung a clouding of insects, they
parted like a curtain as Gershom went through, and closed
in again in a waiting buzz. Over by the fence Anna Geijer-
stam was feeding the calves, Adolf himself had paused to
look on, Betz was lounging astride the gate, hat on head,
straw in mouth, as Gershom came up.
‘ A message on the phone for you, Heinie.
‘ Huh ? ’ He got off the gate, it seemed he’d expected the
message. . .
‘Yes. Somebody Rauskukle. “Okay for Rainier at
four this afternoon,” was the message. He seemed to think
that you’d understand.’
‘ Oh yes.’ The vacant grin grew deeper. Betz pulled
out a watch and looked at it. ‘ Four ? Guess 111 move,
folks. See you all later.’
Geijerstam and Anna looked at him queerly, Anna
paying no heed to her feeding of the calves, the beast nearest
at hand was slobbering her hand, not the cog. Adolf
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 273
himself, sure sign of disturbance, was combing his black
beard upwards. ‘ You—you are going to Rainier ? ’ Anna
asked at last, unnecessarily, but with peculiar intensity.
Betz grinned back over his shoulder. ‘ Sure. Me and
the boys. Be okay. Just a little visit.’
Anna turned to her calf-feeding again, in silence ; Geijer-
stam combed his beard more slowly ; Gershom climbed up
to Betz’ place on the picket-fence and watched lazily the
slobber of the young roan calf as it neared the end of the
cog’s contents. It was very peaceful, the sun a blanketing
of warmth down over the peace of the country-side. Ger¬
shom drank in appreciation of the moment, lazily, with
eyelids half-lowered. He was to remember that scene very
vividly, always . . . because it was the last time he was
ever to look out over the rolling plain to Great Dipper.
For presently the silence beyond the farm-house was
broken by the sound of the starting of Betz’ motor cycle.
The group by the picket-fence looked up and saw Betz
wobble past them along the yard track, and shoot down the
rise to the road. He waved as he went, Gershom waved in
response, though neither Anna nor Adolf moved.
‘ And what fete has Betz gone to ? ’ Gershom asked,
indifferently.
It was Adolf who answered.
‘ No feast. He and the others—the boys—they have
gone to raid the artists at Rainier.’
‘ Raid the artists ? ’ Gershom was very much at sea.
Adolf growled confirmation. Then Gershom remembered.
‘ Oh, the colony of what-was-it the pastor called them ?
Gymnosophists ?—at the farm five miles from here ? ’
They nodded.
‘ And what is Betz doing there with the boys ? ’
274 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ They have gone to raid the house. They will find the
men and women and take them and beat them up, Adolf
explained unemotionally, but his eyelids twitched. Betz
said they were to tar and feather them as well, and close
down the farm.’ . }
Gershom dropped his cigarette. ‘ Yes, but the police
Anna shook her head without looking up, Adolf grunted.
And then slowly, unemotionally, he began to tell of a camp
of Radicals—Reds—that had been at a place twenty miles
south of Great Dipper. The radicals had made it a centre
of summer outings and the like up to a year of Gershom s
coming to Minnesota. Until the churches had preached
against them 
One night a raid was made on the place by men who
were masked, though everyone in the district guessed who
the masks were worn by. Well, the radicals had tried to
telephone the police and had found the wires cut. And
one of them had managed to get through to Great Dipper,
he got there on horseback, was arrested and locked up,
and beaten up, folk said, when he tried to tell the story of
the raid that was on at the radical’s camp.
‘ And what happened to the radicals ? ’
‘ Two of them died from exposure,’ Adolf told. ‘ And
one—she was a woman—she went mad, and was found mad
next day, wandering and singing.’
‘ But ’
They had nothing more to tell, disquiet and unease in
their faces, they knew the things that might happen at
Rainier—the might, and no more. Gershom got down from
the picket-fence : something of the peace had gone from
the day. Anna turned and watched, her face wrinkled up
with a sudden anxiety.
275
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ What are you to do, Gershom ? ’
‘ I am going up to Rainier.’
‘ But you must not! They would kill you—if you went to
warn the artists.’
‘ I’ll warn them if I get there in time. If I don’t ’
‘ It is too late to warn them now,’ Adolf said. ‘ It is
nearly four o’clock now. And maybe they have been
already warned.’
Gershom paused at that, unwilling enough to abandon
the peace of the afternoon here and a lazy drowse on a
picket fence. ‘ You think that they have ? ’
He did not answer, neither did Anna, and Gershom
knew there had been no warning, it was merely their liking
for himself that prompted that guess. He turned and ran
for the house.
Upstairs he caught up a greatcoat and stared at his
revolver and debated the matter, and dropped it in his
pocket. When he came down and went over the yard to
the shed where his motor cycle was stored, Anna came
running at his heels.
‘ Gershom—Gershom, you must not go.’
‘ But, Anna, I must.’
She gave a little moan, her fingers at her mouth.
And then lowered them and was practical and
quick.
‘ Do not shoot unless they shoot at you first. And wait:
I will bring you a scarf.’
She ran into the house and ran back. Adolf had also
gone in, and now came, sandwiches and a hip-flask in his
hands.
‘ It may be you will need them.’
Gershom nodded. Anna thrust the scarf in his pocket—
276 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
it was no more than a piece of coloured cloth, oddly twin-
punctured with holes.
‘ But I shan’t be cold, I don’t need it, Ma.’
‘ It is not that—they wear that, the others, in the raids.
As a mask.’
Gershom leant over the handle-bars and kissed her,
shook hands with Adolf.
‘ m be back when I can. Don’t worry for me. Auf
wiedersehen.’ ,
They called something after him, but that he couldn t
hear clear, the noise of the engine drowned their words. At
the incline’s foot he looked back and saw them, they seemed
suddenly old, watching him go. He waved to them, Anna
fluttered a hand, he turned and sped east, and Geijerstam’s
was presently a dot behind him.
§3
Rainier is set on a hill and lies back from the road that
runs south-east from Great Dipper to Gultz. You see it
from that road as a leafy eruption of trees, the early settlers
had made it distinctive in that treeless land by planting
long groves of poplar and beech, beeches bronze-leaved
that were brave in their plumage that spring afternoon that
was wearing to evening.
Gershom rode up the track from the Great Dipper
road. ,
Right in front, as his cycle chugged upwards, he saw the
white gleam of a stone-built house through the trees, and
back of that an orchard tangled to jungle, flowering with
bushes, a mat on the hill. Then above the noise of the
engine he heard a noise that caused his knuckles to go
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 277
white on the handles. A woman screamed—shrilly, high
on a note of terror and pain.
The raid was in progress.
He wheeled through an avenue of beeches, braked
suddenly, a sawn-off shot-gun levelled at his head. The
holder of the gun lounged up by the gate-post, his head
tied about by a scarf with eye-holes. He came sauntering
forward.
‘ Visiting friends ? ’
Gershom took out the scarf Anna Geijerstam had forced
on him. ‘ Am I hell. Tm from Geijerstam’s. Heinie
Betz told me there was a round-up here. But I started
late. . . . Got the birds yet ? ’
The scarf ruffled up as a grin passed beneath it. The
shot-gun was lowered.
‘ Straight in. You’re late, ah right all right. Round up
nearly finished but for two that are hiding back there a
somewheres in the bush.’
Gershom kicked his starter. * Get ’em in the nude ? ’
‘ Every darned one.’ The scarf rippled again. ‘ But
they ain’t nude now—or they won’t be long. Hear the skirt
give a scream ? Hot tar, that, I guess. . . . Roll along.’
Gershom chugged away slowly down through the avenue,
and a moment later came full on the scene near the house.
The sunlight was strong there, he stared at the figures, the
figures that were still, the figures that struggled, there was
a cackling of comment from among the masked men, and
every now and then a cry from the dozen or so men and
women who so hideously were being maltreated. Gershom
stared and stared, sickness upon him, and slowly chugged
forward. One of the masks raised his hand and waved it
to the orchard.
278 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ Down there if you want to be in at the last run, stranger.
‘ Okay.’
He switched to the right through the aisle of trees, for a
stretch they bowered greenly the path in a dimness. The
horror of the tortured nudists was behind, he found blood
on his lips, and now, close to the shrubbery, dismounted
from his cycle and listened. Nothing. Not a sound to be
heard, though it seemed to him, listening, that the wood
was filled with a waiting unease, somewhere in its depths
two terrified creatures crept, listened, and hid with pursuers
behind them lunging in a clumsy stealth. He wheeled the
motor cycle round housewards, kicked up the rest below
the back wheel, and went down a path.
Now it was near to sunset. In the hot, deepening blueness
of the afternoon the paths seemed like a maze, they twined
on themselves. He broke from them after a moment,
there were quagmires and stretches of sward, and once to a
little garden he came, blue with the blowing of chrysanthe¬
mums. He stood looking at that, a moment, dreaming,
realizing something of the genius of whoever had planned it.
Nothing he could hear even then, he sat down and lighted a
cigarette, and wondered what best he had do go back and
create a diversion with a stray shot or so in the midst of the
raiders or abandon the business entirely.
And then he heard an unmistakable sound, the crack of a
whip quite close at hand, that, and the sound of that whip
descending on something that yielded sharply, like flesh.
He jumped up and listened and then, as he tells, whitely, a
desperate coolness came on him. He parted the bushes
and himself passed through, soundless, unheard on the grass,
and so came on the verge of that open patch where Betz and
another had run to earth the last of the Rainier refugees.
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 279
“For background, the trees with the night close on
them, the sky was afloat with a wash of faint colourings, it
poured that wash into the glade upon her, a moment her
naked body was gold, a slip-painting in gold and in ochre.
Then the green had betaken those colours to itself, it was as
though I peered at her through the malachite waters, deep,
of a pool, so still now she stood, marble in that pool she
might well have been, frozen against the green of the bush.
And then out of my memory blinding there leapt, terrible,
tenebrous, the image ”
Betz had her right hand gripped in his, Gershom knew
him at once in spite of the mask. Over her, whip in hand,
stood the other masked man, Gershom knew him as well,
there was little disguise, it was the Lutheran pastor of Great
Dipper, you saw the pallor under the mask. . . . And
then Gershom’s eyes passed to the upraised whip.
All three were breathing deeply, they had paused a
minute, the woman had her head flung back, her body held
tense. It was Betz who spoke.
‘ Okay. Then we’ll lift your skin again, see ? Will you
or won’t you sell over Rainier’s to the Vigilance Committee
at the price we’ve said ? ’
‘ I won’t.’
‘ Try her again, then, mister.’
The whip poised in the pastor’s hand was suddenly a
snake that leapt in the sun and whistled and descended.
Before Gershom’s eyes the Image shivered and dissolved.
Then It towered tremendous in a moan of pain.
‘ No, I won’t even yet—even yet ! ’
“. . . so I heard. I was never again to see the Image
that had followed me far from Chatham. But I saw it then,
I saw it! I knew it! And I saw it aureoled clear, in a
280
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
flame, that Superscription that was blurred so long. I
knew it final and finished, I seemed to awaken and come
from a trance remote in my soul. I heard and saw it,
ringing and tremendous, that Superscription forged in
pre-history’s deeps : even yet ! ”
§4
And there, I suppose, his story ends. But Gershom
gathered the final threads together, and tied them with
neatness before he turned and went out to the world and
an endless quest—out on that quest companioned.
He was to think it probable that Betz never knew the
thing that struck him. He went down with the butt of
Gershom’s revolver raising a dark matting of red on his hair,
he stumbled against the Lutheran pastor. The latter
staggered and struck with his whip at Gershom, but the
woman, no Image now, no woman even, hardly more than
a girl, a slip-painting violently come alive, seized his right
arm and while she held it Gershom kicked the pastor,
quickly and vigorously, and heard and saw him double and
fall, clawing at his belly. And then Gershom seized on the
girl’s hand.
‘ Come on—you know the way back to the house ? ’
‘ But not there—they’re still waiting.’ She was panting
and flushed. She gave a little gasp as she moved : a blue
weal stood against her body’s bronzed pallor. ‘ We can
creep through the hedge ’n’ get off.’
‘ They’d follow. . . . I’ve a bike. We can make a dash
for it. Try ? ’
‘ Of course.’
* Run, then ! ’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 281
They ran together, they ran hand in hand, the bushes
about them, the rim of the sun just verging the orchard,
suddenly Gershom saw the house quite close. Then they
came to the motor cycle, up-propped. He got it in readi¬
ness, quiet as he could, sat himself down, and waited the
girl. She was straining back her head to listen, one hand
on his shoulder.
‘ Ready ? ’
‘ Thought I heard those two following us—’n’en I
didn’t ! ’
‘ I don’t think they’ll follow.’
She chuckled, swinging herself up behind him, her
arm came white and naked and firm round his shoulder.
‘ No, they’ve proceeded.’
‘ Eh ? ’
‘ I think one of them’s dead.’
He murmured ‘ Poor devil! ’ and indeed was wrung a
moment with his old, passionate pity for the cruel and the
foolish. Then these thoughts quite went. He felt light and
young and clear and confident. He tested the light, it
flooded the path down which they chugged, and then he
remembered the danger of that, and off-switched it again.
To the right rose the house : beyond it the avenue. So
fast he was going by then that the sudden thought which
came on him—his passenger’s white nakedness so easy a
mark—was no more than a footnote of care to the multitudi¬
nous writings in which he must read. The path was
burring and singing below, the engine roared, and roaring
the motor cycle cleared the path and shot by the side of the
house. The two of them had an urgent impression of a
group breaking and dispersing and running. Voices called
after them, one called persistently, high and imperative :
282 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ You there, stop ! ’
‘ Stop be damned !5 the girl breathed close in Gershom’s
ear, but she also had realized the danger she backed, she
crouched forward, tight against Gershom. The wind
sang past, the front wheel collided with a hidden stone,
they swerved and reeled from the road. That it was which
probably saved them, for in that moment of swerve the air
about them seemed alive with a singing drone, as of hornets.
There followed the sharp, quick bark of Brownings. “ I
righted just as it seemed I couldn’t, we were into the avenue
of trees by then. Right in front the watcher of the threshold
came running, minus his mask, his shot-gun half levelled.
There was nothing else for it: I put the motor cycle straight
at him, the right handle-bar and my hand caught his
shoulder, he fell off the path and out of my life, explosively,
with a jerk. Then the gates swung by.”
They were out, they were clear of Rainier then, the
cycle sang on down the hill, there was nothing they could
do for those left behind, both knew they must ride far clear
of the place ere the news of Betz and the pastor, dead or
wounded, was bruited abroad the country-side.
§5
The fields were draped in their malachite cloaks, long
garments that were hemmed with night. And now that
night itself, forsaking black, came not as any night should,
it came with a sky that glowed like the shell of a pearl, soft
like an early rose it came that sky into which they fled. . A
wind had arisen, it blew in their faces, blowing the spring
itself in their faces, the deserted road along which they
sped. They met no one, mile on mile as they went, far
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 283
over to right and left a light here and there began to gleam
as the day waned fast; once on a hill-side they saw the
forms of men that were racing against the dusk. “ I sat and
held on and did no guiding at all for mile upon mile, Provi¬
dence had forsaken the pastor, I suppose, in disgust, and
loaned its protection to us. And then, we must have been
a good ten miles from Rainier, south and south-east we had
gone, I saw the coming of the stars.”
He slowed down then. The engine coughed dryly and
ran to a stop, he put down his right leg and braked on the
road, and so, in a silence, they came to a standstill. The
firm hand clasped on his shoulder remained there.
‘ I’ll give you my driving coat,’ he told her. ‘ There’s a
wind coming up.’
‘ But I like this, Gerry.’ The hand on his shoulder
moved a moment, it touched his cheek and went back.
The passenger laughed a strange, choking laugh. ‘ Oh, ’n’
I thought you were killed in Paris ! ’
‘ I wasn’t. . . . And I knew you weren’t. Ester ! ’
‘ Gerry.’
‘ Do you know what it is just now ? ’
* What—what is ? ’
‘ Why, April. It’s your name this month, can’t you
smell it ? ’
‘ Good as all that ? ’
‘ God, yes. So good that I’m to smell it all my life long.
I’ll never call you Ester again, you know, April. . . .
April always : you could never be anything but that.’
‘ I’ll see to that—’n’en some ! ’
‘ That “ ’n’en ” ! Where’ll we stop to-night ? ’
‘ Not here. Drive on for a long time yet.’
‘ I’ll turn round my head if you’d like to kiss me.’
284 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
‘ My dear, amn’t I just one kiss up against you ? ’
The Sower of the stars was walking the skies, a cobalt
patch lingered where the sun had gone, the engine below
them sang on and still on, Gershom with the naked arm on
his shoulder. Then a sickle moon came and rode the night,
night-birds were crying in a marsh they passed.
‘ Rainier was the farm your father left you. But I never
thought I would find you there.’
‘ And how did you find me ?—Why, Geijerstam, of
course ! Fd forgotten all about it, it was once George
Shaw’s. ... Oh Gerry, if they saw us now ! ’
‘ They’d think you as lovely as I do, that’s all.’
‘ I can’t kiss you more than Fm doing, you know. ’N’
oh, go on ! While it lasts ’
He flooded a long stretch of the road with his headlight,
and saw the cotton-tails go bobbing to the dark, and switched
the light off and went on in the dark. He heard April
singing a song by his shoulder, the low song that rises with
peace and content, security near and a lonely road. And
yes, it was that that he heard again !
‘ Nobody knows the trouble Fve known,
Nobody knows my sorrow :
Nobody knows the trouble Fve known,
Glory hallelujah ! ’
§6
A deeper darkness showed up in the night and Gershom
slowed down and switched on his headlight. It was a
great clump of trees that rose there, in the air was the smell
of ploughed lands in the spring, the moon was now low in
the sky. Gershom looked at his wrist-watch and found it
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 285
midnight. The air had grown cooler in the last hour or
so, but not the hand on his shoulder.
That he found by putting up his own hand and touching,
and so for a little they sat and were silent. And then
Gershom said ‘ We’ll rest here awhile, till it’s closer to
morning, I think. Then we’ll make Minneapolis, stop and
get clothes for you somewhere en route. You can wear my
coat and my stockings while we rest, and I’ve a rug tied
under the pillion.’
‘ Blessed boy.’
His passenger dismounted and yawned. Then he heard
her gasp.
‘Oh!’
And at that he remembered the weal from the whip, a
ghost of the old, blind fury came on him, he spoke through
his teeth, not turning as he spoke.
‘ By God, I’ll go back and get even with those swine
yet.’
‘ No, you won’t. There’s no going back for us—ever
again. . . . ’N’ it’ll be all right to turn round, Gerry.
You can’t see me, anyhow.’
‘ I wouldn’t object.’
‘ I know,’ she said, whimsically, ‘ ’n’ neither would I—
if I weren’t so tired ’n’ so cramped.’
‘ Why didn’t you tell me before ? ’
‘ Because I didn’t notice. I didn’t notice a thing for
miles past but your head and your hair. I nibbled a bit of
that, didn’t you feel me ? Good hair.’ He heard again the
sound of a yawn, saw his dim guest a white ghost stretching
in the moonlight. Then : ‘ Can I help ? ’
He said, ‘ No. Just wait.’
So she did while he wheeled the cycle to the side of the
286 IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
road. A hidden stream was singing away through the
trees and Ester heard it the while he unpacked. She dis¬
appeared, he thought she had gone to drink, but in a little
while he heard the sound of a splashing and when she came
back he was waiting with a cloth.
‘ A towel ? How on earth—but how on earth it all ?
How did you come to Rainier at last ? ’N’ where have you
been since the War ? ’N’—Gerry, is that really food ?
They sat side by side, Ester absent-mindedly draped in
his coat, and heard out each other’s sagas at length, in the
shrill of the stream back through the trees, and watched the
sickle of the moon sink over the plain. It all seemed very
home-like, as though lived before, he remembered lines
of a forgotten poe
‘ Deep in the gloom of a fireless cave
As the night sank o’er the plain,
And the moon hung red on the river’s bed,
We mumbled the bones of the slain ’
She said : ‘ I know. ’N’ so we did—-sometime. Long
ago ’n’ far away. Maybe on this very plain. The prospec¬
tors from Asia came far north as this, the folk that ended
the Golden Age. Maybe we saw them ’n’ hated them
even then.’
‘ Maybe, and we trekked away when they came, and lived
out the Golden Age though they came.’
‘ Oh Gershom ! ... But it’s been so long since then ! ’
‘ I know, but we’ve found that time again. All the world
will yet find that time again. . . . And this stuff that
you’ve told me, your life in New York—it’s got nothing
whatever to do with us now.’ He thought. Though I
hope there were none ever called you April ? ’
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION 287
‘ None did. I’ve kept you that—’n’ other things. . . .’
‘. . . April, I know ! We’ll do it again ! No one to stop
us now, poor George now he’s dead and your father as
well. No one. They would think us mad, but we’ll do it.’
‘ I know. But you say it. Oh, damn it, ’n’ don’t say it
wrong ! ’
‘ Do you think that I could ? We’ll get married and clear
out, the first boat down to Guat, fit up an expedition and
go up to the mountains, and go in through the bush and
find Lorillard at last! It’s still waiting there to be found.’
‘ And we’ll find it. Hurry to-morrow ! ’
He looked up. ‘ And that’s close.’ He rose and took
up the rug and switched on the light and found a dry place
under the trees, away from the road, and spread the rug
there. And then he came back.
The moon pointed a finger up to the zenith. The stars
were reddening as that pallor went. Far away in the dim¬
ness a coyote yelped—no tiger as once had followed their
tracks. They stood and looked up at the night, at each
other.
‘ I’ve spread you a place to sleep over there.’
‘ ’N’ where are you sleeping yourself ? ’
‘ Under this nearer tree.’
She rose up, a slim shape, vivid even in the dark, some¬
how.
‘ Good dreams.’
§ The Last
He dreamed from the moment he laid head to the ground,
mixed dreaming that woke him an hour or so after. And,
waking, he knew that he still was dreaming.
288
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
He saw the tree boughs wave over his head, soundless,
in the soundless passing of the wind, there was no sound
above or about him, the quietness of dreams. And in his
arms, by the darkness hidden, was a warmth and a silent
tenderness that was surely only his dreams still dreaming
while he himself woke.
He whispered the word, scared, lest this dream might
end.
‘ April! ’
‘ Oh Gerry, did you think you’d escape me again ? . . .
Am I real ? So real I’ll be only too soon ! But for now—
are we to be it or dream it ? ’
He held her and kissed her, slowly, till she laughed, and
they ceased with slowness and terribly, queerly, scared and
with heed, their lips found each the other’s in the darkness.
And suddenly she drew her lips from his, and kissed him
with her eyelids against his cheek, and laughed, a child
still, and a woman again, and was tender with him, and
loved him, and he her, and he woke to find her asleep and
kissed her, and slept himself and awoke to her kisses, the
light of the foredawn shining through the trees, in the air the
smell of the dawn and all the sky waiting and watching for
the coming of the sun.
THE END
7*
