KfNCftfcOfNB O'NIEL
BANCWOftV TSAAM
S'TftACHAN
MOUttr BA7TOCK
Sr.ciAV!
WAAVMRK
DftOMOAK
^ fiiV?Toi
’ortlethck 7
CHA^b-y
'U«A/S
^Sv/cOUTfiA
:«A»Mr<jN
TaWhuM
KfNWCffJ
.BCWH^ME
\JOMNSMAVEN
OTS QUAIR^
ABERDEErv<
ji oy
^ '>*1 O
• o ^ / a_
vr
y* Fern. £^s>735J'ONE ha> 6 n
^OUflCTTT/M?!
•oath Mac
National
Library of
GREY GRANITE
Books by LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
Novels forming the trilogy A SCOTS QUAIR
SUNSET SONG (1932)
CLOUD HOWE (1933)
GREY GRANITE (i934)
Biography
NIGER : The Life of Mungo Park
In collaboration
SCOTTISH SCENE (With Hugh MacDiarmid)
NINE AGAINST THE UNKNOWN (With J. Ltsli* Mitchell)
LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
GREY GRANITE
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34 Paternoster Row E.C.4.
First published in Great Britain, October 1934
PRINTED IN
GREAT BRITAIN,
AT THE ANCHOR
PRESS, TIPTREE,
;: essex ;:
To
HUGH MacDIARMID
CAUTIONARY NOTE
The ‘DuncairiT of this novel was originally 'Dundon’.
Unfortunately, several English journals in pre-publication
notices of the book described my imaginary city as Dundee,
two Scottish sheets identified it with Aberdeen, and at
least one American newspaper went considerably astray
and stated that it was Edinburgh—faintly disguised.
Instead, it is merely the city which the inhabitants
of the Mearns (not foreseeing my requirements in com¬
pleting my trilogy) have hitherto failed to build.
E. G. G.
CONTENTS
PAGE
I. EPIDOTE   I5
II. SPHENE 98
III. APATITE ------- 165
IV. ZIRCON 229
xiii
Grey Granite
I
EPIDOTE
A EE around her the street walls were dripping in fog
as Chris Colquohoun made her way up the Gallowgate,
yellow fog that hung tiny veils on her eyelashes, curled
wet, and had in her throat the acrid taste of an ancient
smoke. Here the slipper-slide of the pavement took a
turn that she knew, leading up to the heights of Windmill
Place, and shortly, out of the yellow swath, she saw come
shambling the lines of the Steps with their iron hand-rail
like a famished snake. She put out her hand on that rail,
warm, slimy, and paused afore tackling the chave of
the climb, breathing deeply, she could hear her heart.
The netbagful of groceries on her arm ached—she looked
down through wet lashes at the shape of the thing
as though it was the bag that ached, not her arm. . . .
Standing still so breathing that little while she was
suddenly aware of the silence below—as though all the
shrouded town also stood still, deep-breathing a minute
in the curl of the fog—stilling the shamble and grind of the
trams, the purr of the buses in Royal Mile, the clang
and swing of the trains in Grand Central, the swish and
roll and oily call of the trawlers taking the Forthie’s flood
—all pausing, folk wiping the fog from their eyes and
squinting about them an un-eident minute 
Daft, she said to herself, and began climbing the
stairs. Midway their forty steps a lamp came in sight,
*3
i6
GREY GRANITE
at last, glistening, it flung a long dirty hand down to
help her. Her face came into its touch, it blinked sur¬
prised, not expecting that face or head or the glistering
bronze coils of hair that crowned them—hair drawn in
spiralled pads over each ear, fog-veiled, but shining.
Chris halted again here under the lamp, thirty-eight,
so she couldn’t run up these steps, stiff’s an old horse on a
Mounth hill-road.
Old at thirty-eight ? You’ll need a bath-chair at fifty.
And at sixty—why, as they’d say in Segget, they’ll have
carted you off to the creamery !
Panting, she smiled wry under the lamp at the foul
tale told of Duncairn crematorium—the foul story that
had struck her as funny enough even hearing it after the
burning of Robert. . . . Oh, mixed and queer soss that
living was, dying, dying slowly a bit of yourself every year,
dying long ago with that dim lad, Ewan, dying in the kirk
of Segget the time your hand came red from Robert’s
dead lips—and yet midmost the agonies of those little
deaths thinking a foul tale flouting them funny !
Daft as well as decrepit, she told herself, but with
a cool kindness, and looked over the Steps at the mirror
hung where the stairs swung west, to show small loons
the downward perils as they pelted blue hell on a morning
to school. She saw a woman who was thirty-eight,
looked less, she thought, thirty-five maybe in spite of
those little ropes of grey that marred the loops of the
coiled bronze hair, the crinkles about the sulky mouth
and the eyes that were older than the face. Face thinner
and straighter and stranger than once, as though it were
GREY GRANITE 17
shedding mask on mask down to one last reality—the
skull, she supposed, that final reality. Funny she could
stand here and face up to that, not feel sick, just faintly
surprised ! Once it had been dreadful and awful to
think of—the horror of forgotten flesh taken from endur¬
ing bone, the masks and veils of life away, down to those
grim essentials. Now it left her neither sick nor sorry,
she found, watching a twinkle in sulky gold eyes above the
smooth jut of the wide cheek-bones. Not sad at all, just
a silly bit joke of a middle-aged woman with idle thoughts
in a pause on the Steps of Windmill Brae.
Below the quiet broke with the scrunch of a tram
wheeling down from the lights of Royal Mile to the Satur¬
day quietude of Gallowgate. Chris turned, looked, saw
the shiver of sparks through the fog, syne the sailing brute
swing topaz in sight, swaying and swearing, with aching
feet as it ran for its depot in Alban Street. Its passage
seemed to set fire to the fog, a little wind came and blew
the mist-ash, and there was Grand Central smoking with
trains. And now, through the thinning bouts of the fog,
Chris could see the lighted clock of Thomson Tower
shine sudden a mile or so away over the tumbled rigs of
grey granite.
Nine o'clock.
She lowered the netbag and stretched her arms, saw
herself wheel and stretch in the mirror, slim still, long
curves, half-nice she half-thought. Her hands came down
on the railing and held it, no need to hurry to-night for a
change, Ma Cleghorn would have seen to supper for them
all—the nine o'clock Gallop to the Guts as sHe called it.
B
i8
GREY GRANITE
No need to hurry, if only this once in the peace of the ill-
tasting fog off the Forthie, in the blessed desertion of the
Windmill Steps so few folk used in Duncairn toun.
Rest for a minute in the peace of the fog—or nearly at
peace but for its foul smell.
Fike the faint, ill odour of that silent place where
they'd ta’en Robert's body six months before 
She'd thought hardly at all what she would do after
Robert’s funeral that so shocked Segget, she’d carried
out all the instructions in the will and gone back with
Ewan to the empty Manse, Ewan made her tea and looked
after her, cool and efficient, only eighteen, though he
acted more like twenty-eight—at odd minutes he acted
eighty-two she told him as he brought her the tea in the
afternoon stillness of the sitting-room.
He grinned the quick grin that was boy-like enough,
and wandered the room a bit, tall and dark, unrestlessly,
while she drank the tea. He hated tea himself, with a
bairn-like liking for bairny things—milk and oatcakes
would have contented Ewan from breakfast to dinner
and some more for his supper. Ayont the windows in the
waning of the afternoon Chris could see the frozen glister
of night on the Grampians, swift and near-moving,
Ewan's shoulder and sleeked dark head against it. . . .
Then he turned from the window. Mother, I’ve got
a job.
She’d been sunk in a little drowse of sheer ache,
tiredness from the funeral and the day in Duncairn, she
GREY GRANITE 19
woke stupid at his speak and only half-hearing : A job ?
—who for ?
He said Why, for little Ewan Tavendale all by his lone.
But you’ll have to sign the papers first.
—But it’s daft, Ewan, you haven’t finished college yet,
and then there’s the university !
He shook the sleeked head : Not for me. I’m tired
of college and I’m not going to live off you. And thought
for a minute and added with calm sense, Especially as
you haven’t much to live off.
So that was that and he fetched the papers, Chris
sat and read the dreich things appalled, papers of appren¬
ticeship for four years to the firm of Gowans and Gloag in
Duncairn. Smelters and steel manufacturers—But, Ewan,
you’d go daft in a job like that.
He said he’d try not to, awfully hard, especially as it
was the best job he could come by—and I can come out in
week-ends and see you quite often. Duncairn’s only a
twenty miles off.
—A nd where do you think I am going to bide ?
He looked at her curiously with cool, remote eyes, black
didn’t suit him, hair and skin over dark. Eh ? Oh, here
in Segget, aren’t you ? Y ou used to like it before Robert died.
Sense the way he would speak of Robert, not heartless¬
ly, just with indifference, as much as to say what did it
matter, would a godly snuffling help Robert now ? But
a queer curiosity moved Chris to ask Does anything ever
matter to you at all, Ewan ?
—Oh, lots. Where you’re going to stay, for one thing,
when I’ve gone.
20
GREY GRANITE
He’d slipped out of that well, Chris thought with a
twinkle, sitting in the deep armchair on her heels, her
head down bent, he ran his finger along the curve of her
neck, coolly, with liking, as she looked up at last:
I’m coming to bide with you in Duncairn.
When they’d sold the furniture and paid off the debts
there was barely a hundred and fifty pounds left, Segget
took the matter through hand at the Arms, the news got
about though both Chris and Ewan had been secret about
it and never let on. But Segget would overhear what you
said though you whispered the thing at the dead of night
ten miles from a living soul in the hills. And it fair en¬
joyed itself at the news, God man ! that was a right
dight in the face for that sulky, stuck-up bitch at the
Manse, her with her braw clothes and her proud-like
ways, never greeting when her man died there in the ;
pulpit, just as cool as though the childe were a load of
swedes, not greeting even, or so ’twas said, when they
burned the corp in there in Duncairn. And such a like
funeral to give a minister, burning the man in a creamery !
And the Segget Provost, Hairy Hogg the sutor, said
the thing was a judgment on the coarse brutes both, he
never spoke ill of the dead, not him, but what had his
forefather, the poet Burns, said ?—
Ake Ogilvie the joiner was having a dram and he
sneered real coarse : You and your Burns ! The gawfius
blethered a lot of stite afore they shovelled him into the earth
and sent all the worms for a mile around as drunk as links
GREY GRANITE
21
at Paldy Fair. But I’m damned if he’d ever a tongue like
yours. What ill did Robert Colquohoun ever do you—
or his mistress either, I’d like to know, except to treat you
as a human being?—B’God, they showed themselves soft
enough there!
Alec the Provost’s son was in having a nip, he wanted
to fight Ake Ogilvie for that, the coarse Bulgar of a joiner
to curse that way at a poor old sod like the Provost his
father. But the wife of the hotel-keeper was back of
the bar, folk called her the Blaster and Blasphemer for
short, she was awful against a bit curse now and then :
and she nipped Alec short as a new-libbed calf. None
of your cursings in here, she cried, I won’t have the Lord’s
name taken in vain. Alec habbered he’d nothing against
the lyord, it wasn’t Him he’d called a Bulgar, but the other
one—and got in a soss, fairly upset at the Blaster’s
glower. Folk thought her an interfering old runt, ay
God ! she’d find her custom go.
So the most in the bar took a taik to the door with their
drams in their hands and sat on the steps and looked
at the sky, evening in Spring, bonny the hills, the seven
o’clock dirling down Segget High Brig, peesies out on the
long flat field that went mounting up to the bend of the
hills. You minded Colquohoun, how he’d haunt those hills,
the temples of God the creature would call them, him that
died in the pulpit preaching a sermon—fair heathen it
was, ay, a judgment of God. And now this slip of a wife
of his had less than a two hundred pounds to her name,
living up there in one room, folk said, all by her lone now
that her loon, Ewan (ay, a son by her first bit man)
22
GREY GRANITE
had gone to work in Duncairn toun. It just showed you
what happened to proud-like dirt, she’d intended the loon
for an education and a braw-like life in a pulpit, maybe,
nothing to do but habber and haver and glower over a
collar on back to front: and instead he’d be just a common
working chap.
Ake Ogilvie had new come out and heard that last
speak of wee Peter Peat’s. Well, God, YOU’RE common
enough, he said, though it’s damn little work you ever man¬
age. And then he went swaggering across the Square,
past the statue of the War Memorial Angel, a trig-like
lassie with a pair of fine hips, and spat at it, coarse-like,
fair a tink Ake, aye sticking up for the working men,
you were maybe a working man yourself but were hardly
such a fool as stick up for the brutes.
Syne Feet the Policeman came dandering along, he
was due to leave for a job in Duncairn, folk cried out Ay,
Mr. Leslie, fine night, respectful-like, for he’d fair got on.
And he stuck his thumbs in his belt and said Ay, majestic-
like, like a steer with the staggers, and squashed out his
great feet and looked up at the Angel as though to speir
where she’d mislaid her stays. Syne folk saw that he gotten
his sergeant’s stripes, he’d come out to give the bit things
an air ; and he said he was off to Duncairn in a week,
he’d been kind of put in charge of the toun, you learned,
him and some other skilly childes, or at least in a bit that
they called Footforthie where the factories were and a
lot of tink workers, low brutes, for they hadn’t a meek to
their name and lived off the Broo and Ramsay MacDonald,
draining the country and Ramsay dry. But did that
GREY GRANITE
23
content them ?—No, faith, it didn’t, they were aye
on the riot about something or other, stirred up by those
ill-ta’en Bulgars, the Socialists. . . . Feet said that he’d
use a firm hand, by God you thought if he used his feet
there wouldn’t be a Socialist left in Duncairn that didn’t
look like an accident with a rhubarb tart. God, how the
meikle-houghed sod could blow !
Folk ganted a bit and began to taik off, but halted at
the hint of a tasty bit news, and cried No, man ? and came
tearing back. What’s that ? God be here! and Feet
swelled out his chest and started to tell his tale over again.
And the gist of the thing when you got to the bree
was that Sergeant Sim Feslie had been in Duncairn, on
business, like, that very forenoon—colloguing with the
other heads of the Police and learning the work that he’d
have to take on. Well, he’d finished the business and
looked out for lodgings, awful expensive up in Duncairn
and you needed a fine salary, same as he had. The second
bit place that he keeked intil was a boarding-house on
Windmill Brae, fell swell it looked, a braw bit house on
the high hill that rises over Duncairn. But the terms were
hardly as much as he’d feared, and he clinched for a room
with the mistress o’t, a meikle bit woman, Cleghorn the
name.
Well, they had a bit crack when he’d ta’en the room
and she told to Feet, fair newsy-like, she’d had the place
all decorated of late at an awful expense she couldn’t
have afforded but that she had advertised for a partner
with a bit of silver to lay down as deposit, and syne help
33 a maid attending the lodgers. Feet had said Ay ?
GREY GRANITE
24
and Well, that’s right fine, not caring a damn one way or
the other till she mentioned the new bit partner’s
name.
But when he heard THAT Feet fairly sat up, as every
soul did now in front of the Arms : Mrs. Colquohoun ?
Where might she come from ? And the Cleghorn body
had said From Segget. Her man was a minister-creature
there, though I’m damned if she looks it, a fleet trig woman
that could muck a byre more ready any day than snuffle
a psalm. At that poor Feet was took sore aback, he never
could stick the proud bitch at the Manse ; but he’d made
a deposit for the lodgings already and couldn’t well ask
for the silver back. So off he’d come home and got ready
to pack—and faith, did you ever hear the like of that ?
Afore night was out all Segget had heard, and half
of the Mearns afore the next day, postmen ran for miles
over parks with the news, old Hogg hammered four soles
on the same pair of boots he was in such a fash to give
the tale out. And when Mrs. Colquohoun went down to
the station, straight and cool, with her trig-like back, her
hair coiled over each lug, fair daft, some thought it bonny,
you were damned if you did—the half of Segget was keek¬
ing from its windows, and wondering about her, how
she’d get on, what was she thinking, what was she wearing,
had she had a bath on the previous night, did she ever
think of a man to sleep with, how much did she measure
around the hips, could she greet if she liked, what was her
temper, how much of the hundred and fifty was left, was
that loon of hers, Ewan, as dour as he looked, would he
land in jail or would he get on ?
GREY GRANITE 25
At half-past five the clock would go birr ! in the narrow
long room you had ta’en for yourself, you’d wake with a
start and find yourself sprawled in weariness right across
the great bed, dark the guff of the early Spring, no cheep
of birds here on Windmill Brae, clatter of the clock as
it started again with a hoast and a rasp ; and you’d reach
for the thing and switch it off and lie still a minute, hands
under your neck in the pad of your hair, fingers rough-
seamed and scraping your skin. And you’d stretch out
under the bedclothes, long, till your muscles all creaked,
legs, hips and ribs, blessedly, you’d still a passable figure.
Syne you’d throw off the blankets and get from the bed,
the floorcloth cold as a Christian’s heart under the naked
soles of your feet—off with your nightie and stretch again
and look from the window at the coming of dawn, lacing
its boots and grabbing its muffler and pelting across the
roofs of Duncairn. In a hurry the same you’d wriggle
in your vest, stockings and knickers, slip on your dress,
getting warm already in spite of the floor and the frozen
gleam of grey granite outside. And you’d open the door
and go down the stairs, quick, and looping back your
hair, to the cold prison walls of the kitchen, smelly, fling
open the window, in rushed the air and a smell of cats
you could cut with a knife. At first that smell had made
you near sick, even Jock the house-cat, a clean beast
enough, but you’d no time for such luxuries as sickness
now-a-days, lighting the gas, the kitchen range, your hands
swift on kettles and frying-pan, eyes on the clock and ears
wide open for the first stir of life in the morning’s morgue.
At six you were up at Ma Cleghorn’s room with a cup
26
GREY GRANITE
of tea and a knock at her door and go in and draw back
the window-curtains, let up the blinds, bang ! She'd
wake up and groan Is’t you, Chris lass ? Losh, you spoil
me, just, she meant the tea, and you’d say Oh, havers, she
spoke Duncairn and you’d got the same gait. And Ma
Cleghorn would give another bit groan and drink up the
tea and loup from the bed, swack as you like, an old woman
only a minute afore but filled now with tea and a fury
to work. The Bulgars’ll soon be on the howl for their
meat. Whatever made me take to the keeping of lodgings ?
You’d say A BOARDING-HOUSE, please, Mrs.
Cleghorn, one of the jokes that the two of you shared,
Ma’d give a great snifter through her meikle nose:
Boarding? B’God, it’s leathering they want. And I
haven’t a pair of bloomers to my name that’s not darned so
a body can hardly sit down. I’ve a fair bit padding of my
own to ease it, you haven’t, get out of the damn trade, lass,
afore you’re like me and take to bloomers instead of them
frilly things you wear—God be here, they’ll kill you yet dead
with cold. Aren’t your legs froze?
You’d say Not them; fine legs, and Ma struggling into
her blouse would say You’re no blate. Who told you
they’re fine ? And you’d say Oh, men, and she’d nod to
that, great red face topped with greying hair like the face
of a war-horse out of Isaiah (as you’d once thought,
minding back through the months to Robert’s reading
from the Bible in Segget).—Ay, no doubt they have, and
enjoyed them fine. And would again if you gave them the
chance.
Syne you’d to tea,r to the kitchen again, in time for
GREY GRANITE 27
the ring from Miss Murgatroyd’s room, dying for her tea the
poor old wretch, solemn you’d carry it up to her room,
the best in the house, three guineas a week. She’d
quaver out of a lace nightcap : Is that you, Mrs. Colquo-
houn? And you have my tea? Oh, that’s Such Fine,
she was awful genteel, poor spinster body with her pen¬
sions and potterings, not a soul in the world hers and
respectable down to her shrivelled toes, wabbling hands
and meek quiet eyes, Episcopalian, serving tea for the
whist drives up at the Unionist Club. . . . And Ma
Cleghorn, watching her taik down the street, would ask
who in God’s name would be an old maid ? She’d often
used to think when her Jim was alive and would come
back from the Fish Market stinking so bad that his shirts
hung out on a washing day would bring the cats scraiching
for miles around—she’d used often to think I wish I
were single, trig on my own, not handled, not kenned,
with nobody’s seed ever laid in me ! But losh, when he
died she had minded him sore, night on night and would
fain have had him again though he smelt like a kipper
mislaid in a drain when he’d cuddle you, feuch ! They
were sosses, were men, but you’d only to look at the
Murgatroyd creature to make you mad to go tearing out
and grab the first soss that you met in breeks—Half¬
past six, Chris ; will you waken your Ewan ?
He slept in one of the two rooms of the upper floor,
the other empty, his window looked down on the glare of
Footforthie at night that changed to a sick yellow furnace-
glow, unstill, staining the sky on the morning’s edge.
You'd wanted him to change to another room, and he’d
28
GREY GRANITE
asked you why and you’d told him he’d surely get sick
of it—working down there all day and seeing it all night.
But he’d shaken his shapely, sleeked head, no fancies
or flim-flams with Ewan at all: It’ll neither wake me
nor send me to sleep. Only a light in the sky, you know,
Chris.—So you’d turn the handle of his door and go in and
meet the sting of the sea-wind there, the window wide
open, the curtains flowing, Ewan dim in the light of the
early dawn, lying so still, so still he slept that near every
morning you’d be startled the same, feared that he lay
there dead, so quiet, you’d shake his shoulder and see
as you bent the blankets he’d thrust away from himself,
pyjamas open wide to the waist, curling dark down on a
boy’s breast. Strange to think that this was your Ewan,
once yours and so close, so tiny, so small and weak,
sexless, a baby, that had grown a body tall as your own,
slimmer, stronger, secret and strange, blossom and fruit
from that seed of yours. ... In a queer pity you’d look
and shake him awake : Ewan, time you were up !
He’d start awake quietly, at once, like a cat, and look
at you with those deep, cool eyes, neither grey nor green,
grey granite eyes. All right. Thanks. No, I don’t want
tea. I’ll get an apple for myself, mother. MOTHER l
I said I’d get it for myself! And he’d be out of bed and
have reached the dish and caught an apple afore you got
near. You’ve enough to do without waiting on me.
—But I like waiting on you. Wouldn’t you wait on
me ?
—I suppose so, if you were sick or insane. What’s
the time? And lean out half-naked from the window
GREY GRANITE 29
ledge to peer over Duncairn to Thomson Tower. Splen¬
did. I’ve time for a dip in the Forthie.
He’d be out of the house as you gained the kitchen,
an uproar by then of banging pans, Ma Cleghorn cooking
porridge and bacon and sausages and coffee and cocoa
and tea, and swearing out loud at the young maid, Meg,
who slept at her home away down in the Cowgate and was
supposed to come up each morning at seven. Call that
seven?—Then you’re blind as well’s sweir. Stack up the
range and be nippy about it. Mrs. Colquohoun, will you
lay the table ?
You were aye Mrs. Colquohoun when Meg was about,
Ma Cleghorn treating you distant, polite, for the sake of
discipline, so she said. You’d gathered the way of setting
the table in the big ben room so quick your eyes hardly
followed your fingers, porridge plates for Sim Leslie
(who’d come from Segget where they’d called him Feet)
and Mr. George Piddle, the Runner reporter, thin and
he-he’ing, minus his hair so that he could go bald-headed
for news. Bacon for Miss Murgatroyd and Mr. Neil
Quaritch : Mr. Quaritch worked on the Runner as well,
a sub-editor creature, aye reading books and sloshing them
to death in the Runner next day. But you rather liked
the wee ferret man, red eyes and red hair and a red nose
as well, and a straggle of beard on an unhappy chin,
Ewan said he’d gone sozzled with reading rot rather
than with knocking back gills of Glenlivet. . . . Mixed
grill for Miss Ena Tyon, the typist, powdered and lip-
sticked, and awful up-to-date, baggy a bittie below the
eyes and a voice like a harried peahen, poor lass. Porridge
3o GREY GRANITE
for young Mr. Clearmont, nice loon who went to the
University and was awful keen on music and jokes, you
could never make head nor tail of either as he always
guffawed out, young and hearty, right at the point—
if there was a point. Ma Cleghorn didn t think much
of him, she said if ever he d a thought in his head it d be
easy to tell it, you’d hear the damn thing rattling about
like a stone in a tin. But she was jealous a bit, you
thought, of the lad’s university and books and book¬
learning. . . . Bacon for young John Cushnie, all red,
the clerk in Raggie Robertson’s Drapery Depot, half¬
sulky, half-shy and would spend half an hour roping up
his neck in a speckled tie, he shared Archie Clearmont s
room but nought else. . . . Bight o clock and you hit
the gong, breakfast all ready set on the table.
And down they’d all pour and sit in about, Miss Mur-
gatroyd sitting neat as a pin, Such Fine, and eating her
grape-fruit up like a sparrow pecking at a bit of dung
(you laughed : but you sometimes wished that Ma wouldn’t
say those things about folk so often : the picture stuck,
true or untrue, and you never saw them in real likeness
again) ; Sergeant Sim Ueslie supping his porridge and
goggling at you over his collar ; Bwan eating quick, clean
and indifferent, lost in his thoughts or else in a book,
all squiggly lines and figures and drawings , Miss Ena
Lyon, complete with complexion, eating her bacon and
talking to Clearmont, he’d been to a concert the night
before and Miss Lyon was saying she liked music as
well just loved a talkie with a Catchy Choon. Poor Mr.
Piddle with his long thin neck and his long thin head, as
3i
GREY GRANITE
bald as a neep and something the shape, would snap up
his meat in a haste to be gone in search of news for the
Daily Runner, a fine big paper, the pride of Duncairn,
and awful useful for lining your shelves; Cushnie, red¬
eared and trying to speak Knglish, would call out above
the folds of his tie Will ye pass the cruet ? Em in a gey
hurry. Me and Mr. Robertson have the Spring Sale on ;
and Mr. Neil Quaritch would push down his cup, May I
have another, Mrs. Colquohoun ? he’d left his breakfast
untasted as usual.
And Ma Cleghorn would sit at the top of the table,
her big red face set square on its neck, sonsy and sturdy,
you’d liked her from the first, she you, you supposed you’d
neither of you frills, you’d seen over much of this queer
thing Ifife to try hide from its face by covering your own
with a ready-made complexion out of a jar, or ready-made
morals from the Unionist Club, or ready-made fear and
excitement and thrill out of the pages of the Daily Runner.
. . . And you d sit and stare at your own porridge plate
till Ma would call out; Will you fill up the cups ?
By ten the lot would have clattered away, on trams
and buses, on foot and a-run, tripping along like a sparrow,
Miss Murgatroyd, Mr. Piddle whirring away on his bike
like a snake going pelting back to the Zoo, Miss Ena Lyon
with her heels so high that her shoulders drooped and her
bottom stuck out, quite up-to-date, Ewan in dungarees,
no hat, books under his arm, black hair almost blue, shin¬
ning down the Steps of Windmill Brae two at a time, hands
in his pouches. . . . And they left the real work of the
house to begin.
32 GREY GRANITE
You and Ma Cleghorn couldn't run to more help
than Meg for the washing-up in the kitchen, Ma took the
first floor with the dining-room and sitting-room and swept
them and dusted them and tore up the rugs and went out
to the back and hung them on the line and thrashed them
to death in a shower of stour. You had the bedrooms,
Ma’d asked if you’d mind—Some of them stink like a
polecat’s den. You’d said you didn’t care, we all stank
sometimes. And Ma had nodded, Pegs, and that’s true.
But fancy you being willing to let on—you that was wed
to a minister body l
You’d mind that speak as you redded the rooms,
gathered the mats and pulled wide the curtains, opened the
windows and made the beds, swept out and polished each
of the rooms, emptied slops and carried down washing, and
cleared the bathroom of razor blades and bits of paper stuck
with shaving-soap hair, other things that Miss Murga-
troyd would half-hide, so would Miss Lyon in a different
way. . . . Wife to a minister—wife to Robert: it faded
away in the stour of the days though only last Spring you
had been in Segget, had slept beside him in those chill
hours that had come trailing down a blanket of dark to
cut you off one from the other, Robert sleeping sound
while you woke and heard the wail of sleet from the
Grampian haughs. All ended, put by, Robert himself
no more than a name, you’d loved him so deep that the
day he died something had broken in you, not in your
heart, it didn’t break there, something in your belly
went numb, still, and stayed so . . . but the queerness of
things ! You could hardly mind now the shape of his
GREY GRANITE 33
face—his eyes, were they grey or blue ?—Oh God ! . . .
And you’d sometimes stop and feel sick to think how
quickly even your memories went, as though you stood
naked in an endless storm shrilling about you, wisp
by wisp your garments went till at last you’d stand to all
uncovered—love, pity, desire, hope, hate put by under the
sail of the endless clouds over Cloud Howe, the Howe of
the World 
Then you’d shake yourself to sense, get down with
pail of water and a scrubbing-brush, scrub and scrub
till your finger-nails, so smooth and round-shaped in your
years at Segget, come jagged again, hacks in your fingers
that caught the blankets as you turned in unease of a
night and sent a shrill stream of pain up your hands.
Queer to work again in such fashion, use all your body
till you ached dead tired, by the time you'd finished the
upper floor your hips were filled with a stinging and shoot¬
ing, like a bees’ byke with bees, bad as having a baby,
sweat in runnels either side your nose—you felt like a
greasy dish-clout, just, ready to be wrung and hung out
to dry. And when you got down to the kitchen at last
Ma Cleghorn would skeugh at you over her specs, Pegs,
lass, you take well with a slammock of work. Like a cup
of tea ?—Here, gi’me the basses, I’ll take them out while
you sit down a minute. You’d say I’ll shake them myself,
I'm fine, and she’d look at you grim, It’s your funeral,
then. But die where it’s easy to spread out the corp.
A blessed minute that when you’d gotten back, though,
sat down to drink the strong tea Ma made, hot, steaming and
thick, Ma drinking another cup the other side of the table,
C
34 GREY GRANITE
Meg pleitering still at the kitchen sink. You felt all
revived, throat, belly and—better not further. (Miss
Murgatroyd you were sure never went further, Ma Cleg-
horn on the contrary seldom went higher.) You’d see
yourself as you sat and drank, your head and hair and face
and breast in the kitchen mirror over the range, flushed
face, not pretty, it was never that, sulky eyes and the
mouth men had liked well enough in your time—-long
ago, afore you grew old and took to scrubbing ! . . . And
you’d finish your tea and loup to your feet and be gone
to finish the rest of the ploy, and be back in the kitchen
to lend Ma a hand to plan out the dinner for those that
came home—Mr. Clearmont from the University, Ewan
seldom, Mr. Piddle sometimes, Mr. Quaritch and Miss
Ena Eyon never, John Cushnie when Raggie’s rag Sales
would allow, Sergeant Sim Eeslie sure as the clock.
Ma had a great cookery-book of her own, made up
of recipes cut out of the papers, daft ones and good ones
and plain damn silly ones, Ma’d say What stomachs
some folk must have to eat the dirt that the papers say !
But she cooked well enough, passable yourself, Jock the
cat would sit and purr under the red-hot glow of the
range, half-roasted the brute had been since his birth,
and liked it: Ma said he’d enjoy hell. And she’d lift
him aside with a meikle great foot, impatient-like, and
he’d purr all the time, while the foot was under him,
while he sailed through the air, while he landed with a
thump out under the sink. And Meg would give a bit
scraich of fear, and maybe drop a plate, inviting death.
In the first few days you’d been sorry for the lass,
GREY GRANITE 35
Ma Cleghorn treated her worse than dirt, bullying her,
sneering at her, upbraiding Almighty God for making
such a trauchle to pest decent folk. Syne you saw that
Meg, thin, schlimped and pert, wasn’t feared a wee bit,
sleeked and sly with a sideways glint in her eyes at Ma,
taking her in and her measure unfeared. And Ma that
could skin a body alive with her tongue and hang out the
hide in the sun to dry wouldn’t send Meg out on a message
if it rained, heaped her plate with great helpings at dinner,
and when she saw the bit maid over-trauchled with a job
would swear at her and go tearing to help. ... So you
didn’t interfere but got on with your own work, plenty
of that—how you’d ached at first afore dinner-time,
hungry as you’d never been in a manse : genteel appetite
going with all else, walking now with a quick and a hasting
step not the long lope that had once been yours, face
altering as well from the drowsy mask that had come on
you under the yew-trees of Segget—waiting, half-asleep,
sitting deep in a chair, for Maidie to bring tea out on the
lawn, the peesies flying over Segget blue in smoke, smoke
in sun smother, long ago, long ago ; and Robert coming
striding across the lawn, whistling—and you looked, and
he hadn’t a face—
And once Ma came on you as you stood and wept,
tearless, sobbing dry-eyed, and stared and knew, shook
you and hugged you tight, it hurt: Don’t greet, nothing’s
worth it, not a damn thing, no man that ever yet was, Chris !
You’d stopped from that daft carry-on at once, shamed of
yourself, bothering Ma, weeping like a fool over something
as common as kale, losh, weren’t there thousands of
36 GREY GRANITE
widows in the world worse off than you and not snivelling
like bairns ? And you’d shaken Ma off, gentle as you
could : I know. I'm just giving myself a pet. My father
would have said it was salts I needed.
Dinner and the feeding of all the faces, funny to think
a face was mainly for that; and then out shopping for
the morn’s meat. You went down Windmill Steps in the
blue Spring air, the grey granite walls rising about you,
if the day was clear you’d see below Duncairn spread as
a map for show, far off, north-east, the sheen of the Beach
beyond the rolling green of the Dinks, Footforthie a
smother of smoke ayont the Docks, the Fish Market and
the trawlers’ rig, the Forthie gleaming grey under its
brigs. Cleaving the jumble of warrens and wynds went
Royal Mile like a south-driven sword, to the left the new
biggings of Ecclesgriegs, Town Hall and courts and
Thomson Tower, the Tangleha’ trees that hid the Uni¬
versity, the gentry's quarters, genteel Craigneuks—
to the right in jumbles around Grand Central the Cowgate
and Gallowgate, Paldy Parish, and far off in the west
beyond Footforthie the fishers’ weetoun, called Kirriebem.
You waited a tram by the Windmill Steps, it came
showding and banging up from the Station, green like a
garden slug, in you got, and sat down and closed your
eyes and thought hard, the things you’d to order, where
you’d best get them. Fish, beef, eggs, butter, go swear
at the grocer, the laundry hadn’t sent back those sheets,
Ma Cleghorn wanted the chimney-sweep, you needed
a new frock and must bear with the need. . . . Out into
Royal Mile you stepped,—there on his stance, unmoving,
GREY GRANITE
37
King Edward, bald as a turkey and with much the same
face, ready to gobble from a ton of grey granite. In the
seats round the plinth the unemployed, aye plenty of
them, yawning and wearied, with their flat-soled boots
and their half-shaved faces, they’d cry their bit bars
as they stared at the stir, or chirp a bit filth to a passing
quean, sometimes though seldom they did it to you.
You didn’t much mind, were you wearied yourself and
half-fed, you thought, with nothing to do, you’d do worse
than chirp.
Only once had that worse ever happened to you, you’d
run down the steps from the Mile to the lane that led to
the Gallowgate’s guff one evening, to a dairy there that sold
good eggs. Day above, but already half-dark in that place,
no body about as you hurried along, or so you thought
till you sighted the man. He’d been leaning in the door¬
way of an empty warehouse, heard you coming and looked
up and down : and as you came near he got in your way.
I’m starving, wifie. Gi’me a tanner.
His face was thin and dirty and brown, he’d no
shirt, his jacket pinned over his breast, smelt awful, great
knuckled hands, should you scream ? And then you’d
known that that would be daft, you’d said All right,
though I haven’t one to spare. And you’d opened your
bag, heart thumping as you did it, what if he grabbed and
made off with the lot ? But he didn’t, stood waiting,
face red with shame. You’d found him the sixpence,
handed it over, he’d nodded, no thanks, and looked away.
And you’d hurried on down the lane to the dairy, suddenly
trembling and your lips grown wet.
38
GREY GRANITE
You'd get back to tea with the netbag full, have a first
cup ere the others came, Archie Clearmont first, banging
up the stairs, he’d meet you and smile, ’Lo, Mrs. Colquo-
houn. That’s a nice frock. You’d tease him and say
There’s a nice woman in it, and he’d blush, boy-clear,
I know that as well. If only Kwan were as simple as he !
. . . Mr. Piddle tearing in from his office, all in a fash to
be off to the Station and catch the 6.30 bound for Dunedin.
Not that he’d catch the train himself, he’d send off
the latest news of Duncairn and make a bit extra salary,
he-he! from the linage the Tory Pictman would print. . . .
Miss Ena Eyon trailing in half-dead from the work in her
office, half the rouge gone, the other half sprinkled about
like a rash, she’d drawl on the Awful Rush in the firm,
and the Boss no more than a Vulgar Keelie. . . . Ewan
at last, black-streaked, black-haired, as cool and composed
from Gowans and Gloag’s as he’d been when haunting
the hills of the Howe seeking the flints of the ancient
men.
More clearing away, more tidying-up, getting ready
supper, eating it, clearing it—you might almost have
hated the sight of food with the number of times you
messed the stuff. But you didn’t: instead, you were
hungry all day, ate a large supper at nine o’clock, found
work nearly done and yawned a bit, and sat listening to
Ma’s radio in the sitting-room, a deserted place most
nights but for you. And you’d listen to talks on ethics
and cocktails and how to go hiking on the Cote d’Azur,
minding the baby, copulation in catkins, and the views
of Jacob P. Hackenschmidt on Scotland and Her Ancient
GREY GRANITE
39
Nationhood; and you’d switch the thing off, losh, that
was better, worth paying a licence to keep the thing quiet,
drowse instead and think of the countryside, corn coming
green in clay parks this night as often you’d seen it when
you were a quean, wedded to Ewan in Kinraddie long
syne—you that waited the feet of another Ewan now.
In Paldy Parish as the June came in there came a
wave of heat with the month, it lifted the guffs from the
half-choked drains and flung them in under the broken
doors down through the courts to simmer and stew, a
body could hardly bear the touch of his sark as he lay
in bed by his wife of a night, the weans would whimper
and move and scratch on the shake-down over under the
window—stewing in the front of a half-open furnace.
And a man would get up in a Paldy tenement and go
along the passage to the W.C., blasted thing crowded,
served a score of folk, not decent, by God what a country
to live in. On the Broo since the War and five kids to
keep, eating off your head—och, why did you live ?—
never a minute of quiet to yourself, nothing but the girn-
ings of the wife for more silver, the kids half-barefoot,
half-fed, oh hell.
And the wife would turn as she heard him come back,
lie wakeful and think on the morn’s morning—what to
give the weans, what to give the man, fed he must be ere
he took the streets to look for that weary job he’d not
find—he’d never find one you had come to ken. Hardly
believe it was him you had wed, that had been a gey
40 GREY GRANITE
bit spark in his time, hearty and bonny, liked you well:
and had hit you last night, the bloody brute coming drunk
from the pub—a woman couldn’t go and hide in booze,
forget all the soss and pleiter, oh no, she’d to go on till
she dropped, weans scraiching, getting thin and like
tinks, and the awful words they picked up every place,
the eldest loon a street-corner keelie, the quean—oh
God, it made a body sick.
And the quean would turn by the side of her sisters,
see the faint glow of the dawn, smell the reek of the Paldy
heat—Christ, would she never get out of it, get a job, get
away, have clothes, some fun ? If they couldn’t afford
to bring up their weans decent why did father and mother
have them ? and syne nag and nag at you day on day,
on this and that, the way that you walked, the way you
behaved {take care that the loons don’t touch your legs),
the way that you spoke—nothing pleased the old fools,
and what you brought home they thought should be
theirs, every meek that you made, nothing for yourself,
stew in the reek of the Cowgate’s drains till you died and
were buried and stank to match. My God, if a lassie
couldn’t do anything else she could take a bit walk out to
Doughty Park, fine there, though the place was littered
with Reds, fair daft, the Communionists the worst of the
lot, aye holding their meetings and scraiching and bawling
that the workers all join up with their unions and fight
for their rights and down with the gents.
But no decent lassies would listen to them, for they
knew the Communionists were awful tinks who wanted
to break up the home.
GREY GRANITE
4i
Every day as the Cowgate stirred Meg was up at the
cheep of dawn, seeing to young Jessie and Geordie for
school, getting ready breakfast, snapping back at Mother,
Father the old devil lying snoozing in bed, he didn’t go
down to the Docks till ten. He swore he could hardly
get a wink of sleep because of the old trawl-skipper next
door, awful religious and fond of a nip, who thrashed his
old wife near every night, singing out hymn-tunes like
hell the while. If other folk could sleep through the
old skipper’s roar of Rock of Ages, cleft for me as he cleft
his old woman under the bed, why couldn’t Father sleep
as well ?
Alick, Meg’s brother, would get into his clothes, grum¬
bling as usual when he’d only porridge. He was barely Meg’s
age, an apprentice-lad down at Gowans and Gloag's in Foot-
forthie. That might have been fine, the beginnings of a
job, but when his apprenticeship was up—well, every¬
body kenned what happened to apprentices. They were
sacked right off when they needed men’s wages, and Alick
like others would be chucked on the Broo.
Alick said this morning when Meg sneered that, Ay,
maybe to me the same as the others, but not to the dirty college
sods. And he said that Gowans took college pups now,
with a special apprenticeship, easy as winking, they served
the first six months at the Furnace, same as the others,
but what happened to them then ? They squatted their
dowps in office jobs, and put on clean collars and gave out
their orders, bloody toffs, though no better than you or me.
There'd been two of them in the last two years, training
as managers, they weren’t sacked, when the last machinery
GREY GRANITE
42
came into the Works that would do all the doings without
working-chaps : you’d still need somebody to oil it about,
and they’d keep the mammie’s pets to do that. Another
had come a two months back—a black-haired, stuck-up
gypsy Bulgar, over-fine to speak to a chap like Alick,
he’d get a sock in the kisser sometime.
Meg said Don’t blether, you haven’t the guts ; you’re
jealous he’s brains and you haven’t, that’s all. Alick snorted
Brains ? Him ? He’s only got swank. And me and the
chaps in the Furnaces are planning a little bit of a surprise
for Mr. Bloody Ewan Tavendale.
—WHO ?
Alick said Wash out your lugs. Ewan Tavendale’s
the name if you want to know. Here, get out of my way till I
get on my boots, the hooter’ll be howling in a minute or so.
So that was where HER son worked, was it then ?
What had She to be stuck-up about ? A lassie could bear
with old Ma Cleghorn, an orra old bitch but not a bad
heart. But the way that that Mrs. Colquohoun took
on, and looked at you cool, put a body off. And who was
she to put on her airs that kept a lodging-house for a
living and had her son only an apprentice like Alick ?
Meg grabbed her hat and set out for Windmill, the
Cowgate slowly unwreathing its fug, up in Royal Mile the
lorries were lolloping over the calsays, Paldy Parish litter¬
ing its doors with weans, snuffy and ragged, kids off to
school, scrawling dirty things on the pavements, some
throwing filth and cheeking a lassie. . . . She’d get out of
this place, get a lodging somewhere in Tangleha’ or the
Ecclesgriegs.
GREY GRANITE 43
But who should she meet where the Cowgate lane
climbed up to the stour and whirr of the Mile than Big
Jim Trease the Communionist, red-cheeked and sappy,
everybody kenned him and called him Jim when bobbies
weren t looking. But Meg had no use for those coarse
brutes the Reds that would do away with the gents and
her job, and when Big Jim smiled all over his face twink¬
ling his wee pig eyes at her she made to go by with her
nose in the air. He'd a creature with him she didn’t know,
thin, brown, ragged, with an ill-shaved face; and Jim
cried Meg, I’ve been looking for you. Has your Ma still
got that spare bed to let ?
Meg snapped Supposing you gang and speir at her ?
Big Jim smiled at her sappy and kind, she felt half-
shamed though the beast was a Red : Right, and we will.
Many thanks, Meg.
Would you credit that ?—trying to land a Red in the
house, maybe rape you and gut you in the middle of the
night, as the coarse tinks did with hardly a break, night
on night, in that awful Russia. If Ma wasn’t soft she
would keep the door snibbed. ... Oh to hell, there’s the
Windmill tram !
She caught the thing by the skin of the teeth and got
out under the Windmill Brae, ran up the Steps and met
face to face young Ewan Tavendale coming down them—
three at a time, no hat, in overalls, hands in his pouches,
two books alow his oxter, his eyes went over her, why need
he be proud ? The like of him made you think the Reds
right, he needed to be jammed by a wall and shot.
Morning, Meg, he said, Didn’t notice you, and smiled
GREY GRANITE
44
as sweet as a kid at you. Oh, losh, and the things you’d
been thinking about him !
And the things Alick said they were doing to-day—
Gowans and Gloag made metal containers, bolts and
girders and metal trestles, fine castings for sections of
engine casings, a thousand men working in great rattling
sheds built to hold the labour of three times the number in
a rattle and roar of prosperity. Ewan Tavendale would
think of that now and then, Gowans had flourished just
after the War, high wages and bonuses dished out to all,
pap for the proletarirats. Wonder what they did with
the high money then ?—Spent it on the usual keelie
things, dogs and horse-racing and sleeping with whores,
poor devils—it had nothing to do with him.
Hardly anything to do with the others at all, stoking
his shot in the Furnaces, stripped to the waist, he stripped
brown, mother’s skin, and tightened his belt over shovel
and barrow, cleared out the clinkers and wheeled up a
load and flung it deep in the whoom of the flame, the
Works kittling up as the morning woke, bells snarling
hell if the heat now and then went low in one fire or another.
In an hour or so Ewan’d be dripping with sweat, and drink
and drink from the tap in the rear, water that gushed out
again from him, a sponge-like life and tremendous fun.
The other apprentices, keelies the lot, didn’t seem anxious
to chum up at all, thank goodness, it gave him time to
tackle the books of the trade, metallurgy twice as exciting
as flints. He stacked the books with his coat in the sheds.
GREY GRANITE
45
till dinner, and went up and scrubbed himself, put on his
coat and went down to the Docks with books and a sand¬
wich and swotted up Castings. But the other apprentices
stayed behind and laughed and joked in the lavatories,
insanitary devils, no business of his.
But this forenoon was the worst he’d faced in the
Furnaces, hours clogged with heat, lungs going like bel¬
lows, once the foreman Dallas came swearing down, about
fires, not Ewan’s, it was drawing fine. He looked at Ewan
and gave him a nod Take, it a bit easier, Mr. Tavendale.
Yours is fine. It’s the fires of those other muckers. He’d
hardly gone up the steps to Machines when the pimply
keelie Alick Watson called out to another of them,
Ewan didn’t know his name : D’you know any poetry
this morning, Norman ?
—Oh ay, a fine bit. You other lads heard it ?—
There once was a gent Tavendale
(Oh-Rahly-the-guff-makes me pale !)
A pimp and a sucker,
A dirty wee mucker—
And his name, as I’ve said, Tavendale.
.... Oh ay, the toff bastard heard it fine, but he didn’t
let on, just went on with his work, all the lads laughed,
you’d known he’d no guts. Syne Norman Cruickshank
sang out another bit, you laughed till you split, a funny
sod Norman, about the toff mucker’s mucking mother.
He threw down the shovel as he said that, Norman, getting
ready for the toff when he louped to bash him, as any body
would do when he heard THAT about his mother. And
he heard it all right and gave Norman a look, fair damn
46 GREY GRANITE
well maddening, as though Norman were dirt and not very
interesting dirt at that: and went on with raking the
clinkers, calm. But Alick you could see was warming up
to him, you all warmed up, led him hell’s delight, serve
him right with his bloody show-off. Wee Geordie Bruce
couped his barrow when he wasn't looking, and Norman
nipped back for the urine pan and slung it right slap in
the toff Bulgar’s fire, it sent up a guff that near killed you
all and the toff had to stoke it up afresh.
He’d only just finished when the hooter went, Alick
Watson had nipped up a minute afore bent on some devil¬
try you could be bound. When the rest of you got up the
stairs he was just coming out of the washing-sheds where
all the lads left their jackets and pieces. He winked and
you knew he’d been up to something, and grinned and
waited for Tavendale.
Bwan went in and washed and took down his jacket,
and put it on, and put his hand in his pocket. . . . For a
minute, certain, he knew he’d be sick, damned sick, and
then swallowed his throat and didn’t think as he washed
his hand and wrenched off his jacket. Nuisance—miss
most of that section on phosphor bronze now.
The five keelies were waiting for him to come out,
they held their noses and capered and laughed, Bwan
thought The pimply keelie, I suppose, and walked quietly
over to where the five stood. The keelie’s eyes in his thin,
dour face didn’t change, scornful of gentry, hands in his
pouches, Damn shame, he’s no chance, said Bwan’s mind
as he hit him and felt his arm go numb.
Alick shot like a stone from a catapult half across
GREY GRANITE 47
the yard crash in a bowie of lime, Ivwan knew he d be
back in less than a minute, the only other dangerous one
in the gang the one called Norman, an unscrubbed little
swine—about three inches higher than yourself—still, little.
And he swung up his left, keelie on the point, he whirled
about and went flump in the stour ; and it seemed to
Kwan suddenly all the day cleared, Duncairn clear, bright
and sharp to his finger-tips’ touch, he’d never felt so well
or so keen for life, he laughed: and Alick Watson came
at him head down.
The foreman and another man heard the fighting
back by the sheds and came round to see. The childe
with the foreman grunted That’s him: another of those
gentry apprentice sods, but the foreman Dallas of course
had his favourite, he called out Steady a bit, Tavendale !
Ewan dripped blood like a half-killed pig, but he didn’t
know that, infighting, they were both thick-streaked with
blood and snot, holding and fighting, Alick tried to kick,
Ewan felt a stab of pain like a knife, and loosened his hold
and Alick broke away—looked, swung, and struck, it
caught Ewan’s neck, he gave a queer grunt and twist,
the fight finished, queer that silence to Alick and the way
the sheds shook.
hen Chris woke next morning the first thought that
came in her mind was of Ewan. She didn’t lie in bed and
stretch as usual, got out and dressed and went down to the
kitchen. Outside the early dawn of Duncairn lay pallid
on the rigs and rinds of grey granite stretching away to
48 GREY GRANITE
the feet of the morning, east wan-tinted, no birds crying,
the toun turning to yawn awake below. Jock came and
purred and circled her legs, sniffed and sneezed, but she
hardly noticed, taking up Ma’s tea, syne Miss Murga-
troyd’s, and so at last gained Ewan’s room.
He lay fast sleep, head bandaged, neck bandaged, she
thought He's so young! as she saw his arm, dimpled and
smooth of skin, lying by his side. And then as she went
nearer she saw his face, the bruises upon it, the broken
skin, the swollen lips : and went soft inside in a blaze of
rage. How could they—to Ewan, he was only a bairn !
She picked up one of the apples he’d want and sat
down on the bed and shook him awake. He woke with
the usual quick lack of blink, but half unguarded for a
minute, Chris thought, as though she’d peeped down in
his eyes for once to that queer boy-self that so puzzled
her. Son of herself but sometimes so un-sib she felt more
kin to Meg Watson the maid !
She told him that, idly, as though it were a joke, and
he put his hands under his head and considered, and said
something about hormones and egg-cells, whatever they
had to do with it—I’m not so different; but I want to
KNOW THINGS. And I love you up to that phosphor-
bronze hair—more than Meg Whatname'll ever do.
Chris said it was Watson, not Whatname, and Ewan
said that was a funny coincidence, wondered if she were
any relation of the keelie that had bashed him so yester¬
day.—Perfect hiding he was giving me, Chris ; and I struck
it unlucky, head bang on a girder. Fought like a rat and
so did I.
49
GREY GRANITE
Chris said What was it all about ?
He lay still a minute, still in that posture. Oh, filth.
Nothing you need worry about. They don’t much like me,
the keelies, Chris.
She’d heard him use that word before but the queerest
thing happened to her now. She said sharply : What’s a
keelie, Ewan? Your father was a ploughman afore we
were wed, and I was a quean in a crofter’s kitchen.
Bandaged, undisturbed, he lay looking at her. A
ploughman’s not a keelie. And anyhow, Chris 
Her heart tightened in a funny way. There was some¬
thing else. She said Yes?
—Oh—-just that though my father was a ploughman
and you came from a kitchen—that’s nothing to do with me,
has it ? I’m neither you nor my father : I’m myself.
All that day and the next Meg didn’t turn up, Ma
Cleghorn swore at the lazy limmer and did all the washing-
up by herself, and broke two plates in the first half-hour
—all through that lazy bitch of a quean ! Jock hardly knew
where he was after that, his feet more often in the air
than not, as Ma kicked him from the range to the dresser
and back, he purring like a red-hot engine the while,
Chris saw the last act as she brought down a tray—Jock
scart his claws in Ma’s sonsy leg and give a loud scraich
and shoot out of the window. And the sight was so funny
Chris heard herself giggle, like a bairn, Ma rubbing her leg
and swearing:
D
5o
GREY GRANITE
Malagaroused by a cut and forsook by a jade. Will
you go to the Cowgate and see what’s come of her ?
So down Chris went, not taking the tram, better ac¬
quainted with Duncairn by now, down Windmill Brae
with its shelving steps, across the Meal Market where they
didn’t sell meal, sold nothing, old, a deserted patch, dogs
and unemployed squatting in the sun, through Melvin
Wynd into kittle Mart where the ploughmen gathered in
feeing-times in Paldy Fair in the days long syne. They
didn’t now, two or three shops littered here, shops every¬
where that a body might look, how did they all live and
manage a trade ? The pavements were sweating a greasy
slime as she made her way to the Cowgate s brink, steps
leading down to Paldy Parish.
She’d never been so far into Paldy before, seeing the
broken windows and the tattered doors and the weary
faces of the women going by, basket-laden, all the place
had a smell of hippens, unwashed, and old stale meat and
God knew what, if even He knew, Chris thought He couldn t.
And she passed a Free Kirk with a twist to her thought:
if there was a God as Robert had believed couldn’t He
put it into the heads of those folk they’d be better served
filling the wames of their weans than the stomach of
some parson clown in a Manse ? But then she’d never
understood religion, thought it only a fairy-tale, not a
good one, dark and evil rather, hurting life, hurting death,
no concern of hers if others didn’t force it on her, she her¬
self had nothing to force in its stead.
Robert once had had with his Socialism. And looking
around that evil place in the stew of the hottering rising
GREY GRANITE 51
June she minded that verse he'd once quoted in Segget,
long ago in that other life :
Stone hearts we cannot waken
Smite into living men :
Jehovah of the thunders
Assert Thy power again !
And dimly she thought that maybe that was what the
Covenanters had believed when they faced the gentry
in the old-time wars. Only God never came and they died
for Him and the old soss went on as it always would do,
aye idiot folk to take dirty lives and squat in the dirt, not
caring a lot were they letten a-be to rot as they liked. No
concern of hers—she belonged to herself as Ewan had
told her he belonged to himself, she'd have hated the
Covenant giving her orders as much as she’d have hated
its enemies, the gentry.
. . . And all far off from a middle-aged wife looking for
a missing maidie, Meg. Where was it Ma said the creature
bade ?
She found it at last, a deep narrow court, used to
the smells she went in and up the stone stairs, chapped
at the door and waited and listened. In a tenement near
a row was on, furniture crashing, Chris heard a woman
scraich and grew white to the lips. Syne she heard a
loud voice raised in a hymn :
Count your blessings, name them one by one,
Count your blessings, see what God has done.
Count your blessings, name them one by one
And it will surprise you what the Lord has done.
52
GREY GRANITE
There followed a final thump on that, somebody
cried I’ll hae the bobbies on you, and then a door banged :
and then a loud silence.
Chris chapped again, heard a noise inside, the door
opened, she said : Is Meg Watson in ?
The man who opened the door was the same who’d
once stopped her in the Upper Cowgate and asked her for
sixpence.
They both stared like gowks a minute, speechless,
he’d shaved and wore a second-hand suit, over-big for
him, bulging at paunch and bottom, the thin brown face
didn’t look so starved, cocky and confident till he met her
eyes. Now he flushed dark and licked his lips :
Meg Watson’s gone off to look for a job.
Chris nodded. I see. Will you tell her I want to
know why she left me ? My name Mrs. Colquohoun and
if she comes back the morn you can tell her that I’ll say
nothing about it.
... So that was who the sulky bitch was, boor joy
and stuck-up—he’d heard the tale, Alick had sloshed her
son down at Gowans. A stuck-up toff, he’d said ; like
the mother, damn her and her glower and her ice-brick
eyes.
Meg was feared to go back when she heard from her
brother he’d bashed your son in a bit fight at the Works.
Chris said I see. Well, she needn’t be, and turned
and went down the stairs, stare on her back; turned
again : I think you owe me a sixpence.
He dived in a pouch and brought one out, flushing
again, but looking at her cocky : There you are, mistress.
GREY GRANITE 53
Enjoy your money while you have it. There’s a time coming
when your class won’t have it long.
Chris's temper quite went with her a minute, silly
fool, the heat she supposed, she didn’t care :
My class ? It was digging its living in sweat while
yours lay down with a whine in the dirt. Good-bye.
Ewan was tired enough of the going next week, lying
in bed, reading in books, feeling the throb under the
bandages go. If only they’d leave him alone with the
books. . . . And he thought Most people—how they hate
you to read!
They were at him all hours : Chris in the morning,
decent sort Chris, though you’d never got very close to
each other since that winter in Segget, further off now
since you’d made it plain her notions on begettings weren’t
necessarily yours. But once or twice when she put her arm
under your head and unwound the bandage in the early
morning, stuck on the lint, hands and arms so alive you
felt queer—as though you were falling in love ! You’d
gathered the reactions were something like that, and
possible enough for all that you knew, those psycho¬
analyst Jewboy chaps had had cases enough, record on
record, (Edipus the first of the Unhanged Unhygienics
—Rot! Let’s dig in the phosphor bronze!
She’d hardly have gone than a thunderous chapp, and
in would come waddling Mrs. Cleghorn, very fat, very
oozing, you rather liked her. Supposed it was her jollity,
easily come by, it didn’t mean much and couldn’t mean
GREY GRANITE
54
much, but a bearable ingredient—so damn scarce. She’d
plump on the bed and ask how you were, not stop for an
answer, instead start in to tell of the time when her hus¬
band, Jim, was ill—with mumps, so he’d said, and looking
like a tattie scone. And he’d been fair ashamed to have
mumps at his age, the daft old tyke, Ma had wondered a bit,
funny-like mumps for a body to have. So she’d hauled
in the doctor, will he nill he, and then could you guess
what his illness was ? You couldn’t, you were over inno¬
cent and young, but the cause turned out to be one of
those trollops down in Fish Market, Jim had chased her
and gotten her and got tally-ho. And he’d got more
than that when the doctor left.
Ewan had said Oh? not caring a rap, and Ma had
nodded. Mind out for the women. You’re over bonny a
lad to be taken that way. Ewan’d said, grave, he’d be sure
to mind, and Ma had said Fine, and gone, thank God.
Back to that chapter on phosphor-bronze smelting,
house cleared with the others all off to their work. All ?
—No luck, a knock on the door.
Miss Murgatroyd this time, thin and peeking, tittering
and shy like a wren gone erotic, Eh me, in a Gentleman’s
Room, such a scandal! I thought you’d maybe like an
orange or so, she’d brought two of the things, great bulging
brutes. You said you were sorry you never ate them,
and she shrivelled in a way and you really felt sorry—
why couldn’t old people leave one alone ?—always in
need of pity, compassion, soft words to fend off the edge of
things, cuddling in words, oh, damn them all!
So you’d put on a kind face and said you were sorry—
GREY GRANITE
55
it was nice of you to think of me. And at that she’d un¬
shrivelled like a weed in the rain, peeking and chittering
in your bedroom chair all about herself and her life and
her likes ; and Ewan’d sat and listened, half-wishing she’d
go, half-wondering about her in an idle way. Queer to
think she’d been born for that, been young once like one¬
self and wanted real things : food, wind on the sea,
phosphor-bronze smelting . . . maybe not, but books and
sleeping with men. Surely at least she had wanted
THAT—her generation had seemed to want little else,
blethered in their books about little else, Shaw and the
little sham-scientist Wells running a fornication a folio
before they could pitch an idea across : gluey devils,
the Edwardians, chokers and chignons, worse than the
padded Victorian rabbits. . . . And now at the end she
had none of it, went to tea-fights, the Unionist Eadies,
she liked Mr. MacDonald and the National Government
and read lots of faded verse in Scots, the new Scots letters
the Edwardian survivals were trying to foist on the Scot¬
tish scene—Have you read Dr. Pittendrigh MacGillivray’s
pomes? Such lovely, I think, and Clean and Fine. And
Miss Marion Angus, though they’re awful Broad. And
Ewan said he hadn’t, he didn’t read poetry. Then she
tweetered from the room and came back with a book of
Mr. Eewis Spence’s for him to read, all about the ancient
Scots, they’d been Awful Powerful in magic. And Ewan
said that was nice ; and he was sure they had.
Tired after that and a spot of sleep. Chris would
waken him up at noon, with a tray and dinner, gleam of
bronze hair, dolichocephalic heads scarce in Duncairn,
56 GREY GRANITE
his own one only a betwixt-and-between. And he'd
eat, not much, and read some more, Duncairn outside in
its afternoon haze, far off the foghorn on Crowie Point
lowing like an aurochs with belly-ache—the cattle that
Caesar said couldn’t lie down, no knee joints, they kipped
up against a tree. . . . What the devil had that to do
with a chapter on Castings ?
Five o'clock, shoes on the stairs, a guffaw, a knock,
young Archie Clearmont. Decent chap Archie, if a bit
of a bore, baby face, a long story about a Prof : he’d turned
round in the lecture-room and said to Archie, and Archie
had turned and said to the Prof—, and Ewan nodded
and wondered they hadn’t grown dizzy. Rectorial elec¬
tions coming off soon, Archie thought he’d support the
Nationalist. Kwan asked why, and Archie said for a
bit of a rag, the Nationalist candidate was Hugo Mac-
Downall, the chap who wrote in Synthetic Scots. Ewan
asked Why synthetic? Can’t he write the real stuff? and
Archie said I’m damned if I know. Sounds more epileptic
than synthetic to me—that’s why I’m interested, I’m going
in for Medicals!
John Cushnie next, sure as fate, poor devil with his
English and his earnestness, smart, in a new Raggie
Robertson suit, he’d brought Ewan an Edgar Wallace
to read—you must feel weariet with lying there. And he
said ’twas a gey thing when decent chaps, just because
they spoke well with a bit of class, were bashed by keelies
down in Footforthie. They were never letten into Raggie
Robertson's Depot, time the bobbies took they kind of
wasters in hand. , , . Ewan said What wasters ?—Raggie
GREY GRANITE 57
or the keelies ? and Cushnie gawked above his tight collar
oh ay, ha-ha, but Raggie was all right, he’d a good job
there and a chance to get on. A chap didn’t need a
union to help if he put his back into a job of work—
though Labour wasn’t so bad, look at Bailie Brown.
But the Communists—along in Doughty Park on Sunday
he'd stopped and listened to that dirty Red, Trease,
paid from Moscow as every body knew, splurging away
about all workers uniting and yet pitching glaur as fast’s
he was able at decent folk like Bailie Brown. . . . And
then, thank God, the tea-bell went, and Cushnie with it,
tie, spots, and all.
Mr. Quaritch came up in the evening to see him, with
a pile of review-books from the Daily Runner, and his
pipe, ferret-twinkle, and unhappy wee beard : Want
anything to read ? What’s that you’ve got ? Ewan
showed him the text-book and he shook his head : Dreich
stuff. Would you care to review a novel ?
Ewan shook his head, couldn’t be bothered with
novels. Mr. Quaritch said he might count himself
lucky, he’d to bother enough with the lousy tripe, twenty
or so of the damned things a week. Ewan asked who
wrote them—and what on earth for ? and Mr. Quaritch said
mostly wee chaps without chins—but what for God
might know, He kept quiet about it, unless it was to pro¬
vide the deserving reviewer with half a crown a copy when
he sold them at Burnett’s.—Piddle makes a fortune flogging
reviews. Have you heard what happened to my colleague
last night ?
Ewan said he hadn’t and Quaritch told him the tale,
58 GREY GRANITE
Mr. Piddle was racing for the six-thirty train with his
copy, Duncairn news for the Tory Pictman, gey late,
in a hell of a sweat that he’d miss it. You knew the way
the daft Bulgar would ride ?—head down over the handle¬
bars, neck out like a gander seeking the water, all in a
flush and a paddy for time. Well, he wheeled out from
the Runner offices in Wells Street, into Royal Mile, and
pedalled like hell up the Royal, tramcars and buses and
lorries about, dodging the lot and beating them all.
Dark was coming down and the street-lamps were lighting
and Fiddle’s feet were flying like the wind when, keeking
his head a bit to one side he noticed a lot of folk yelling
at him. Well, he took no notice, half Duncairn yells
whenever it sights our reporter Piddle, just thought that
the proletariat,—he-he !—was living up to its lowness,
yes ? And then next minute his bike left the earth, his
head went over his heels and vanished, and when he’d
finished wondering with a sheer despair how he’d ever get
copy about the end of the world down to the Tory Pict¬
man office when there wouldn’t be a Pictman left to print
it—he looked up round the curve of his haunches and saw
two or three folk looking down at him, one cried Are you
killed ? Piddle wasn’t sure, but he managed to stand up,
and was dragged from the hole by the crowd that had come,
the rest of the survivors of the end of the world. And
then he found what had happened was he’d fallen head¬
first into road-digging in the middle of the Mile, he’d
passed the red lights with never a glance, that’s what the
shouts had been for as he passed. The bike looked like a
bit of string chewed by a cow, but Piddle had no time to
GREY GRANITE
59
attend to it: the next things the gapers around the hole
saw were Fiddle’s legs scudding away up the Mile, bent
on catching the Pictman train. . . .
Ewan lay with his hands under his head, drowsing and
thinking of Quaritch and his tale when both had gone
down to their supper. Now the night was coming in by,
lamps lighted ; through the window and up through
the night the ghost-radiance of Footforthie flecked the
blind.—People thought that kind of a story funny, every¬
one laughed, Quaritch had expected him to laugh, and he
hadn’t, he’d seen nothing funny about it. What was
funny in a queer old wreck like Piddle falling into a dirty
hole in the Mile ? He’d hurt himself a bit, no doubt—
that the fun ? Enjoyment of seeing another look ridicu¬
lous ? And he thought of innumerable stories he’d heard,
overheard when a boy, been told in Duncairn with loud
guffaws and glazed eyes of mirth—about women and their
silly, unfortunate bodies, about babies and death and
disease and dirt, and something he supposed was lacking
in him, Robert had once told him he was born a prig, he’d
no humour and couldn’t be cheerful and lusty and scrabble
in filth and call it fun. Fun ? Real fun enough in the
world—fun in the roar of the furnaces, in a sweeping
door and a dripping trough of blazing metal a-pour on
the castings, fun in the following of formulae through trick
on trick in the twists of maths, fun in the stars wheeling at
night with long lights over the whoom of Footforthie,
the breath-taking glister of the Galaxy. Fun in the dead¬
ness of Duncairn after midnight, you could stand by
the edge of Royal Mile where it wheeled to the moving
6o GREY GRANITE
blackness of Paldy and think the end of the world had
come—the shining dead streets of this land long hence,
waving in grass, beasts lairing in culverts, the sea creeping
up and up on Footforthie and a clamour of seals on the
rocky points where once they launched the fisher-fleets,
men long gone from the earth, not wiped out, not lost,
vanished an invading host to the skies, to alien planets
and the furthest stars, storming at last the rooftops of
heaven, earth remote from their vision as the womb and
its dreams remote from the memory of an adult man 
He woke late that evening to hear a commotion in
the next-door bedroom, empty till then. Low talk and
quick steps, Mrs. Cleghorn, Chris, then a shivering bang,
silence, a cough. Then Ma Cleghorn whispering Will that
have waked Ewan ?
His own door was opened a minute later and Chris
came in, walking pussy-foot, she stood and listened till
he called out soft, ’Lo, Chris. What’s all the row next door ?
She said she was sorry they’d woken him up, a new
lodger was coming in a hurry, late, and they were making
her up a bit bed.
Ewan said he saw. What was she like ?
Chris didn’t know, a lass up from Dundee, the
new schoolteacher at the Ecclesgriegs Middle—English,
she’d heard, though she hadn’t yet seen her—
Then she saw with a smile that Ewan was asleep,
human beings were never of much interest to him.
GREY GRANITE
61
Taking up tea to Ma Cleghorn next morning Chris
found the meikle creature already out of bed, getting into
her stays like wool into a bottle. God, Chris, just give a
pull at they points, I'm getting a wee bittie stout, I’m half-
feared.
Chris put down the tray and pulled at the tapes, the
house a drowse in the Saturday quiet, she asked why Ma’d
got up so early, and Ma asked if she’d forgotten the new
lodger-lassie, was Chris herself to do all the work ? Chris
said Well, unless she’s so awful big, she’ll make no difference
to me, I hope. What’s she like ? and Ma gave a bit of a
snort: A stuck-up looking bitch from a school in Dundee.
Schlimpid and English and thin as a sparrow, I never could
abide the stuck-up kind. Chris said Some folk say that
I’m stuck up, Ma said So you are, and so’s your bit Ewan.
I’ll maybe thole two of you about the house but I’ll be danged
to a cinder-ash afore I bear with another of the brew. . . . Och,
lassie, go away, I’m in bad tune this morning. Take the
teacher creature her cup of tea.
So Chris did, and went up and knocked, a cool
voice said Come in, in she went, the lassie lying in the
double bed Chris and Ma Cleghorn had put up yestreen,
window wide open, curtains flying, Chris lowered her eyes
to the quean herself and saw her trig, neat, in a flowered
nightie, slim like a boy, like Ewan almost, short black
hair and blue deep eyes, great pools going down into dark¬
ness. She sat up and took the cup and nodded : You Mrs.
Cleghorn’s partner ?
Chris knew for certain then what was wrong, the
English lass was shy as could be but carrying it off with a
62 GREY GRANITE
brassy front, the kind of cool courage Chris always had liked.
And as Chris smiled the brassiness went, the quean flushed
sweet as they looked at each other, was suddenly neat and
demure and forlorn, no more; like a prize pussy-cat, Chris
thought, with that faint line of down on her upper lip
that one liked the look of, most folk didn’t.—I’m Mrs.
Colquohoun and you’re Miss Johns.
—I say, you’re different from what I expected.
—You’re a wee bittie different yourself, Chris said, and
carried down the tray and went on with her work, nice to
have had a nice quean like that for one’s own sometime :
as well as had Ewan. But that was just dreaming—she
wouldn’t have been one’s own any more than was Ewan,
the pussy-cat, wave of nice black hair by her smooth, soft
cheek and that funny down and that youngness—oh,
but they made one feel like an old trauchled wife, the
young folk here in Duncairn !
And suddenly, washing the breakfast things, there
came a waft of stray wind through the window, a lost
wean of the wind that had tint itself in play in the heights
of the summer Mounth, Chris nearly dropped the cup
she was drying. Ma Cleghorn louped: Steady on, lass !
Mighty be here, have you seen a ghost ?
Chris said Only smelt one, and then, on an
impulse, Ma, I want the day off. Can you spare
me ?
Ma said If you like : you’re hardly my slave, Chris said
she knew that, but would Ma manage herself ? Ma said
she’d managed a good fifty-five years, off and on, and
as far as she kenned at the moment she was neither
GREY GRANITE 63
a cripple nor had brain-concussion. So Chris laughed and
said I’m off to the country.
And she ran up and knocked at Ewan’s door and went
in and found him not in bed, up, naked, a long, nice naked
leg and that narrow waist that you envied in men, lovely
folk men, he was standing and stretching, stark, the
bandage gone from his head. No shyness in Ewan, just
a cool disinterest, he turned and grinned I’m feeling my
feet. Too hot to lie in bed. Chris: let’s take a holiday
out in the country !
She said I was off for one on my own, his face fell a
little, then he nodded All right. Have a good time. 
But aren’t you coming? Not if you want to be on your own.
And Chris said that was daft, she would always want him,
and he said that was nice, and meant it, with a sudden
glint of a grey granite smile nipped across to where she
stood and cuddled her, funny to be cuddled by a naked
man, she made out she was shocked, for fun, and he didn’t
see that, said Oh, sorry, and went back to his clothes. A
minute Chris stood with the queerest feeling of lostness,
staring at him, fun was beyond Ewan.
Then, because she knew that couldn’t be helped, daft
to expect him other than he was, she said Be ready in
half an hour, and went down to her room and changed,
looked at her clothes and found a light frock, took off
all she wore and looked at herself, as of old, with cool
scrutiny, seeing mirrored her face with the broad cheek¬
bones, seeing the long white lines of thigh and waist and
knee, not very much need to envy men. The queer
years that I’ve been with you ! she said to the earnest thing
64 GREY GRANITE
in the mirror, and the shadow-self smiled back with golden
eyes, shadow and self no longer woe, light-hearted suddenly
as she dressed in haste to be gone for a day from Duncairn
and herself.
She went into the sitting-room for a book, the place
half in darkness, half the blinds drawn against the sting
of the sun without. And the place wasn’t deserted as
usually it was, Miss Johns was sitting in the biggest chair,
on her heels, not reading, chin in hand looking out through
the window, a little lost pussy-cat Chris thought, with
her trim black hair and her lobeless ears. She smiled
up at Chris with that fenceless smile that came when the
brassy shyness went: and Chris was moved to an impulse
again. I’m going for a jaunt to the country to-day. W ould
you like to come—if you’ve nothing else to do ?
She hesitated a minute, flushed, demure : I’d love
to. Terribly. Only—I’ve no money. And in a sudden
rush of confidence was telling Chris she’d come dead broke
from Dundee and wouldn’t get an advance until Wednes¬
day, she’d nothing till then and had settled herself to
mope the week-end in Windmill Place. Chris said that
didn’t matter, she’d pay, and Miss Johns could pay her
back some time ; and the pussy-cat was shyer than ever,
and Chris asked her name, and she said Oh, Ellen. Helen
really, you know, but when Dad came down from London
to work in Dundee I went to High School and they mis-spelt
me Ellen. . . . And Chris had almost expected that, she
couldn’t have been anything else but an Ellen !
She was dressed and down in the sitting-room a
short minute before Ewan came down. Chris said Ellen
GREY GRANITE
65
Johns—Ewan Tavendale. He’s my son—sometimes.
Ellen’s coming out with us on our jaunt. And Bwan,
un-boylike, wasn’t shy a bit, he said that would be nice,
grey granite eyes on Ellen Johns as though she were a
chapter on phosphor bronze, they were much of the same
straight height and look, both dark and cool, Ellen cool
as he was, no blush now, indifferently polite to each other.
And a queer unease came on Chris that minute as she
looked from one to the other : as though she were sitting
in a theatre-stall and watching the opening of a dark, queer
play.
But that fancy was lost in the hours that followed.
The three went down to Mercat Cross and found an Aber¬
deen bus waiting there, ready to leave in a minute or so,
crossing the Slug into Banchory, down by Deeside and
Dunecht to Aberdeen, turning about and so back again.
And they got in the bus, the two pussy-cats polite, not
wanting either to sit by the other, manoeuvring each to
sit by Chris. Chris said I think I’ll sit by myself, right at
the front, and went and sat there, the other two on the
opposite seat, Ellen by the window, hatless, hair braided,
curling long lashes and secret face, Ewan hatless as well,
cool and composed, staring about him as the bus moved off.
Once he leaned over and asked where they were going,
Chris didn’t know, they’d get out at some place they liked.
In a minute, themselves near the only passengers,
the bus was climbing Duncairn Rise up to the heights
where the men of Montrose had marshalled three hundred
66 GREY GRANITE
years before, suddenly, on a Sunday, over-awing Duncairn
and pouring down to a Sabbath of blood. Chris turned
in her seat and looked down and saw the white sword
gleam of Royal Mile, the haze that lay on the lums of
Footforthie, shining boats dipping out to sea in the pelt
and shine of the morning tide. And then the road
wheeled up and around and paused : there below the
Howe of the Mearns, crowned, shod, be-belted in green
and gold, silver chains where the Mearns burns wound and
spun to the Forthie’s flow, Stonehaven forward, Bervie
behind, far off the shimmer where the Grampians rode,
the farms gleaming below the bents, haugh on haugh,
tumbling green long corn-swaths under the wind. And
syne the bus stopped and took on a farmer, thin and mean¬
looking, he starved his men and ate sowans to his meat,
never cuddled his wife except on Sundays and only then
if he’d been to kirk. And like a great squat beetle the
bus crept on, oh, they were cutting the hay in a park,
the smell in the bus, drifting, tingling—Blawearie’s
night and days, hush of the beeches in a still July, pastures
sleeping around Segget Manse with Robert beside you
as you drowsed on the lawn—Robert that you looked at,
and he hadn’t a face 
And Chris shook that woe dreaming away from herself,
let nothing spoil the sun and the hay and the goodness
of being alone and alive, peering through lids at July un¬
fold, birring, up the blossoming Howe, deep-honeysuckled
ran the hedges, in parks outbye the gleg-vexed kye were
tearing about with tails a-switch, some eident body would
have sour milk the night. Ewan and Ellen at last were
GREY GRANITE 67
speaking to each other. Ewan had turned his head and
Chris saw the English quean looking up at him, cool,
like a virtuous panther-kitten exchanging tail-switchings
with a black-avised leopard.
The next thing she knew they were through Stonehyve,
windy, guarded by Dunnottar Woods, and were climbing
up the heath of the Slug, no hay-smell here but the guff
of the heather billowing up to the quivering heights.
And there came a sudden memory to Chris—a winter
night twenty-three years before when father and mother
and Will and herself and the loons long-lost and the twins
that died had flitted across these hills in a storm, with
battered lanterns in the on-ding of sleet . . . twenty-three
years before. Back and back through the years as the
bus climbed the Slug, years like the rustle of falling leaves,
dreams by night and dim turnings in sleep, and you were
again that quean in the sleet, all the world and living
before you unkenned, kisses and hate and toil and woe,
kisses at night when the byre-stalls drowsed, agony in
long deserted noons, hush of terror of those moon-bright
nights when you carried within your womb seed of men—
for a minute they seemed no more than dreams as you
drowsed, a quean, in the smore of the sleet. . . .
But now below, creeping out of the heat, the Howe
left behind, came Banchory shining in its woods and far
away the long flicker of the ribboned Dee that went down
through the fine lands to Aberdeen. On the sky-line
the mountains marched snow-covered, lifting white faces
to the blink of July, in great haughs the fir-woods bou-
rouched green, red crags climbed the northwards sky to
68 GREY GRANITE
peer, hands at their eyes, at Aberdeen. Sometimes a
body would get off the bus, sometimes it would stop by
a tottering gate and a slow, canny childe climb grinning
aboard, or a sharp-faced woman, Aberdeen, thin-voiced,
thin-faced, with a quick ferret look around, from Chris
to Ewan, Ewan to Ellen, syne to the driver, syne up to
the roof, syne out of the window, syne folding her lips
and her hands, the world well and respectable and behav¬
ing itself. And Chris sat and watched the comings and
goings, happy and happy and sweir to the bone.
Then at last here was Ewan shaking her : Chris.
Where are we going ?—to A berdeen ? She said goodness
no, she didn’t hope so, though the tickets were for there
and ’twas a pity to waste them. And then she looked out
and saw flash by a word white-painted on a cross-roads
sign, a word and a place she had long forgotten. We’ll
get out at Echt and wait the bus back.
So they did, Echt snoozing white in its stour, bairns
playing about the doors of the houses, Ewan went into a
shop and bought pieces, Chris went to help : loaf, butter
and milk, some cakes and a knife, they looked loaded
down for a feast or a famine, or tinks on the road, fair
shocking Echt. Ellen showed her bit English mettle at
once, no pride, she caught up the loaf and the bottles,
some of the bairns cried after them, she laughed and
didn’t mind, kitten not cat. Then Chris led them off
on the ploy she’d planned.
The Hill of Fare towered high in the sun, scaured and
red, the flow of heather like a sea of wine, leftwards, dark,
the Barmekin haunted even in July’s sun-haze. Chris
GREY GRANITE 69
cried Oh, wheesht! to the others and they stopped, looked
at her, listened, and heard through the sun, lonely, un¬
forgotten, never-stopping that plaint, the peesies flying
over Barmekin. Twenty-three years and they never
had stopped. . . . And Chris thought half-shamed, in
a desperate fly ting : Losh, but their throats must surely be
dry!
And at last through the litter of the wild-growing
broom choking the upward track, they came to the croft
of Cairndhu where Chris had been born, rank thistles
all about, the windows were shuttered, grass crept to the
door, another and bigger farm long syne had eaten up the
land and the implements. They poked their heads inside
the out-biggings, the barn musty with a smell of old hay,
rats scampered there in the sun-hazed gloom, Chris
wandered from place to place like one seeking that which
she wouldn’t know—maybe something of that sureness
mislaid in the past, long ago, when she was a quean.
But here was nothing, nothing but change that had
followed every pace of her feet, quiet-padding as a panther
at night.
When she turned away from the biggings at last she
found Ellen and Ewan sitting on the mill-course, speaking
low and clear to each other, not to disturb her, cat-like
the two of them, unheeding the sun, haunted by no such
memories as hers. Daft not to have known from the first
that this meant nothing to them, ruined biggings on a
little farm : her old frere the land was nothing to them,
children of touns by love or by nature, Ewan born in a
croft in Kinraddie knew little of the land, cared less.
GREY GRANITE
70
not his job—that was stoking a furnace in Gowans and
Gloag’s!
He asked where now, and said Chris was the guide, and
she pointed up to the Barmekin shining high and flat in the
air against the tops of the further hills : I haven’t been
there since I was a bairn. Ellen said Well, you don’t look
as though that was long ago, and Chris asked Am I as
bairn-like as all that ? and Ellen flushed and said she
hadn’t meant that—it’s just you don’t possibly look as
though Mr. Tavendale here were your son. Chris smiled
at him. But he is, worse luck, Ewan nodded, a kindly joke
in his compass: The luck’s all mine. Come along then.
Carry your parcel, Chris ?
Chris said shortly she’d manage it herself, she wasn’t
in her second childhood, either; and they laughed and went
up and left the road and waded through the whins and the
broom and over fences and up steep braes, steep so’s
you’d to clutch up step by step with handfuls of heather
and grass for holds, Ellen flinched with stung legs and
Ewan slipped on smooth shoes, Chris laughed back at
both of them, shinning the slopes light and free and sure
of her hold, she looked back from the uppermost ledge
and waved to them, poor fusionless creatures her father
would have called them—her father who all his years in
Cairndhu had never (that she knew) climbed Barmekin,
over-busy with chaving and slaving his flesh, body and
soul and that dark, fierce heart, into the land to wring
sustenance therefrom. So the whirlimagig went round
and on : Father, now Ewan, the hill little to either, only
to her who came in between and carried the little torch
GREY GRANITE 71
one from the other on that dreich, daft journey that led
nowhither—
But, standing up there, with the wind in her hair, the
thought came to her that THAT didn’t much matter—daft
the journey, but the journeying good. And she looked
at the slopes gay in their gear, useless and meaningless
but fine fun to climb. . . . The other two thought the
same when they came, Ellen with smooth braids tangled
a bit, a damp lock over Ewan’s high forehead, they laughed
and said things about Excelsior, young and sexless both,
like the angels, dark angels, folk of an older stock than
Chris’s, intenter and sharper, not losing themselves in
heather dreams or the smell of broom. Ewan said he
was hungry,—aren’t you, Miss Johns? and Miss Johns
said Aren’t I ? Hungry as hell.
So they made their way in the brush of the broom
along the outer wall of the old Piet fort built by the men
of antique time, a holy place before Christ was born,
Chris said they'd find shade from the sun in its lithe.
Syne they came on a thing they had little looked for,
Ewan swore, his old passion for old times rekindled—
men had been here, a great gang of them, had torn down
the walls and flung them aside, deep ruts showed where
the carts had been driven : and within the inner walls
of the fort were the char and ash of a great foolish
fire.
Some celebration, Chris thought, not caring, Ewan
did, he said it was a filthy outrage and justified nothing
that had happened in Aberdeen since they told the first
of their filthy stories—that was probably before Christ’s
72 GREY GRANITE
coming as well. Chris had never seen him so angered,
she herself wasn’t, they were only rickles of stone from
long syne raised up by daft childes who worshipped the
sun. Ewan said That’s rot. You know nothing about it,
and Chris gave a laugh and sat down on a stone, clasping
her knees, not caring a fig one way or another. Miss
Johns said I agree with Mrs. Colquohoun. What does it
matter what happens to this rubbish? There are things
more in need of worrying about. Ewan turned his grey
granite glance upon her : I didn’t expect that YOU would
think different.
So they sulked a bit, sitting each side of Chris,
and she didn’t laugh, but looked fearsomely solemn.
Then Ewan opened the milk-bottles and got out the bread
and Ellen spread out the papers for a tablecloth, two
sleek black heads under Chris’s gaze ; and they fed her
solemn, though Ellen peeped at Ewan through those
dangerous lashes—she’d trip on them some time. But
he wasn’t thinking of her at all, his mind far off with his
ancient men, he began to tell them of that time that had
been, how close in the generations these men were, how
alike ourselves in the things they believed, unessentials
different—blood, bone, thought the same. For if history
had any lesson at all it was just that men hadn’t changed
a bit since the days of the folk in the Spanish caves
who painted the charging aurochsen—except to take up
civilization, that ancient calamity that fell on the world
with gods and kings and culture and classes—Ellen cried
But then you’re a Socialist!
Ewan looked blank, smooth boy face, angel-devil
GREY GRANITE 7Z
eyes, suddenly dragged from his ancient Piets : What’s
that to do with it ? And Ellen said Everything. If there
was once a time without gods and classes couldn’t there
he that time again ?
Ewan said I suppose so. I don’t much care. It won’t
come in our time. I’ve my own life to lead—and at that
the slim quean seemed to forget all her hunger, curling
lashes and dimpled ways, she said Mr. Tavendale was
talking rot, how could anyone live a free life in this age ?
—capitalism falling to bits everywhere, or raising up
classes of slaves again, Fascism coming, the rule of the
beast 
Ewan sat and munched bread They won’t rule me.
I’m myself. You’re not. You’re a consequence and pro¬
duct as all of us are. If we’re all the children of those
old-time men that you’ve told us about do you think for a
moment we aren’t more the children of our fathers and
mothers and the things we’ve read and depended upon ?
fust silly to say that we’re not. And Ewan asked what had
that to do with it ? ; and they lost their tempers ; and
Chris fell asleep.
When she woke they were nowhere in sight; far off,
drowsy, a ring-dove crooned in the little woods scampering
down to Edit, remoter still a peesie cried. The sun had
wheeled to afternoon, red on the nearer mountain cliffs,
blue far in the upper heights. Mountain on mountain :
there was Bennachie ahint which the tired folk went in
song. Sitting with her hands so propping her, Chris
found herself aching, sun-wearied and sad, in the bright
day’s glister curiously lost though she knew that Ewan
74 GREY GRANITE
and the English quean couldn't be far off, they’d come
if she cried. Call ?—behave like a frightened old wife ?
She lay back again in the heather bells, and under
her ears heard whispers unceasing, sounds soft and urgent
and quieter than mice, the little world of the little beasts
about its existence of sowing and harvest, feeding and
fighting and a pridesome begetting, moral and urgent and
dreadfully unsweir, pelting through lives as brief as a
blink as though the blink lasted a hundred years. It
felt like God so to lie and listen—so long’s the beasts
didn’t come climbing up a stalk and mistake one’s ear
for heaven.
When she rose and went to look for the others she
found them close on the ruined dyke, not sitting and
kissing as they might have been (some sense in that, said
her mind, still sleepy), Ewan perched on a stone, hands
clasping his knees, looking down at Ellen sitting clasping
hers, nice knees and long legs and the lot forgotten, talk¬
ing, still talking—about history and Socialism and free¬
dom for people in the modern world. And Ewan was
saying Yes, that seems sense and I'll look it up. I've always
thought Socialism just a measly whine, MacDonaldish stuff
and politicians’ patter. Different when you think of it
as history making, the working class to be captured and led :
all right, I’ll give the keelies a chance. Ellen said A nd don’t
be so horridly superior; you’ll never lead if you can’t be
an equal. . . . Oh, there’s your mother. Coo-ee, Mrs.
Colquohoun !
It seemed that their talk had run them clean dry,
quiet enough in the afternoon quiet gathering up the
GREY GRANITE
75
papers and burning them, carrying the milk-bottles
down the hill, the sun was dimming and all about bees
homing like drunken men from a pub, one came bumbling
against Chris’s face and tangled itself in her hair. She
brushed it aside, quickly and quietly, and Ellen shivered
I couldn’t do that! Chris asked What ? and Ellen said
That bee—I’d have jumped and hit it and it would have
stung me. I’m a ghastly coward, and shivered again.
Ewan didn’t notice, far off in thought, treading down from
the breach in the Pictman’s fort to seek the like in the
crumbling castle that prisoned the men of his time.
Alick Watson said Och, let the sod a-be. He gave me
as good as I gave him ; and Norman Cruickshank said
He gave you a mucking sight more ; who’d have thought a
toff Bulgar had a punch like that ?
So they wouldn’t have anything to do with the plan
of Wee Geordie Bruce to send a bit note, insulting-like,
to Tavendale’s address when he bade at home nursing
the broken head he’d gotten in that fight with Alick
in the yard—Christ, the place was splottered in blood,
wee Geordie went out and glowered all about it and nearly
got down on his knees to lick it, with his wee shrivelled
face and shifty eyes, awful keen on blood and snot. Alick
said You’re not right in your head, you wee whoreson, he
seemed hardly right himself all that week, snapping a
chap’s head off if you spoke to him praising him a bit
how he’d bashed the toff Bulgar.
Norman wasn’t much better, they both worked like
GREY GRANITE
76
tinks doing Tavendale’s furnace as well as their own, try¬
ing to stick in with the foreman, were they ? They got
little thanks if that was their hope, Dallas came down and
glowered God Almighty, is that the way to work at Gowans
and Gloag’s ? Alick said to him Ach, away to hell. We’re
doing the work of a dozen here—if that doesn’t please you,
gang off and clype. The foreman looked a bit ta’en aback,
We’ve all to do more than our shift in Gowans, so give’s
none of your lip, you Cowgate brat. And Alick said when
the foreman had gone what he’d like to give the bastard
was one in the guts, syne dance on his face with tacketty
boots.
For Gowans and Gloag were fair in a way, they’d
sacked a dozen from Machines that week and were trying
to cheese-pare all over the shops, they’d been on to Dallas
and gotten out his rag. The apprentice chaps in the
dinner hour sat out in the yard and swore at them, and
smoked, and watched through the haze from the Docks the
swinging cranes that loaded the ships, or the bridges open
and a laggard trawler creep in from an antrin night on the
sea, lost in the fogs of the Dogger Bank. And Alick
said by Christ if he had the guts he’d run off from it all and
take to the sea, a fine bit life if it wasn’t that on a ship
a common chap was near starved to death. And Norman
said that he’d like a farm: and he’d near as much chance
of getting that as of wee King Geordie making him his
vallay.
Well, you couldn’t but wonder what Tavendale would
do when he got back to Furnaces on the Monday morning,
stuck up as ever, and acting the toff he looked when he
GREY GRANITE
77
came down and took up his shovel, you keeked sideways
and saw he’d no sign of a bandage, froze up and don’t-
touch-me-I’m-awful-grand. Syne the work started, all
at it hell for leather till the hooter went, no larking or
jookery-packery, Alick and Norman not looking at the
toff, they were maybe a bit feared he’d reported them.
And then as you all climbed up to the yard the toff
turned round to Alick Hullo ! and Alick gave a kind of a
start Hullo! and they laughed, and Norman went dan-
dering over Hullo ! as well, and a fag to the toff Tavendale.
You’d never seen him smoking before, but he took it:
I’m going down to the Docks to eat my dinner. Coming,
you chaps ?
Now Alick and Norman never left the yard, they would
bide there all the dinner hour and raise hell with pitching
stones at old tins, telling bit tales of their Saturday nights,
they were both of them awful Bulgars with the queans,
Norman had gotten a tart into trouble, and laughed when
her Ma came after him chasing him with a bit of a broken
bottle from the Gallowgate half through Paldy Parish ;
and they’d tease Geordie Bruce, the dirty wee devil,
and get him to do the dirtiest capers, rouse hell’s delight
and have a fair time. But now they just looked a bit
tint and surprised, and Alick said Och, ay, as though he
couldn’t help it, and Norman Cruickshank gave a bit
nod, and away the three of them went together.
That was the beginning of a gey queer time, it wasn’t
only the apprentices noticed it, the toff didn’t go out of
his way to be friends but if he came on you, joking-like,
he’d sit down and listen and smoke a fag-end and give a
78 GREY GRANITE
bit nod, and he wasn’t so bad, not looking at you now so
that a childe felt his face was all wrong and his sark gey
clorted up at the neck and he hadn’t ta’en the trouble to
wash that morning. Some said that his bashing had done
him good, he’d gotten scared of the working chaps ;
but Alick Watson said that that was damned stite, Ewan
Tavendale could tackle any Bulgar here. And had he
gone clyping to the management ?
He was in and out of the shops all the time, and Nor¬
man’s father, in the Grindery, took him down to a meeting
of the Union branch, Norman didn’t go, he couldn’t be
bothered, he said to Tavendale They just claik and claik
and grab your subscription and never give anything, they're
a twisting lot of sods in the Union. But the old man's aye
been keen on them. And looked a bit shamed, He's
Labour, you see.
Tavendale said There are lots of chaps that, my step¬
father was, and you all cheered up, sitting on buckets in
the furnace room, a slack hour, and having a bit of a jaw,
you were none of you Tabour and knew nothing about
politics, but all of you had thought that the Bulgars of
toffs were aye Tory or liberal or this National faeces.
And somehow when a chap knew another had a father
who’d been Tabour you could speak to him plainer,
like, say what you thought, not that you thought much,
you wanted a job when apprenticeship was over and a
decent bit time and maybe now and then a spare bob or
so to take your quean to the Talkies—och, you spoke a
lot of stite like the others did, about the queans that
you’d like to lie with, and the booze you’d drink, what a
GREY GRANITE 79
devil you were, but if you got half a chance what you
wanted was marriage, and a house and a wife and a
lum of your own. . . . Wee Geordie Bruce said The Tories
have the money, they’re the muckers for the working man /
and Norman said Blethers, the Bulgars have money, but
they take good care to keep it for themselves or spend it on
their lily-fingered whores, what’s the good of Tories to us,
you neep ? Alick said that maybe the next kabour
Government wouldn't be so bad as the last had been, they
were working folk themselves, some of them, though
they’d birns of the rotten toffs as well. . . . And you all
said what you thought, except Bwan—funny, you’d
started to call him Kwan—he just sat and listened and
nodded now and then, as though he couldn't make up
his own mind : well, that’s what a chap with sense would
do. And when one of the chaps in the Stores said to you :
I hear you re all sucking the young toff’s anus you nearly
took him a crack in the jaw, the daft sod, young Kwan
was as good as he was and a damn sight cleaner in the
neck and the tongue.
Well, Ewan went to the Union meeting that night,
next morning chaps asked him what he’d thought o’t,
and he said there hadn’t been much on at all, there’d been
less than a dozen members there—I suppose you can’t
blame a union if the chaps who belong to it won’t attend its
meetings. Norman asked what the hell was the good of
attending, the Union had sold the pass time and again,
the heads of the bloody thing down in kondon were thick
as thieves with the viscounts and earls. Kwan said that
was rotten if it was true, why didn’t the Union give them
8o GREY GRANITE
the chuck ? And Norman said he’d be Bulgared if he
knew.
Alick Watson said that his Ma’s new lodger, a chap
called Selden, and he was a Red, was aye saying the unions
should chuck out the leaders. And everybody laughed,
you knew well enough what Reds were like, daft about
Russia and its Bolshevists—tink brutes, it made you boil
to think the way they mis-used the ministers there, the
Daily Runner had pages about it and the Pope had been
in a hell of a rage at atheists behaving near as bad as
Christians.
And you all sat by the Docks, you’d go down there
now and look at the two or three ships in the harbour
sleeping an hour in the still July, smoke a slow pencil
plume from the derricks, a dead cat or so floating under
your feet, far off through the brigs you could see the North
Sea fling up its green hands again and again and grab
and scrabble at the breakwater wall—and you blethered
about everything you could think of, Ivwan wouldn t talk
much unless Alick made him, Alick’d slap him on the
shoulder, Come on, man, tell us. But he’d say I don t
know any more than you chaps—less, it’s only stuff out of
books.
Well, wasn’t that a lot ? And you’d ask him about
it, did he hold with this ongoing of the Bolshevists in
Russia, closing down kirks and chasing ministers all to
hell for just preaching, like ? He said he didn t know
anything about Russia but he thought the time of kirks
was past. But you surely believe there’s Something, man ?
and Ewan said Maybe, but I don’t think it’s God.
GREY GRANITE
81
And you couldn’t make out what he meant by that,
funny chap, fine chap, you liked to go home with him, he
called you Bob as you called him Kwan, and was awfully
interested in everything, where you’d been born, and gone
to school, and the stuff they’d taught you in Ecclesgriegs.
And you felt a bit shy to invite him, like, the old man’s
house was a hell of a soss, but you’d like him to tea some
Saturday night. And he said Right, thanks. I’d like
to come ; and you went home and maybe boasted a bit
till your sister, the silly bitch, said Tavendale: isn’t that
the toff that you couldn’t stick ?
And out of the fragments of days and nights Chris
saw her life shape to a pattern again. Getting up and
working and going to bed—it had never been anything else
in a way she thought as she scrubbed the floors, tidied
the rooms, and helped Ma Cleghorn cook the meals or
young Meg Watson wash up at the sink. Meg had come
back and was fair subdued, looking at Chris with a
frightened eye, afraid, poor lass, she’d be somehow blamed
over that fight at Gowans and Gloag’s. But Chris wasn’t
so daft as pay heed to that, Ewan could heed to himself,
she thought, he was growing up with his own life to lead.
And she had hers, and sleep, and food, work, and meikle
Ma Cleghorn to laugh at—and what else was there a body
could want ?
Ma said B’God she should marry some childe, fair
going to waste, a lassie like her. And Chris asked who
she should marry—Mr. Piddle ? and Ma gave a snort, she’d
82 GREY GRANITE
said marry, not martyr, he’d never get up from the mar¬
riage bed.
Chris said she thought that was fair indecent, drinking
tea and pulling a long face; and Ma shook her meikle
red face at her, I^ife was damn indecent as both of them
knew. The first time she’d lain with a man, her Jim, she
couldn’t make up her mind to be sick or to sing. But
there was more of the singing than sickness for all that,
even though it felt awful like going to bed and being
cuddled by a herring-creel, not a man. But mighty, a
lassie when she was a lass just bubbled for a childe to
set her on fire. But now they were all as hard and cold
and unhandled as a slab of grey granite in a cemetery,
lyook at that teacher-creature, Miss Johns, whipping in
and out the house like a futret, with books and papers
and meetings to attend, never a lad to give her a squeeze.
Chris said You don’t know, she’s maybe squeezed on the
sly, Ma said Not her, she’d freeze up a childe. Not but
she isn’t bonny in a kind of a way, though I never could
stick they black-like jades with a bit of a mouser on the upper
lip.
Chris thought of the faint, dark down on the lip of
a downbent face, and the long lashes, curled, soft and
tender, blue in the sun. And she said that she thought
it rather bonny, and Ma said Bonny ? You’ve an awful
taste. Though the Cushnie and Clearmont think the same,
they near eat her up at a breakfast time. I suppose the
most of the queans about are all such a pack of scrawny
scarts that a sleek pussy-cat like our Really-Miss-f ohns
just sets a childe fair a-tingle to stroke her.
GREY GRANITE 83
Chris had noticed how Ellen woke up the breakfast,
though she herself didn’t seem to know it, canty and trig,
with her braided hair and her cool, blue eyes, John
Cushnie would pass the marmalade, and blush, and
habber a bit of English, making an awful mess of it
above his tight-tied tie, Mr. Clearmont would give his
cheerful guffaw and fix his round baby eyes on this titbit
—Coming to the Saturday Match, Miss Johns, Students
and Profs, it ll he great fun ? And Miss Johns would shake
her head, Too busy, and Archie’s face would fall with a
bang. Even Mr. Quaritch forgot his books, the pussy¬
cat had snared him as well, he’d waggle his thin little
beard at her and tell her stories of the Daily Runner,
and start to explain the Douglas Scheme, the Only Plan
to Save Civilization by giving out lots and lots of money
to every soul whether he worked for’t or not. Who
would he such a fool as work at all then ? Miss Johns
would ask, but she’d ta’en it up wrong, Mr. Quaritch
would marshal bits of bread to prove the Scheme again
up to the hilt, and Miss Johns would say it sounded great
fun, she knew there was Relativity in physics, this was
the first time she’d met it in maths. Mr. Piddle would
say, He-he! Fine morning. And how is Miss Johns
to-day, yes—yes ? And Feet the Policeman would curl
his mouser, a Sergeant, and give her a bit of a stare like a
cod that wanted its teeth in a cat, instead of the other
way round, as was usual. Chris would smile at the coffee¬
pot and meet Ellen’s eyes, demure blue eyes with an
undemure twinkle.
She and Ewan were indifferent, polite, Chris thought
84 GREY GRANITE
them too much alike to take heed of each other. But
Miss Lyon couldn’t abide her at all, and would sniff as
she watched her, Just a Vulgar Flirt, she didn’t let men
take Liberties with her. She told this to Chris after
breakfast one day, didn’t Mrs. Colquohoun think the Johns
girl Common ? And Chris smiled at her sweet, I don’t
know, Miss Lyon. You see I’m awfully common myself.
The first bit of scandal on the pussy-cat Chris heard
was brought by Miss Murgatroyd, she had heard it up at
the Unionist Ladies—it was awful, and Miss Johns
looking Such Genteel. And what the Tory women had
been saying was that the new teacher in the Ecclesgriegs
Middle was being over-quick with the strap, strict as
could be, maybe not a bad fault. But worse than that
she was telling the bairns the queerest and dirtiest things,
Mrs. Colquohoun, drawing pictures on the blackboard
of people's insides and how their food was digested and
oh—And Miss Murgatroyd coloured over with Shame,
and dropped her voice and nearly her cup—the way
that the waste comes out, you know.
Chris said she thought that was maybe good and the
bairns would be less constipated. Miss Murgatroyd
tweetered like a chicken in the rain, and then bridled a
wee, Well, of course I’m Single, and don’t know much
about things like that. Chris wanted to ask, but didn’t,
if being Single meant that you never went to the bathroom ;
but a question like that wouldn’t have been Such Fine.
But more was to come, as she heard soon enough,
the Unionist Ladies in an awful stew, and hot to write the
Education Authority. Miss Johns had been explaining
GREY GRANITE 85
the Bible away, the whole tale told to Miss Murgatroyd
by Mrs. Gawpus, the wife of Bailie Gawpus, she said her
little niece had come home and said there wasn’t a God
at all, the new teacher had said so or as good as said so.
He was just a silly old man the Jews worshipped and the
world had really begun in a fire. . . . Just Rank Material¬
ism, wasn’t it, now ?—And who would think it of a girl
like Miss Johns ?
She told the same story to Ma Cleghorn that night,
but got feint the much petting for her pains. Well,
damn’t, there’s maybe some sense in her say, Miss Murga¬
troyd, the Bible s no canny. Mind the bit about Lot and
his daughters, the foul slummocks, him worse, the randy
old ram ? It’s better to speak of beginnings in fire than
let the weans think it began in a midden. Ay, there’s more
in the lass than meets the eye, I’ll have to see how she’s
getting on.
Chris met Ellen Johns a week after that, coming up
the stairs, her dark face pale, she smiled at Chris, a tired-
looking lass and Chris said she looked tired. She said
so she was, though not with the teaching, and then told
she’d been summoned before the Authority and repri¬
manded for telling the Duncairn kids a few elementary
facts about themselves. So I’ve to leave off physiology
and it’s Nature Study now—bees, flowers, and how catkins
copulate. Won’t that be fun ? But she didn’t wait an
answer, just smiled in the sleeked way she had, dark
and cool and wise, a mere slip, a little quean playing about
with fire, and went on up the stair to the room next
Ewan’s.
86
GREY GRANITE
Jim Trease had planned the march for the Friday,
Broo day, with all the unemployed of Paldy and contin¬
gents from Ecclesgriegs and Footforthie and a gang of the
chaps on the Kirrieben Broo. The main mob mar¬
shalled up in the Cowgate, the Communionists crying for
the folk to join up—we'll march to the Council and demand
admittance, and see the Provost about the P.A.C. And a
man’d look shamefaced at another childe, and smoke his
pipe and never let on till Big Jim himself came habbering
along, crying you out by your Christian name, and you
couldn’t well do anything else but join—God blast it,
you’d grievances enough to complain of. The wife
would see you line up with the other Broo chaps, looking
sheepish enough, and cry out Will! or Peter! or Tam!
Come out of that—mighty, it'll do you no good. And a man
just waved at her, off-hand-like, seeing her feared face
peeking at him. But a bit of a qualm would come
in your wame, thinking Och well, she’ll be all right. We’re
just marching down to the Castlegate.
Syne the drum struck up and off you all marched, some
gype had shoved the handle of a flag in your hand, it read
DOWN WITH THE MEANS TEST AND HUNGER
AND WAR, the rest of the billies made a joke about it,
they would rather, they said, down a bottle of beer.
Right in front was Big Jim Trease, big and sappy in his
shiny blue shirt, beside him the chap he’d been helping
of late, Stephen Selden that had been an emigrant to
Canada and come back from the starvation there to starve
here. The two of them were in the lead of the march,
wee Jake Forbes waddling behind, banging the drum,
GREY GRANITE 87
boomroomroom, he could play a one-man band on his own,
a Red musician, and played at the dances with his meikle
white face that had never a smile. And on and up you
rumbled through Paldy, clatter of boots on the calsay
stones, the sun was shining through drifts of rain, shining
you saw it fall on the roofs in long, wavering lines and
floodings of rain, queer you’d never seen it look bonny
as that.
But now all the chaps were lifting their heads as
they marched, and looking as though they hadn’t a care
in the world, not showing their qualms to the gentry
sods. Bobbies had come out and now marched by the
column, a birn of the bastards, fat and well fed, coshes
in hand, there was the new Sergeant, him they called
Feet—Christ, and what plates of meat! Boomr-oom
went the drum and you all were singing :
Up wi’ the gentry, that’s for me,
Up wi’ the gentry fairly.
Let’s slobber on King and our dear Countree—
And I’m sure they’ll like me sairly.
And a lot more like that, about Ramsay Mac, stite,
but it gave a swing to your feet and you all felt kittled up
and high by then and looked back by your shoulder and
saw behind the birn of the billies marching like you, you
forgot the wife, that you hadn’t a meek, the hunger
and dirt, you’d alter that. They couldn’t deny you,
you and the rest of the Broo folk here, the right to lay
bare your grievances. Flutter, flutter the banner over
your head, your feet beginning to stound a wee, long since
88
GREY GRANITE
the boots held out the water, shining the drift of the
rain going by. And now you were all thudding into step,
and beyond the drum saw Royal Mile, flashing with trams,
thick with bobbies : and here out from the wynds came
the Ecclesgriegs men and the fisher-chaps from Kirrieben,
they looked the worst of the whole caboosh. And Big
Jim Trease cried Halt a minute, you all paiched to a stop
while the other chaps drew in and formed fours.
Watching that you minded your time in the army, the
rain and stink and that first queer time your feet slipped
in a soss of blood and guts, going up to the front at Ypres
—Christ, long syne that, you'd not thought then to come
to this, to come to the wife with the face she had now, and
the weans—by God, you would see about things ! Com-
munionists like Big Jim might blether damned stite
but they tried to win you your rights for you. And all
the march spat on its hands again and gripped the banners
and fell in line, and looked sideways and saw the pavements
half-blocked, half Duncairn had heard of the march
on the Town House—and och, blast it if there wasn't the
wife again, thin-faced, greeting, the silly bitch, making
you shake like this, the great sumph, by the side of those
oozing creashes of bobbies, shining their capes in the rain.
But now you'd wheeled into Royal Mile, a jam of
traffic, the trams had slowed down, flutter, flutter the
banners, here the wind drove, your mates shrinking under
the sleety drive, Woolworth's to the right, where all the
mecks went, and there the big Commerical Bank and the
office of the Daily Runner, the rag, it had tried to put a
stop to this march, the sods had said you never looked
GREY GRANITE 89
for work, you that tramped out your guts day on day on
the search—to the Docks, to the granite works, the country
around, as far to the north as Stonehyve. Boomr-oomr,
wee Jake’ll brain that damn drum if he isn’t careful, God,
how folk stare ! A new song ebbing down the damp
column, you’d aye thought it daft to sing afore this, a
lot of faeces, who was an outcast ? But damn’t, man,
now—
Arise, ye outcasts and ye hounded.
Arise, ye slaves of want and fear—
And what the hell else were you, all of you ? Singing,
you’d never sung so before, all your mates about you,
marching as one, you forgot all the chave and trauchle
of things, the sting of your feet, nothing could stop you.
Rain in your face—that was easy to face, if not the fretting
of the wife back there (to hell with her to vex a man’s
mind, why couldn’t she have bidden at home, the fool ?).
She’d take no hurt, you were all of you peaceable,
the singing even in a wee died off, they’d shooed the traffic
to the side of the Mile, a gang of the Mounted riding in
front, their fat-buttocked horses swaying away, well-fed
like their riders, the rain sheeting down from their tippets,
the Bulgars, easy for them to boss it on us—
What the devil was up down there ?
The whole column had slowed, came bang to a stop,
more Mounties with their wee thick sticks in their hands
strung out there across the Mile, rain-pelted, the horses
chafing at the bridles, impatient, Christ, rotten to face if
a brute came at you. And a growl and a murmur went
through the column, what was wrong up there, why had
GREY GRANITE
90
they stopped ? Chaps cried Get on with it, Jim, what's
wrong ? Syne the news came down, childes passing it on,
their faces twisted with rage or laughing, they hardly
bothered to curse about it, the police were turning the
procession back down into Paldy by way of the wynds.
It wasn’t to be let near the Town Hall at all, the Provost
had refused to see them or Trease.
And then you heard something rising about you that
hadn’t words, the queerest-like sound, you stared at
your mates, a thing like a growl, low and savage, the same
in your throat. And then you were thrusting forward
like others—Never mind the Bulgars, they can't stop our
march! And in less than a minute the whole column
was swaying and crowding forward, the banners pitching
and scudding like leaves above the sodden clothes of the
angry Broo men. Trease crying Back ! Take care ! Keep
the line!
And your blood fair boiled when you heard him cry
that, a Red—just the same as the Tabour whoresons, no
guts and scared for his bloody face. And above his head
you saw one of the bobbies, an inspector, give his arm a
wave, and next minute the horses were pelting upon you
hell for leather, oh Christ, they couldn’t—
Ewan was down in Tower Mile when the police tried
to turn the unemployment procession down the wynds
to the Gallowgate. He’d just come from a bookshop
and was forced to stop, the pavements black with out-
staring people. And then they began to clear right and
GREY GRANITE
9i
left, the shopman behind cried Come back, Sir. There’ll
be a hell of a row in a minute, he was standing on a pavement
almost deserted. Then he saw the mounted policeman
wave and the others jerk at their horses’ bridles, and sud¬
denly, far up, the policeman of Segget, the clown that
the Segget folk had called Feet, not mounted, he’d come
by the side of the column—saw him grab a young keelie
by the collar and lift his baton and hit him, crack!—crack
like a calsay-stone hit by a hammer, Ewan’s heart leapt, he
bit back a cry, the boy screamed : and then there was hell.
As the bobbies charged the Broo men went mad
though their leader tried to wave them back, Ewan saw
him mishandled and knocked to the ground under the flying
hooves of the horses. And then he saw the Broo folk
in action, a man jumped forward with a pole in his hand
with a ragged flag with letters on it, and thrust: the bobby
took it in the face and went flying over his horse’s rump,
Ewan heard some body cheer—himself—well done, well
done ! Now under the charges and the pelt of the rain
the column was broken, but it fought the police, with
sticks, with naked hands, with the banners, broken and
knocked down right and left, the police had gone mad
as well, striking and striking, riding their horses up on
the pavements, cursing and shouting, Ewan saw one go
by, his teeth bared, bad teeth, the face of a beast, he hit
out and an old, quiet-looking man went down, the hoof of
the horse went plunk on his breast—
And then Ewan saw the brewery lorry jammed by the
pavement, full of empty bottles ; and something took hold
of him, whirled him about, shot him into the struggling
GREY GRANITE
92
column. For a minute the Broo men didn't hear or
understand, then they caught his gestures or shout or
both, yelled, and poured across the Mile and swamped the
lorry in a leaping wave. . . .
That evening the Runner ran a special edition and
the news went humming into the south about the fight in
the Royal Mile, pitched battle between unemployed and
police, how the Reds had fought the bobbies with bottles,
battering them from their saddles with volleys of bottles :
would you credit that, now, the coarse brutes that they
were ? The poor police had just tried to keep order, to
stop a riot, and that's what they'd got.
The Reverend Edward MacShilluck in his Manse said
the thing was disgraceful, ahhhhhhhhhhhh, more than
that, a portent of the atheist, loose-living times. Why
hadn’t the police called out the North Highlanders ? . . .
And he read up the Runner while he ate his bit supper, and
called in his housekeeper and told her the news, and she
said that she thought it disgraceful, just, she’d heard that
a poor old man was in hospital, dying, with his breast
all broken up : would he be a policeman then, would you
say ? The Reverend MacShilluck gave a bit of a cough
and said Well, no, he understood not—Ahhhhhhhhhhhh
well, we mustn’t worry over much on these things, the proper
authorities will see to them. And gave the housekeeper a
slap in the bottom, well-fed, and said Eh, Pootsie, to¬
night ? And the housekeeper simpered and said Oh, sir—
GREY GRANITE
93
Bailie Brown, that respectable lyabour man, was
interviewed and was awful indignant, he said that he
fought day in, day out, the cause of the unemployed on
the Council, none knew the workers better than he or
the grievances they had to redress. But what good did
this senseless marching do ?—the Council had to impose
the P.A.C. rates the National Government laid down for
it, you could alter nothing for a three or four years
till habour came into power again. The unemployed
must trust the Labour Party, not allow itself to be led
all astray—And he shot Mr. Piddle out on the street, in
a hurry, like, he’d to dress for dinner.
Lord Provost Speight was found in his garden, strok¬
ing his long, dreich, wrinkled face ; and he said that this
Bolshevism should be suppressed, he put the whole riot
down to Communist agents, paid agitators who were
trained in Moscow, the working-class was sound as a bell.
If they thought they could bring pressure to bear on the
Council to alter the rates of the P.A.C., by rioting about in
Royal Mile, they were sore mistaken, he’d guarantee that—
Duncairn’s Chief Constable said it wasn’t true the
police had run, they’d just given back a wee till reinforce¬
ments came and by then the crowd had dispersed, that
was all. No, they’d made only one arrest so far, the
well-known agitator Trease. And the old man who had
died in the hospital had been struck down by one of
the rioters—
94
GREY GRANITE
And the men came back to their homes in Footforthie
and Paldy Parish and Kirrieben, some of them walking
and laughing, some glum, some of them half-carried all
the way, with their broken noses, bashed faces, it made
a woman go sick to see Peter or Andrew or Charlie now,
his face a dripping, bloody mask, his whispering through
his broken lips : Fm fine, lass, fine. Oh God, you could
greet if it wasn’t that when you did that you would
die. . . .
And all that night they re-fought the fight, in tene¬
ments, courts, this room and that, and the bairns lay listen¬
ing how the bobbies had run, of the young toff who’d
appeared when Trease was knocked down and shouted
Break down the lorry for bottles! and led them all off
when the bottles were finished, him and Steve Selden,
and told them to scatter. By God, he’d lots of guts had
that loon, though, toff-like, he’d been sick as a dog of a
sudden, down in the Cowgate when binding a wound.
You wanted more of his kind for the next bit time. . . .
And the wife would say What’s the use of more bashing ?
and you said a man had to die only once and ’twould be
worth while doing that if you kicked the bucket with
your nails well twined in a bobby’s liver 
A week later the Daily Runner came out and announced
that after a special sitting the Council had raised the
P.A.C. rates.
Ma Cleghorn heard the story from Chris: Ah well,
if that's how your Ewan feels. I’d never much liking for
GREY GRANITE 95
bobbies myself, though maybe the meikle sumph, you know,
was doing no more than his duty, like. Chris said His duty ?
To bash a young boy—before the boy had done anything to
him? And Ma said Well, well, you’re fair stirred up.
I’ll think up some sonsy lie as excuse, and tell him the morn
to look out other lodgings.
And next morning Ma tackled the sacking of Feet, he’d
spluttered a bit and put on the heavy as she told Chris
when she came back to the kitchen. But she’d soon settled
up his hash for the billy, telling him his room was needed
for another, a childe they’d promised it a long while back.
He’d told her she’d better look out, she had, and not get
in ill with the Force, they’d heard things in headquarters
about that quean Johns and were keeping an eye on the
house already 
Ma had fair lost her rag at that and told him she didn’t
care a twopenny damn though all the bobbies in Duncairn
toun were to glue themselves on to her front door knocker,
the meikle lice—who was he to insult a decent woman who
paid her rent and rates on the nail ? If my man had been
alive, he’d have kicked you out, sergeant’s stripes and all,
you great coarse bap-faced goloch that you are. Feet had
habbered I wasn’t trying to insult you, and Ma had said
Give me more of your lip and I’ll tackle the kicking of your
dowp myself, and left him fair in fluster, poor childe,
hardly kenning whether he stood on his head or meikle
feet, fair convinced he was in the wrong, and packing up
his case to get out of the house.—So there you are, lass,
and we’re short of a lodger.
Chris said she was sorry, she’d try and get another,
96 GREY GRANITE
and Ma said Och, not to worry about that, some creature
would soon come talking around. Chris thought the
same, not heeding a lot, though it was a shame to lose
Feet’s fee. But he couldn’t have bidden in the house at all
after that tale that Ewan had told her—Ewan with a pale,
cool angry face, stirred as she'd never seen him stirred.
She was thinking of that when the postman chapped,
Ma Cleghorn went paiching out to the hall and silence
followed till Ma cried up A letter for you, Mrs. Robert
Colquohoun.
When Chris got down to the hall there she stood,
turning the thing this way and that, all but tearing it
open and reading, Chris nearly laughed, she was used
to Ma. It’s from Segget, Ma said, and Chris said Is t
now ? and took the thing and opened it and read, Ma
giving a whistle and turning away and dighting with a
duster at the grandfather clock, making on she was awful
ta’en up with her work. And Chris read the long straggle
of sloping letters and was suddenly smelling, green and
keen, sawdust, sawn wood—queerly and suddenly home¬
sick for Segget:
We’ve a new lodger coming on the Monday, Ma. A
man that I used to know in Segget, Ake Ogilvie the joiner,
he’s gotten a job as a foreman up at the Provost’s sawmills.
Chris started awake. The fog had re-thickened,
blanketing Duncairn away from her sight as she stood
here dreaming like a gowked bairn. Her hair felt damp
with the pressing mist veils and the weight of the bag
on her arm was as lead—funny this habit she aye had had
GREY GRANITE
97
of finding some place wherever she bade to which she could
climb by her lone for a while and think of the days new-
finished and done, like a packman halting hill on hill and
staring back at the valleys behind. She minded how
above the ploughed lands of Blawearie this habit had
grown, long syne, long syne, when she'd lain and dreamed
as a quean by the loch in the shadow of the marled Druid
Stones, and how above Segget in the ruined Kaimes she
had done the same as the wife of Robert. Robert: and
Ake Ogilvie was coming from Segget with his long brown
face and his rangy stride. How would he take with a
place like Duncairn ? How had he gotten the job with
the Provost ?
Autumn coming down there in the fog, down in the
days you no more could glimpse than the shrouded roofs
of Duncairn at this hour. . . . And Ewan—what was hap¬
pening to Ewan ? Once so cool and cold, boy-clear, boy-
clever, a queer lad you’d thought would never be touched
by any wing of the fancies of men, grey granite down to
the core—and now ?
In the mirror she saw her face, dim in mist, and smiled
at it with a kind dispassion. And what to herself ?—
just the trauchle of time, the old woman she’d believed
herself at first in Duncairn—as she still did sometimes at
moments of weariness—or that other quean that refused
to die, that moved and looked and stole off her thoughts,
and dreamed the daftest of old, lost dreams, blithe as
though twenty, unkissed and uncuddled ?
Well, time she went into those mists of the future.
There was ten o’clock chapping from Thomson Tower.
G
II
SPHENE
AS the day awoke great clouds had come out of the
North Sea over Duncairn, with them the wind rose
and rose, snarling at the gates of the dark, waiting to
break through with the first peep of light. And now as
that peep came glimmering, far off, beyond the edge of
the Mounth, the storm loosed itself over the toun, sheeting
down a frozen torrent of water. Sometimes the sleet
was a ding-dong fall, and again the wind would whirl
and lift, pitching great handfuls into your face though a
minute before you had been in the lithe. The Windmill
Steps were sheeted in slush, twice Chris slipped and nearly
fell as she ran for the shelter of the mirror ledge, low below
a first shrouded tram wheeled, moaning, and took the
road to the Mile, the lights were going out one by one as
the winter morning broke on Duncairn.
In the lithe of the mirror Chris stopped and panted
and beat her frozen hands together, hatless still but
muffled in a scarf to the ears for that last silly journey
down to the doctor’s. She’d finished with him, done
everything proper, and now there was surely nothing else.
And she felt—oh, she could sleep for a month—like a
polar bear, with the sleet for a sheet 
Her hair faint-sprayed by the sleet that went by, not
touching the rest of her, she raised her eyes and saw it,
half in the dark, half in the light, strange, a strange
blind glister and drift high in the lift, a bannered attack
going by in silence though you heard the shoom of the
GREY GRANITE
99
spears far down. Stamping her feet to bring them to
warmth, she rested a minute, closed her eyes, yawned
over-poweringly and achingly, and ceased from that to
stare sombre-eyed down at the breaking of the sleet-
hunted light. Whatever next ? Whatever next ?
How could she have known that day in July when she
rested here and wondered on things that this would come,
that she’d stand here appalled, that she wouldn’t know
which way to think or to move ? Her mind shrank in a
passion of pity a minute, strangely linked with a desire
to laugh. . . . And she shook herself, no time to stand
here, with the house above wakening and waiting her 
Oh, let it wait, let it rest awhile while she caught her
breath and tried to make out where she’d mislaid that
security hers and her own only a short six months before :
Ivong-mousered, green-eyed, with his ploughman’s
swagger, it had seemed to Chris six months before that
Ake Ogilvie’s coming had brought to Duncairn something
clean and crude as the smell of rain—crude and clean as she
herself had been once before a playing at gentry enslaved
her, like turning round in a lane at night and meeting one’s
own lost self and face, lost a long fifteen years before,
smiling with cool and sardonic lips. Not that Ake had
anything very young about him, or old-like either, he was
one of the kind that seem to stick to one age all their
lives, swagger and pipe and clumping feet, met on the
stairs as he carried up his kist that Monday morning from
the taxi below.
100
GREY GRANITE
Ay, Mrs. Colquohoun, you look bonny as ever. And
Chris said that was fine, but why was he carrying the
kist ? The cabman would surely have given him a hand.
And Ake said he’d just had an argy with the billy and sent
him off with a flea in his lug, by God he’d wanted a whole
half-crown for bringing them up from the Central Station.
Chris said that was awful, cabmen were like that,
but Ake wouldn’t be able to carry up the kist on his
shoulder further, the stairs drew in. So he lowered it
down and syne shook hands and looked her all over with
his swagger green glower. Ay, you’ve fairly ta’en with
Duncairn. D’you miss the Manse ? Chris said Not
much. Shall I give you a hand ?
Ake looked a bit doubtful, he thought of her still as
the wife of Robert in Segget, she saw, genteel and neat
and fine and frail—she said Come on ! and took hold of an
end and Ake did the same, up they went to his room, made
ready, and put down the kist in the corner for t. Syne
Ake looked round and out at the roofs : A hell of a place
for a man to bide, the toun, though the room looks canty enough.
You’ll be gey busy here, no doubt then, mistress ?
Chris nearly cuddled him, calling her that, so long
since a soul had called her mistress : I’ve a lot to do,
same as other folk. But we’ll have a crack on Segget some
time. Ay, faith we will. He had turned away, no frills
or unnecessary politeness with him ; I ll be in to my tea,
but not to my dinner. I’ve to gang up and see the Provost
man.
Chris said that she hoped he’d get on fine, and he said
No fear of that. Ta-ta.
GREY GRANITE
ioi
He made himself at home from the first, sitting argu¬
ing in the sitting-room with Mr. Neil Quaritch, thin, with
his little tuft of a beard and his Douglas Scheme (that
Ewan called the Bourgeois Funk-Fantasy), Ake beside
him looking like a shorthorn bull taking up its spare
time on a gossip with a goat. He looked over-real some¬
times to Chris to be real as she’d meet him coming
in at the door, slow and yet quick, throwing down
his feet with a fine and measured stride, the earth’s
his, yielding the wall to none in Duncairn. And he’d
clump up the stairs and into his room without a sideways
look or a thought, he’d paid his fee and the room was his,
would he creep up quiet for any damned body ?
Chris never saw him at ease in his room. Rousing the
first morning after he came she’d thought to make him a
cup of tea and take it to him the same as to others. But
while she was moving about with the cups and the kettle
was singing and Jock the cat purring away for dear life
by the range and the caller air of the August dawn coming
up the Steps and into the house, she heard a pad of feet
on the stairs, and there was Ake at the kitchen door, his
mouser fresh-curled, in his waistcoat and breeks, no slip¬
pers, his kind never did have slippers Chris minded back
to her farmhouse days : Ay, mistress, I thought it would
maybe be you. This’ll be your kitchen place, no doubt.
Chris said it was—Come in and sit down.
And in he came and sat by the fire and gave the cat
J ock a bit of a stroke, and sat and drank the tea that she
poured him, not offering to help her as Quaritch would
have done, God be here it was a woman’s work, wasn’t
102 GREY GRANITE
it now, who’d ever heard of a man who sossed with the
cups ? And Ake drank the tea through his curling mous¬
tache, and wiped that, and nodded Ay, that’s a good brew.
I think I’ll taik down every morning for one. Chris said
There’s no need to do that, Mr. Ogilvie, I take up cups to
the folk that want them. And Ake said Oh to hell with that,
he wasn’t a cripple and could come for his own. Besides,
he was used to getting up with the light and hadn’t a
fancy for stinking in bed. Chris thought And suppose
I’ve no fancy for you sitting about in my way in the kitchen ?
But she didn’t say it, just went on with her work, watched
by Ake sitting smoking his pipe—Ay, God, she looked a
bonny lass still, a bit over-small for her height, you would
say, but a fine leg and hip, a warm bit quean. She’d
fair set a-lowe and burned up Colquohoun in her time, you
wouldn’t but wonder ; and maybe had never yet had
a man to handle her as she needed handling.
So he got in the way of coming to the kitchen and sit¬
ting drinking his tea every morning, Ma Cleghorn heard
and said to Chris that she’d better look out, for they
weren’t to be trusted, childes with curling mousers like
yon. And then sighed : Though, God, there’s no need to
warn you, I keep forgetting you’re gentry yourself, a min¬
ister’s widow, not for common folk. Chris asked what
Ma wanted her to do with him—or thought he was likely
to do with her ? And Ma said that if Chris couldn’t
guess about that there were other folk than the Virgin
Mary had had their immaculate conceptions, faith.
Chris laughed and paid her but little heed, Ake as
far (she knew) from such thoughts as herself, funny in a
GREY GRANITE
103
way to have him about, it wiped out the years, all the
gentry in her, she was back in a farm kitchen again and
the man sitting douce and drinking his tea and she getting
ready the meat for him. . . . And Ake would give his bit
mouser a curl and tell the latest tale of the Provost.
Chris asked how he’d gotten the job and Ake said by
the skin of the teeth and the will of the Lord, he’d been
at school with the laddie Speight a thirty-five years or
so back, they were both of them of Laurencekirk stock.
Well, he’d been a gey dreich and ill-favoured loon, and
Ake had ta’en him a punch now and then to kittle him up
and mind him his manners. The result was he’d fair
ta’en a liking to Ake and would follow him about like a
cat a fish-cadger, right through their schooldays and a
wee whilie after, when they’d gotten long trousers and
cuddled their bit queans. Syne they’d tint one another,
Ake had gone drifting south as a joiner, to the feuching
stink of the Glasgow yards, to that windy sods’ burrow,
the capital, Edinburgh, syne drifted up to the Howe again,
he’d never felt much at home, as you’d say, outside the
cloud-reek and claik of the Howe. And that was how he
had come to Segget, not near so dead in those times as
now, the joiner’s business with still enough fettle to brink
a man a bit meal and drink.
So he’d settled down there, as Mrs. Colquohoun knew,
till the place was fairly all to hell, with unemployment
and all the lave ; and after her good man died* and so on
Ake fair got sick of sitting about in his shed and looking for
custom to come, scribbling a wee bit of poetry the while,
and glowering up at the Trusta heuchs and wishing to
GREY GRANITE
104
Christ that something would happen.—And Chris said
Oh yes, I mind your poetry. You still write it, do you ?
and Ake said Ay. Bits. It would hardly interest you.
Well, as I was saying—and went on to say that one day
he was having a bit look through the paper and what did
he see there but that young Jimmy Speight, him that he’d
gone to school with long syne, had been made the Lord
Provost of Duncairn toun. At first Ake could hardly
believe his own eyes, he’d thought that talent must be
fairly damn scarce to make Wabbling Jimmy a Cord
Provost, like. He’d heard about him afore that, of course,
how he’d been ta’en into his uncle’s business and heired
when the old uncle wore away a fine sawmill and a schlorich
of silver. But he’d never much bothered about the creature
till he read this notice of him being Provost.
Well, damn’t, that fairly moved Ake a bit, if Wabbling
Jimmy was all that well off he’d surely scrounge up a
job for a body. So Ake locked up his place and put on
his best suit and got on the morning train for Duncairn,
and took a tram to the Provost’s house, out in Craigneuks,
a gey brave-looking place with fal-lal ornaments forward
and back and a couple of towers stuck on for luck like
warts on the nose of Oliver Cromwell. A servant lass
came tripping and held the door open, What name shall
I say to the Provost, please ? And Ake said My name’s
Ake Ogilvie, tell him, and ask if he minds the time in
Lourenkirk when I gey near drowned him in a stone horse-
trough. Well, the lass went red and gave a bit giggle, as
a young quean will, and went off with the message, and
into the room in a minute came Jimmy, gey grand, but
GREY GRANITE 105
dreeping at the nose as ever. And damn’t, he’d come in
fair cocky-like but syne a funny thing happened to him,
it just showed you what happened when you were a bairn
—if you got a rattle in the lantern then you might build
a battleship in later life and explore the North Pole and
sleep with a Duchess, but you’d never forget the lad that
had cloured you, you’d meet him and feel a bit sick in
the wame though it was a good half-century later.
Well, something like that came on Wabbling Jimmy,
he dropped his politeness and his hee-haw airs, and Ake
took his hand and cried out loud : Ay, Jimmy lad, you’re
fair landed here, with all these queans to see to your needs,
at door and table and no doubt in your bed. And the Dord
Provost went as yellow’s a neep : Wheesht, Ake, wheesht,
the wife’s on the prowl. And Ake said he didn’t know that
he’d married—d’you mind what happened to Kate Duthie
long syne ? . . .
Now, that had been just a kind of blackmail, as Ake
knew right well but didn’t much care, in a minute poor
Wabbling Jimmy was ready to offer him half his worldly
possessions if only Ake would keep quiet on the subject
of Kate. Ake said that he was on the look for a job,
what about this sawmill that J immy owned ? And J immy
said he seldom interfered, he'd a manager, and Ake said
he hardly wanted his job, though he’d tackle a foreman’s
he’d manage that fine. So Jimmy in a stew howked out
his car and in they got and drove to the Kirrie, a fine saw¬
mill, and they weren’t there long afore the manager
came over to ask if Jimmy had yet ta'en on a new fore¬
man in place of a childe that had gotten the sack. And
io6 GREY GRANITE
at that what could poor Jimmy do but go a bit blue about
the neb and say Ay, I have ; and this is him.
So that’s how he’d collared the Duncairn job, not
that he was over-keen on the thing, D’you ken now, mis¬
tress, what I’ve aye wanted ?—Losh, a job on a ship at sea,
the fine smell and the pelt of the water below you, there’s fine
carpentering work to be done on ships. And Chris, with
the teacups cold on the tray, said she thought it a shame
he’d never got it, maybe he’d get a job like that yet.
Ake nodded, fegs, and he might, not likely, better to
hang on the Provost’s tail, old Wabbling Jimmy that
was feared at his past. Not that poor Jimmy’s an excep¬
tion in that: We’re all on leading strings out of the past.
For days you couldn’t forget that scream, tingling,
terrified, the lost keelie’s scream as that swine Sim Leslie
smashed him down. Again and again you’d start awake,
sweating, remembering that from a dream, Duncairn
sleeping down Windmill Steps, all the house in sleep,
quiet next door, that kid Ellen Johns not dreaming at
all. Luck for her and her blah about history and Social¬
ism : she hadn’t a glimpse of what either meant. . . .
Oh, sick of the whole damn idiot mess, drifting about
nowadays like a fool, couldn’t settle to anything, couldn’t
read a book, caught in the net of this idiot rubbish.
Your head had softened like a swede in the rain ever to
be taken in with the rot—rot about leading new life to
the workers, moulding them into History’s new tool,
apprehending a force more sure and certain than the
GREY GRANITE
107
God poor Robert had preached in Segget. . , . In the
workers ?—Rats, what was there in them that wasn’t
in the people of any class ? Some louts, some decent,
the most of them brainless, what certain tool to be found
in crude dirt ? You’d dug deep enough to make sure of
that, playing the game as a keelie yourself, fraternizing
with the fauna down at the Works—hell, how they stank,
the unscrubbed lot, with their idiot ape-maunderings and
idiot hopes, their idiot boasts, poor dirty devils. They
took you for one of themselves nowadays, so you’d almost
become as half-witted as they.
Finished with it all quite definitely now. What
have the keelies to do with you—except to make you feel
sick ? They don’t like the same things, haven’t the same
interests, don’t care a hang for the books you read (mis¬
laid those text-books this last week somewhere). And
you pretending an interest in horses—dog-racing—foot¬
ball—all the silly kid-games that excite the keelies—find
History’s beat in their drivelling blah !
. . . That ghastly house that Bob took you to—
father unemployed for over five years, mother all running
to a pale grey fat like a thing you found when you turned
up a stone, one of the brothers a cretin, rickets—sat
giggling and slavering in a half-dark corner, they couldn’t
afford to have the gas on, a dead smell of dirt left unstirred
and unscrubbed, disharmonic heads and moron brains ;
and outside the house as you came away : streets on streets,
the fug of the Cowgate, keelies on the lounge in the gutter,
in the dirt, their ghastly voices and their ghastly faces 
They DON’T concern you. BREAK with it all.
io8 GREY GRANITE
So when Alick and Norman that Saturday asked if
you were coming to the Beach Pavilion, Snellie Guff
the Scotch Comedian was On, you said No, sorry, I’ve
reading to do, and saw their faces fall, damn them, they’d
just have to learn as you had to learn. But when you got
home and had finished dinner and been caught by that
ghastly old bore Ake Ogilvie who thought himself God’s
regent on earth because Christ had been of the same trade
as himself, and heard his lout swagger on this and that,
you felt too restless to rout out the books. Damn
nuisance, August blazing outside, birds high up in the
Howe to-day, a bus would take you to Segget in an hour.
... If only it could take you back over a year !
And you thought of the times when you’d haunted the
Howe, as a schoolboy, seeking the old-time flints, Neo¬
lithic stuff, passable collection : you’d forgotten it since
you’d come to Duncairn. Where could it be ?
And in chase of that you went down to the kitchen
and knocked and looked in, Chris and Ma Cleghorn and
Meg the maid, they all looked up and you said I’m sorry.
Chris, d’you mind where my flints went to ?
Chris said she thought you had finished with them,
they were up in the box-room under the eaves. Ma called
as you turned away Ewan man, why aren’t you out at a
game this weather ? Or out with a lass ?—that d be more
your age than bothering about with a rickle of stones. Your
mother showed me them and I thought ‘What dirt!
You said Oh, really ? funny old hag, another keelie
trying to keep you in the gutter—games and street-crawl¬
ing and their blasted girls. Her face fell a bit when
GREY GRANITE
109
you spoke like that, the old fool should heed to her own
damned business. Chris looked at you with her nice,
cool eyes, a long time since you'd kissed her, she had a
nice kiss. Then you went up the stairs to your
flints.
They were thick with dust, lying higgledy-piggledy
in the press, tortoise-cores and a scraper or so, you took
them out and turned them about, and saw the wavery
lines of the knapping done long ago in the hills of the
Howe, some day three thousand years before. Some
careful craftsman had squatted to knapp, with careful
knee and finger and eye, looking up now and then from
his work on the flakes to see the grey glister of the
Howe below, the long lake that covered the Tow Mearns
then, with sailing shapes of islands upon it, smoke of
fires rising slow in the air from the squatting-places of
the Simple Men, deer belling far on the hills as the sun
swung over to the hazes of the afternoon, things plain
and clear to anyone then—you supposed : was that no
more than supposing ?
But at least they had made the things they desired,
finely and surely and lovely as these, long long ago.
Still, things no lovelier than the shining giants that whirred
and spun in Gowans and Gloag’s, power-dreams fulfilled
of the flint-knapping men. . . . And at that the little
warmth they had brought you quite went, you were star¬
ing down at a dusty stone, chipped by someone no shape
at all, a dim shadow on dust, meaning nothing, saying
nothing : and down there in the heat of this August day
the festering wynds of Paldy Parish 
no
GREY GRANITE
You closed the press and went down the stairs, out of
the house, down Windmill Brae, idiot-angry to escape your
soft self. Turning up to Royal Mile you went slower,
wondering what you could do at this hour. A thin
little gallop of Autumn rain came pelting down the street
as you wondered, and you looked up and saw the Lib¬
rary near and beside it the Museum Galleries.
Inside there, breathing from running from the rain
you debated a minute to stay or go out, the place as usual
dingy and desolate, old chap in uniform yawning at a
table. Then you went past him into the hall and stood
and looked at the statues around, poor stuff the most
of it, you’d seen it before.
Plaster-cast stuff of the Greek antiques, Discobolus,
blowsily mammalian Venus, Pallas Athene—rather a
dirty lot they had been, the Greeks, though so many clean
things survived. Why did they never immortalize in
stone a scene from the Athenian justice-courts—a slave
being ritually, unnecessarily tortured before he could
legally act as a witness ? Or a baby exposed to die in a
jar ?—hundreds every year in the streets of Athens, it
went on all day, the little kids wailing and crying and cry¬
ing as the hot sun rose and they scorched in the jars ;
and then their mouths dried up, they just weeked and
whimpered, they generally died by dark. . . .
There was a cast of Trajan, good head ; Csesar—the
Caesar they said wasn’t Caesar. Why not a head of
Spartacus ? Or a plaque of the dripping line of crosses
that manned the Appian Way with slaves—dripping and
falling to bits through long months, they took days to die,
GREY GRANITE
m
torn by wild beasts. Or a statuary group of a Roman
slave being fed to fishes, alive, in a pool. . . .
You turned and went up the deserted stairs to the
picture galleries, dusty and dim, drowsily undisturbed
but for one room you passed where a keelie was cuddling
a girl on the sly, sitting on a bench, they giggled a bit,
dried up as you looked and stared and stared. You
looked away and about the room, flat seascapes and land¬
scapes, the deadest stuff, why did people make a fuss of
pictures. Or music ? You’d never seen anything in
either. You went and sat down in the Italian room, on
the bench in the middle, and stared at a picture, couldn’t
be bothered to find out the painter, group of Renaissance
people somewhere : soldiers, a cardinal, an angel or so,
and a throng of keelies cheering like hell about nothing
at all—in the background, as usual. Why not a more
typical Italian scene !—a man being broken on the wheel
with a club, mashed and smashed till his chest caved in,
till his bones were a blood-clottered powdery mess ? 
Passed in a minute, that flaring savage sickness, and you
got to your feet and went on again : but the same every¬
where, as though suddenly unblinded, picture on picture
limned in dried blood, never painted or hung in any
gallery—^pictures of the poor folk since history began,
bedevilled and murdered, trodden underfoot, trodden
down in the bree, a human slime, hungered, unfed, with
their darkened brains, their silly revenges, their infantile
hopes—the men who built Munster’s City of God and were
hanged and burned in scores by the Church, the Sparta-
cists, the blacks of Toussaint I/Ouverture, Parker’s
II2 GREY GRANITE
sailors who were hanged at the Nore, the Broo men man¬
handled in Royal Mile. Pictures unceasing of the men
of your kin, peasants and slaves and common folk and
their ghastly lives through six thousand years—oh hell,
what had it to do with you ?
And you bit your lip to keep something back, something
that rose and slew coolness and judgment steady, white-
edged, a rising flame, anger bright as a clear bright
flame, as though 'twas yourself that history had tortured,
trodden on, spat on, clubbed down in you, as though you
were every scream and each wound, flesh of your flesh,
blood of your blood. . . . And you gave a queer sob that
startled yourself: Something was happening to you .
God—what ?
Ma said, coming down to Chris in the kitchen after
collecting the lodgers’ fees, she went round each room of
a Sabbath morning before the breakfast time or the kirk .
The Murgatroyd creature’s fair in a stew, her dividends are
all going down she says and she hardly knows how she ll Pay
her Way. She’s a bittie of a shareholder in Gowans and
Gloag’s and there’s not a cent from the firm this year. Aren’t
they brutes to mistreat a respectable woman ?
Chris asked if that meant that she’d have to leave,
and Ma shook her head, Oh no, not her, she’d a bit of a
pension as well as an income, a three hundred pounds a
year from a trust. Chris stared : Then what s coming
over her ? and Ma sighed that Chris didn t understand
and hadn’t a proper sympathy, like, with financial
GREY GRANITE 113
straits of wealthy folk—like herself and their wee Miss
Murgatroyd. What the old bitch really wanted of course
was her runkled old bottom kicked a bit and turned out
into the streets for a night hawking herself at a tanner a
time. . . .
And Ma sat down and paiched a bit, smoothing out
the pounds and the ten bob notes, and said that Mr.
Piddle was short again, him that banked nearly every
meek that he got. Ma'd told him she'd need the balance
on Monday—and not to he-he ! at her like a goat. Four,
five, two halves, a one and ten silver, that’s our little bit
English pussy-cat. Sitting up there and reading a book—
can you guess what the book is about now, lass ?
Chris looked in the range and over at the clock, and
shook her head, only half-heeding Ma's claik.—PP*//,
then, it’s a Manual of Birth Control. What think you of
that and our Ellen fohns, with her little mouser and her
neat long legs ?
Chris was over-surprised a minute to say anything,
then asked if Miss Johns tried to hide the book?
Ma said she hadn’t, neither showing off nor hiding :
Ay, a gey keek our Ellen, with all her quiet ways. And it’s
all to the good of the trade, anyhow. Chris asked How ?
and Ma said Why, she ll be able to sin as she likes and go
free, with no need to marry the gallus childe. So we’ll
be able to keep her our lodger  Twelve, thirteen, ten,
Ake Ogilvie’s—-ay, faith he’s made of the old-time stuff.
If I’d been a ten years younger or so I’d be chumming up
to him, a bonny man, well-shouldered and canty, it’s a
pity you’re gentry.
H
II4 GREY GRANITE
Chris had heard this before and now hardly smiled, if
it was gentry to know her own mind, the things that she
liked and the things that she didn’t, well then, she was
gentry down to the core. And Ma had been watching
her and cried out Hoots, now don’t go away and take
offence. I’m just a coarse old wife and must have my bit
joke. Chris laughed, half-angry, Well, don’t have it on me,
and Ma said she’d mind and went on with her counting,
Miss Lyon’s Boss had fined her two shillings, Awful the
way that they treat Us Girls, the Clearmont laddie was all
a-blither and a-clatter over his Rectorial election, fegs,
what was this Nationalist stite that had got him ?
Chris minded back to her days in Segget and said that
this Nationalism was just another plan of the Tories to
do down the common folk. Only this time ’twas to be
done in kilts and hose, with bagpipes playing and a blether
about Wallace, the English to be chased across the
Border and the Scots to live on brose and baps. Ma said
Fegs now, and are we so, then ? Then I’m for the English.
Eighteen, nine and six, the lot for this week and we’re doing
fine. Did I ever tell you when I wanted a partner my niece
Izey Urquhart wanted to come in ?
Chris said she didn’t know Ma had a niece, Ma nodded,
worse luck, a thrawn wee skunk that lived away down in
Kirrieben. Ma couldn't stick the creature at all but she
was her only living relation and kenned that when Ma
pushed off at last she’d get what bittie of silver there was.
That might be so, but Ma had made up her mind she
wasn’t to have the long-nosed sniftering wretch skeetermg
around while she was alive ; and maybe when Ma died
GREY GRANITE
ii5
holy Izey would find a bit of a sore surprise to meet—
I’m fond of you, lass, and I’m sending next week for my lawyer
man to alter the will. What’s in the house and all things I
have would he better in your hit keeping, I think, than as
miser’s savings in Kirriehen.
Chris said sensibly that Ma shouldn't be silly, it was
likely that she would outlive them all. And Ma said she
hoped to God that she wouldn’t, if there was anything
that cumbered the earth it was some old runkle of a
woman body living on with no man to tend and no bairns,
a woman stopped living when she stopped having bairns.
And Chris laughed at that and said What about men ?
and Ma said Och, damn’t, they never live at all. They’re
just a squeeze and a cuddle we need to keep our lives going,
they’re nothing themselves.
And Chris went out in the Sunday quiet to the little
patch of garden behind and worked there tending the beds
of flowers she’d put in early in blinks of the Spring, sooty
and loamy and soft the ground, clouds were flying high
in the lift beyond the tilting roofs of Duncairn, the hedge
by the house next door was a-rustle, soft green, with its
budding beech, far off through the hedges some eident
body was at work with a lawn-mower, clinkle-clankle, a
bairn was wailing in a bairn’s unease as Chris dug and
raked, watered the flowers, pale things hers compared
with Segget’s. And somehow Ma’s daft words bade
in her mind, those about a woman having finished with
things when she finished having bairns, just an empty
drum, an old fruit squeezed and rotting away, useless,
unkenned, unstirred by the agonies of bearing a bairn,
H6 GREY GRANITE
heeding it, feeding it, watching it grow—was she now no
more than that herself ?—a woman on the verge of middle
age content to trauchle the hours in a kitchen and come
out and potter with weeds and flowers, all the passion of
living put by long ago, wonder and terror and the tang
of long kisses, embracing knee to knee, the blood in a
stream of fire through the heart, the beat and drum of
that tide of life that once poured so swift in those moments
unheard—never to be heard again, grown old.
And, kneeling, she stared in woe at the fork in her
hand, at the prickly roses that leaned their pale, quiet
faces down from the fence : well, was she to greet about
that ? She had had her time, and now it was ended, she’d
to follow the road that others took, into long wrinkles
and greying hair and sourness and seats by the chimney-
corner and a drowsy mumble as she heard the rain going
by on its business in a closing dark. Finished : when her
heart could still move to that singing, when at night in
her bed she would turn in unease, wakeful, sweet as she
knew herself, men had liked her well long ago, still the same
body and still the same skin, that dimple still holding
its secret place—Och, Ma would say that she wanted a
man, that was all about it, as blunt and coarse as a
farmer childe that watched his cattle in the heats of
a Spring.
But there was more to it than that, some never knew
it, but real enough, an antrin magic that bound you in
one with the mind, not only the body of a man, with his
dreams and desires, his loves, even hates—hate of Ewan,
a wild boy’s hate, passionless coldness of Robert in shadow
GREY GRANITE
117
they'd given you hate with their love often enough, tears
with such white tenderness as even now you might not
unfold in memory,—here, at this moment, kneeling here,
still, the August sun on your hair, dreaming and dreaming
because Ma Cleghorn had blithered on the curse of a
woman growing old, because you had heard a baby nearby
wailing soft in a baby's unease !
And, suddenly remorseful at her terrible sweiity, she
bent and dug and smoothed out the earth, raked it again
to a loamy smoothness around the wide feet of the Michael¬
mas daisies, they looked a bit like Sim L,eslie the bobby.
Babies ? (said her mind, though she tried to still it)—
hadn't she had Ewan, perfect enough, grown up though
he was, distant and cool ? And wasn't he fine enough
to have made with a little help from his father long syne ?
And she minded that other baby who had died in the days
of the General Strike, he came over-soon that night she
ran to warn the strikers who were out by the railway
to blow up Segget High Brig. Oh, long since she’d minded
that baby at all, the baby Michael, she’d never seen him,
he’d died within an hour of his birth, killing something
in Robert as he died, killing the last of the quean in herself
she had thought through the long drowse of years in
Segget, my bairn, the lost baby who might have been
mine 
She heard light footsteps hesitating on the path and
shook the mist from her eyes a minute before she looked
up to see who it was, Ellen Johns, slim, sweet in a summer
frock, a blue cloud her hair in the August day, soft dark
down on her lip, blue eyes like pansies, dark and wet,
n8 GREY GRANITE
looking at Chris queer, half-poised like a bird to turn
about and fly off.
I’m sorry, Mrs. Colquohoun, I didn’t know 
Chris said That I was weeping a bit? Old women
often have a weep, you know. Coming to help, or only to
watch ?
Ellen said I’ll help and squatted on long, pointed
shoe-heels and began to weed with long, pointed fingers—
I was sick of sitting indoors and reading.
Chris minded the book that Ma had seen and looked
at her with a little smile: You were reading something
about Birth Control ?
And she didn’t blush and didn’t look up, just went
on with the weeding, quick and calm, intent, and nodded :
Yes. I suppose I’ll need it some time. Can’t find out much
and it sounds a mess, but it’s a thing that’s got to be learnt.
Don’t you think so ? and Chris nearly laughed, but
didn’t. Yes, I think it has. But you’ll want a baby
sometime ?
Ellen shook her head and said she didn’t suppose
so. There were thousands of unwanted babies already
and most of them should never have been born. . . .
Can I have the fork to have a go at those weeds ?
Thank Creeping Jay for the change at last, the six
of you turfed out of Furnaces, three to Stores and two to
Machines, Alick and Norman the lucky sods, they would
be, they gave more lip to old Dallas, they two, than any
GREY GRANITE
119
half dozen in the whole of Gowans and Gloag’s : and he
seemed to like them the better for’t !
Not that Stores was bad, a fine change from the
Furnace, your own bench and lists and pigeon-holes, rows
on rows of the tools and castings, birns of stuff to unload
for the Shops, finished with being a damn kid in the Works,
though the older sods that had been there awhile looked
gey glum when you got your shift. And they’d some¬
thing to look glum about, poor muckers, for afore the
change had been a week over there were six of the older
hands got the sack, on to the Broo, och, hell, you couldn’t
help it. It was just the way that things were run.
Kwan Tavendale had been moved to the manager’s
office, blue-printing, they liked his prints in the shops,
a clever young Bulgar as you’d found out in Furnaces.
You didn’t see much of him the first week or so, but syne
he came into the Stores one morning and started talking
to the foreman chap, wee Kddie Grant, he listened awhile
and said Ach to hell, I’ll have nothing to do with it. Look
out yourself, you’ll be getting in the faeces. But Ewan,
he looked fairly the toff again, clean hands and suit, hair
trig and neat, just nodded, All right, if you feel like that.
But maybe it’ll be your turn next for the sack. Wee Eddie
burbled Me? What the hell! And who’s to take MY
place I d like to know ? A nother of you whoreson appren¬
tice sods ?, and Ewan said nothing, just nodded to you,
Hello, Bob ! and walked out, what the hell was he up to
now ?
Well, it was soon all over the works what it was,
he was trying to stir up the Union men to threaten a
120
GREY GRANITE
strike if Gowans and Gloag carried on with the plan they'd
had year in, year out—taking on apprentices and sacking
the old ones, they saved a fair sum on the weekly wage.
You knew it was Ewan had started the thing, every
body knew, and the story came down to the Stores that
the manager had had him on the carpet for’t, Ewan hadn't
denied it and the manager had asked if he knew what
would happen to him, stirring up trouble ? And Ewan
had said Oh yes, he knew well, he'd be sacked when his
apprenticeship was done. And the manager had roared
Well then, less of it. You’ve had your warning, you won’t
get another. And Ewan had said Yes, thanks, I’ve been
warned.
There was nothing else for a chap to say, the Union
wouldn’t move a foot in the business, it was crammed
with Broo folk to the lid already ; and the stour died
down ; and the gleyed Stores mucker who had sneered
afore at Ewan as gentry said What do you think of your toff
sod now ? and you said He’d the guts to try something, any¬
how, more than a sheep like you ever would.
Then Norman came round in the dinner hour with a
funny like story you could hardly believe, he said that
Ewan’d ta’en up with the Reds, Jim Trease and his crowd,
and was going to their meetings. And you said Away,
he’s not so daft, and Norman said Ay, hell, but he is.
What’s the use of the Reds to any body ? They just get out
the Broo men and march down the Mile and get their heads
bashed in in the end. Well, surely Ewan knew that as
well; why was he taking up with them, then ? Norman
said he was damned if he knew, some rubbish about all
GREY GRANITE 121
working parties co-operating, Ewan had asked him
to go to a meeting but he’d said he wouldn't, he wasn’t
so soft, he’d a quean to take out on a Sunday, him, not
mess about with a lot of Reds who were just damned
traitors to the Es-bour Movement. Not that it was worth
a faeces either. As for Alick, he’d gone skite, same as
Ewan, anything Ewan said went down with him.
Well, hell, that was coarse enough to hear, but what¬
ever made Ewan take up with the Reds ? Him a gentle¬
man, too, as you all knew he was though he tried to deny
it and that time at your home when he came to tea had
acted so fine, you’d all of you liked him, it had been
nearly worth spending the day before scrubbing out the
place, and hiding the twin, the daftie, and getting in
cakes for the tea. So you went now and looked him
up in the office, making on you wanted a chit for some tools,
he was sitting at his desk among the office muckers, all
with their patted hair and posh ties, young college sods
no better than you though they tried on their airs if you
didn’t watch.
Ewan cried Hello, Boh! and you said Hello, and
Ewan, I d like to speak to you sometime. And he said
Right, let’s get out a minute, and out he came and you asked
him point-blank. And he said I didn’t know you’d be
interested, and you said Hell, I’m not, and he said Yes,
you are. Look here, come along to the Saturday meeting,
in the Gallowgate, 3 Pitcarles Wynd. And afore you well
kenned what it was you had done you’d promised to be
there—oh, sod the whole business !
But there you were at the cliapp of seven, a little bit
122
GREY GRANITE
room with maybe twenty in’t, chaps and some queans
all much of your age, chairs and a table and a chair for
the chairman and a picture of a chap above the table that
had cheated the barber from birth by his look, that awful
coarse old billy Marx. Then Ewan came along and made
you sit down, and went back to the table to sit by a lassie,
a stuck-up bitch with black hair, fine legs, she’d a pen
and a lot of papers afore her. And there was a piano
up in the corner with a lad sitting at it, and he started
to play and you all got up and sang about England arising,
the long, long night was over, though the damn thing
had barely yet set in, Christ, what a perfect fool you felt
not knowing the words, a quean next you pushed a book
in your hands, smirked at you, trying to get off, would
you say ? So you made on to sing, glowering about,
there was Alick Watson, bawling like a bellows, if England
didn’t awake she must be stone deaf, and another chap
you’d seen down in Gowans, an older apprentice out of
Machines. Syne the singing stopped and down you all
sat, and Ewan looked at the stuck-up get and said Miss
Johns will now read the minutes.
It was only as the quean was doing that that you
knew she was English, Haw-Haw-Really-Quite, and found
out what the blasted meeting was about, Ewan and some
others were getting up a party for the young in Duncairn,
neither Eabour nor Communist nor yet in opposition,
but to try and keep the two of them working in harness
for the general good of the working class, get rid of the
cowardice and sloth of Labour and cut out the nonsensical
lying of the Communists, the older generation in the
123
GREY GRANITE
workers’ parties had made an idiot mess of things, it was
up to the young to straighten things out, join this new
workers’ league in Duncairn. You said to yourself you’d
be damned if you would, Christ, they’d have you out with
a banner next. But then Ewan stood up and started
to speak, quiet, not bawling blue hell like the Reds or
cracking soft jokes like a Rabour man, but just in an
ordinary voice and way, telling what he thought this
young league could do to waken up all the young workers
in Duncairn, get strong enough till the time might come
when it would take over Duncairn itself. First, the
membership : they’d twenty or less, what they’d now
to discuss was a big drive for members : Six minute speeches,
not a minute more, and practical suggestions, not oratory,
please.
A red-headed kid of a quean got up, near gave you a
fit with what she wanted done—the whole lot go out
and march down the Mile with flags and collecting boxes,
just, and hold a meeting in the Castlegate. That was
the way to win new members and serve the workers. . . .
And you thought she was daft, had she never seen a
worker ? The Bulgars would laugh and tell her what she
wanted was some chap to serve her in another way.
Then the lad from Gowans and Gloag’s got up and said
what they should do was smuggle a lot of leaflets inside
the Shops, and pass them round quiet, you’d get interest
that way. And the quean who had given you the glad
eye like a Garbo got up and said in a he-haw voice,
Christ, another of the bloody toffs, What’s wanted is to
advertise the meetings and then hold readings from the great
GREY GRANITE
124
revolutionary poets, beginning with the greatest of all,
William Morris. And after that every body was over
stunned to say more, except young Ewan, who’d been
staring at the roof.
He got up and said it wasn’t much use marching down
the Mile, they’d only get their heads smashed in by the
bobbies. Leaflets in the factories wouldn’t help much,
no body read leaflets, there were too many about. And the
comrade who had suggested reading William Morris had
surely meant the Dundee Sunday Post. . . . What was
needed was something light and attractive.
And at that the English quean beside him, ay, a
nice leg, got up and said what they wanted was a tanner
hop—she said just that, fair vulgar-like, though you’d
heard by now that she was a school-ma’am. She said
that would bring in members thick and the dances would
pay for themselves twice over.
Ewan asked if he’d put that as a resolution ? And the
schoolteacher said Yes, and Ewan put it, and you heard
yourself saying I second that, your ears near burning off
your head with shame, Creeping Jay, you were in for
it now. And only as you were coming away from the
meeting did it dawn on you with a hell of a shock that
now you were some kind of ruddy Red.
Ellen waited for Ewan to lock up the room, the air
was a stagnant unstirred pool, out by the Crossgate the
autumn night lay low in pale saffron over Footforthie.
As they turned from the door they could see far down
GREY GRANITE 125
through the winding corridors of the Gallowgate the
smoulder of the sun as it lost itself in the smoking lowe of
Footforthie by night. Ewan said there was night-work
again at the shipyards, even Gowans and Gloag’s were look¬
ing up a bit, didn’t look much, did it, like capitahsm’s
collapse ?
They were trudging together up through the streets,
half-lighted, smell of urine and old food seeping out from
dark doorways, sometimes a grunt as a man would turn
in his sleep in the heat, sometimes a snuffle of wakeful
children. Ellen said nothing for a little while and Ewan
had half-forgotten her when she asked of a sudden :
Are you losing heart ?
He said Eh ? and then Oh, about capitalism ? Losing
heart would do a lot of good, wouldn’t it ?
She said then something, queer kid, he was to remem¬
ber : Anyhow, your heart’s not in it at all. Only your
head and imagination.
—And I’m not in much danger of losing either. You
don t quarrel with History and its pace of change any more
than you quarrel with the law of gravitation. History’s
instruments, the workers, ’ll turn to us some time—even
though it’s only for a sixpenny hop. You or I to see to
hiring the hall ?
Ellen said she thought it had better be him, the only
one suitable was the Tower School, and they didn’t trust
her too much there already. And Ewan looked at her,
pale kid, tired kid, and felt an indifferent touch of com¬
passion. Where else might she be if it wasn’t for this
belief she d smitten on him ?—at a dance, at the pictures.
126
GREY GRANITE
in a pretty dress. And he dropped the thought, with
indifference again. Much better as she was, seeing she
wasn’t half-witted.
They were into the Tower Cowgate by then, ten o’clock
and the pubs were spewing out the plebs, raddled with
drink, kids crying in the gutter, Ewan saw a man hit a
woman in the jaw, she fell with a scream and a bobby
came up and an eddy of the crowd came swirling around,
and they couldn’t see more, going up Sowans Tane. But
half way up they came on a woman pulling at the coat
of a man who was lying half in a doorway, half in the
gutter. Och, come on home, you daft Bulgar, she was say¬
ing, or the bobbies’ll damn soon land you in the nick. But
the childe wasn’t keen to go home at all, he was saying
what they wanted was a little song—Come on, you bitch,
and gives a bit tune. And the woman said of all the
whoreson’s gets she’d ever met he was the worst: and
what song did he want then, the neep-headed nout ?
And he said he wanted the songs his mucking mother sang,
and Ewan and Ellen didn’t hear more, they were out of
the Sowans Eane by then, on to the Tong Brig where it
spanned the Forthie, and stopping to breathe from the
Gallowgate fug.
And then, as Ewan stood there and whistled under¬
breath, indifferently, far away in his thoughts, he became
aware of Ellen Johns by his side wiping her eyes in help¬
less mirth : History’s the funniest of jokes sometimes.
If we’d had the courage of our convictions do you know
what we would have done back there ?
He said No, and stared a cool surprise.
GREY GRANITE I27
—Why, STOPPED AND SANG HIM SOME
WILLIAM MORRIS !
Ma Cleghorn had taken Chris to the Talkies, to get
out of the stew of the house for a while, she said she was
turning to a cockroach, near, and Chris to an earthworm
out in that yard. Meg would see to the tea for the folk,
wouldn’t she, eh ? and Meg said she would, Meg had
kittled up a lot of late, Chris thought as she went to her
room to change. When she came down Ma was waiting
for her, dressed all in her braws with a big black hat, with
beadwork upon it, and a meikle brooch pinned in under
one of her chins. There you are, lass, though, God be here
you’re wearing so little I can see your drawers. And Chris
said Surely not, and stooped to see Anyhow, I can’t wear
more than I’m wearing. And Ma said maybe but it was
a damned shame to go about with a figure like that, half-
happed and stirring the men to temptation. And they’d
better get on, near the time already, what in Auld Nick’s
name were they gossiping for ?
So they got on the tram and soughed down Royal
Mile, and up Tittle Janies Street to the Picturedrome ;
and paid for their seats and went in and sat down ;
and Chris felt sleepy almost as soon as she sat, and yawned*
pictures wearied her nearly to death, the flickering shadows*
and the awful voices, the daft tales they told and the
dafter news. She fell asleep through the cantrips a
creature was playing, a mouse dressed up in breeks like a
128 GREY GRANITE
man, and only woke up as Ma shook her : Hey, the meikle
film's starting now, lassie, God damn’t, d’you want to waste
a whole ninepenny ticket ?
So Chris had to stay awake and see that, all about
a lassie who worked in New York and was awful poor
but awful respectable, though she seemed to live in a
place like a palace with a bath ten feet in length and three
deep, and wore underclothes that she couldn t have affor¬
ded, some childe had paid for them on the sly. But the
picture said No, through its nose, not her, she was awful
chaste but sore chased as well, a beast of a man in her
office, the manager, galloping about the screen and aye
wanting to seduce the lassie by night or by day. And instead
of letting him and getting it over or taking him a crack
in the jaw and leaving, she kept coming home in tears
to the bath, and taking off her underthings one by one, but
hiding her breasts and her bottom, fair chaste. Syne
she met with a man that managed a theatre, though
he looked from his face as though he managed a piggery
and had been born in one and promoted for merit, a
flat cold slob of a ham of a face with little eyes twinkling
in the slob like currants, he was the hero and awful brave,
and he took the lass to the theatre and made her sing
that the skies were black and she was blue, and something
that rhymed with that, not spew, and all the theatre
audiences went wild not with rage, but joy, they d been
dropped on their heads when young : and the lassie
became a famous actress and the film did a sudden close-
up of her face with a tear of gratitude two feet long tremb¬
ling like a jelly from her lower eyelid. And she and the
GREY GRANITE 129
slob were getting on fine, all black and blue, my lovely
L,u, when along came the leader of a birn of brutes, a
gang, and kidnapped the lass, grinding his teeth in an aw¬
ful stamash to sleep with her ; and took her away to an
underground den ; and was just about to begin at last,
and Chris was just thinking it fairly was time, would they
never get the job over and done ?—when in rushed the
hero and a fight began and chairs were smashed and vases
and noses, and the lass crouched down with her camiknicks
showing, but respectable still, she wouldn’t yield an inch
to anything short of a marriage licence. And that she
got in the end, all fine, with showers of flowers and the
man with the face like a mislaid ham cuddling her up
with a kiss that looked as though he was eating his supper
when the thing came banging to an end at last.
Ma said God be here, now wasn’t that fine ? It
must be a right canty place, this New York, childes charg¬
ing about like bulls in a park trying to grab any lass they
saw—even though the creatures were all bone and no
breast and would give a man as much joy in bed as a
kipper out of an ice-box, you’d think. Ay, she’d fair
made a mistake a twenty years back when she stopped her
Jim emigrating, faith. He’d been keen as anything on
going to America, a man had loaned him a bit of a book
about Presidents being just plain working folk, born
in cabins and the queerest places ; and maybe Jim thought
that he had a chance, he’d been born next door to a cabin,
near, his mother was bairned on the trawler Jess. But
Ma’d put him off, like a meikle fool, to think she might
now have been out in New York with big Jews chasing
l
130 GREY GRANITE
her in motor-cars and offering to buy her her undies free.
. . . And God, the bit show was over, it seemed.
But she wouldn’t have it that they should go home,
they’d have tea at Woolworth’s in the Royal Mile. And in
they went in the Saturday crush, full of soldiers and
bairns and queans, folk from the country, red and res¬
pectable, an eident wife with a big shopping bag buying
up sixpenny tins of plums and her goodman standing
beside her ashamed, feared he’d be seen by a crony in
Woolies, and she’d be telling him, Look, Willy, such cheap !
Mighty, I’ll need a pound of that; and buy and buy till
he d near be ruined. And hungry Broo folk buying up
biscuits, and queans with their jingling bags and paint,
poor things, trying on the tin bits of rings, and mechanic
loons at the wireless counter, and the Gord alone knew
who wasn t in Woolies, a roaring trade and a stink to
match, Ma fought her way through the crush like a traw¬
ler taking the tide from Footforthie and Chris followed
behind and felt sorry for a man who’d left his feet where
Ma s came down, he cried Hey, you ? and Ma said Ay ?
Anything to say ? and he said Ay, I have. Who do you
think you are—Mussolini ? And Ma cried over her shoulder
Faith, I could wear his hreeks and not feel ashamed. You
never had a thing under yours, you runt.
So up at last, sitting down in the tea-room, Ma ordering
eggs scones and pancakes and butter and honey in
little jars, Chris gasped But whatever’s all the feast for ?
Ma said Och, she was sick of cooking herself, and the sight
of those feeds that they had in America fairly stirred up
a body’s stomach. Bosh, wasn’t it fine to think of the
GREY GRANITE
131
lodgers sossing on their own ?—though your Ewan and our
Ellen, the sleek wee cat, are out again together the day.
Would you think the two of them are getting off ?
Chris said not them, they had just gone Socialist as
young folk would, some plan they had to link up the
Labour folk with the Reds. Ma nearly choked on a mouth¬
ful of egg, God be here, whatever did they want to do that
for ? Chris said for good—or so the two thought, and
Ma said they’d think mighty different soon, the Reds
were just awful, look what they did in Russia to that poor
Tsar creature back in the War—shot him down in a cellar
full of coal, and buried the childe without as much as
God bless you. Chris said she didn’t know anything about
it though it sounded as though it maybe messed up the
coals, as far as she knew neither Ellen nor Ewan had yet
shot anybody, even in a cellar. Ma said No, but she
wouldn’t trust Ewan, a fine loon, but that daft-like glower
in his eyes—Och, this Communism stuff’s not canny, I
tell you, it’s just a religion though the Reds say it’s not and
make out that they don’t believe in God. They’re dafter
about Him than the Salvationists are, and once it gets under
a body’s skin he’ll claw at the itch till he’s lined himself.
Chris said she supposed she thought the same, had
always thought so, but that didn’t matter, if Ewan wanted
God she wouldn’t try and stop him; there was plenty
of mess to redd up in the world on the road to where He
was maybe to be found. Ma said she didn’t believe
there was, this daft Red religion was maybe needed in
places where there was a lot of corruption, coarse kings
that ran away with folks’ silver and prime ministers
GREY GRANITE
132
just drunken sots. But where would you find the like
in Duncairn ? . . . Now, don’t start on me, we’ll just away
home. Eh me, to think of those New York childes tearing
after the women like yon ! Where would you see the like in
Duncairn ?
With one thing and another it was late that night
afore Chris went up the stairs to her bed, Ewan had looked
round the kitchen door and cried good night a good hour
before, Ma had gone off to dream of New York, the rest
of the lodgers were sound in their beds. And Chris was
taking off her clothes, slow, tired to death with the even¬
ing’s outing—why did folk waste their time in touns, in
filth and stour and looking at shadows when they might
have slipped away up the Howe and smelt the smell of
the harvest—oh ! bonny lying somewhere on a night
like this ! . . . And just as she sat and thought of that,
not sad but tired, she heard a commotion above her head,
the clatter of footsteps, and syne a door bang, a woman’s
voice—for a minute she was back in the Picturedrome,
watching and hearing that shadow-play that was never
limned in a toun like Duncairn— And then as a bigger
stamash broke out she opened the door and ran up the
stairs.
Ake Ogilvie told the tale the next day to Ma Cleghorn,
Ma lying at rest in her bed, she’d gone to bed with a steek
in her side and was lying fair wearied till Ake looked in.
He said Ay, woman, I hear you’re not well ? and Ma said
GREY GRANITE
133
his hearing was still in fair order—sit down and gie’s a
bit of your crack. How are you and your Provost creature
getting on ?
So Ake filled up his pipe, sitting sonsy, green-eyed,
with his curling mouser and Auld Nick brows, a pretty
childe as Ma had thought often. And he said the
Provost’s bit influence had been fairly heard in this
house last night, hadn’t the mistress been waked by the
noise ? And Ma asked What noise ? Was the Provost
here? and Ake said No, God, the lass escaped that, it
was only one of his Bacchic chums.
Syne he started to tell of the Saturday outing of the
Duncairn Council to High Scaur Hill. Ma knew of the
new waterworks built there ?—Ay, she’d known, faith, or
at least her rates had. Well, the official inspection had
been billed for the Saturday and the Provost had come
to Ake at the sawmill and said that he’d want him to join
the bit outing, he’d want his opinion on the timber-work.
And Ake had said Ay, he didn’t much mind, though he’d
little liking for councillors and such. Still, the poor Bulgars
have to live somehow, haven’t they, Jimmy ? and the Provost
grinned sick and said he was still the same old Ake.
Well, the whole lot set out on the official treat, Speight,
Bailie Brown and the Dean of Guild, all the Bailie
bilhes and a wheen hangers-on, two coach loads hired
with the Duncairn rates to give a treat to the City Fathers.
And who should the Daily Runner send but the wee Mr.
Piddle, like a snake on the spree, he squeezed into the
back of the Provost’s coach, he-he! and sat down by the
side of Ake with Iris little note-book fluttering, grinning
GREY GRANITE
134
like an ape, the City Fathers all brave in their braws.
And off the jing-bang had rolled to the Scaur.
Well, they got out there at the dinner-time, the staff
all drawn up ready for inspection, and Puller, of Puller
and Grind’s, the contractors, was there with the finest
of feeds made ready for the Duncairn Council and afore
you could wink the contractor had wheeled in Jimmy the
Provost and all his tail and sat them down to a four-course
gobble, specially made and sent up from the Mile, with
wines in plenty—they needed them after the heat of the
drive. Mr. Piddle nipped in and sat by Ake and wolfed
into the fodder like a famished ferret, with his wee note¬
book held brisk at hand for words of wisdom from the
City Fathers. But they’d hardly a word, Provost Jimmy
or the lot, they’d gotten such an awful thirst to slock.
That was about noon ; about three the Fathers made
up the mischances they called their minds to go up at
last and look at the works. Jimmy Speight stood up
and started a speech about how these works were a fine
piece of work (aye, a habbering gawpus with his words,
poor Jimmy), and carried through in every particular
a credit to Duncairn and Puller and Grind. He might
have gone on for God knows how long but that Ake beside
him pulled the old sod down and whispered You haven’t
seen the thing yet. And Jimmy said Neither we have ;
that’s suspicious, and turned on Puller with a gey stern
look, but got suddenly mixed in a yawn and a hiccup.
When Ake had slapped his back out of that they all set
out for the new waterworks.
It was nearly a quarter of a mile from the shed where
GREY GRANITE 135
Puller had spread them their brave bite of lunch, hot
as hell the sun ; and the first man to fall by the wayside
was labour’s respectable Bailie Brown, he sat down and
said he would take it on trust, the workers knew that he
was their friend, he was awful tired and would need a bit
sleep. So they shook him a bit and syne left him snoring
like a pig let loose overlong on a midden, and went on a
bit further till the Dean of Guild, he'd been swaying a
bit with his meikle solemn face, suddenly wheeled round
on wee Councillor Clarke and told him he’d never for¬
given him, never, for that time he had voted an increase
in the tramwaymen’s wages the last year of the War—
September, it was. And wee Clarke said the Dean was a
havering skate, it wasn’t the last year, but the year afore ;
and they started to argue the matter out till wee Clarke
had enough, he punched the Dean one, all the folk around
you may well be sure looking shocked as hell and enjoying
themselves, the Dean sat down of a sudden on the path
and looked solemner than ever and syne started to sing ;
and the Lord Provost who’d been looking on at it all,
very intent, but with both eyes crossed, got fairly as
mixed in his mind as his eyes and thought he was down
at the Beach Pavilion adjudicating on the Boxing Finals,
and started a speech about the manhood of Duncairn, how
pleased he was to see the young men were taking up the
manly art of defence, and not rotting their minds with
seditious doctrines. And Ake, standing by and wonder¬
ing quiet what the hell they’d do if they ever met in with
a real booze-up, he himself was as drouthy as a lime-kiln,
near, saw Mr. Piddle, with a fuzzy bit look, taking it all
136 GREY GRANITE
down in his little note-book with a carbon copy for the
Tory Pictman ; and they left the Dean singing that his
Nannie was awa’, and resumed the trek to the High Scaur
works.
Well, believe it or not, they never got there. Puller
had the wind up by then just awful, he saw he’d drammed
up the Councillors over-much, if he took the boozed
Bulgars up to the works they’d more’n likely fall head¬
first in. So he rounded them back to the lunch-shed
again, Ake dandering behind with a bit of a laugh,
Jimmy Speight stopping every now and again for another
bit speech, he was fair wound up. Puller tried to sober
them up with coffee, two of the workmen carried the Dean,
they found Bailie Brown had started to crawl home and
when they tried to get him to stand he said he was only
playing at bears, couldn’t a man play at bears if he
liked ?
Ake saw Mr. Piddle taking that down as well, he was
just a kind of stenographic machine by then. But the
Council wouldn’t have much of the coffee, the Dean said
if Puller and Grind expected them to pass the new water¬
works, the works in the disgraceful state they were in,
they were sore mistaken he could tell them that. And
Jimmy Speight started his seventeenth speech, this time
about corruption rearing its ugly head like the sword of
Damocles in every avenue. So Puller called to the waiter
childes to bring in the whisky bottles again, they might
as well go home soaked as go home soft.
So our City Fathers lay the afternoon there, soaking
up truly, but Ake drinking cannily—and I guess if a
GREY GRANITE 137
■pickle of those Communist childes had been there they’d have
got enough propaganda to start a Soviet the morn’s morning.
It was seven o’clock before Mr. Puller could get the soaked
whoresons back in their coaches. Then he routed out
Mr. Piddle from a sleep in the grass and told him he ex¬
pected he’d say nothing of this, and Mr. Piddle took that
down in his note-book as well, but said he-he he knew dis¬
cretion, he was a man of the world as well. And old
Puller muttered something about Christ help the world
and then dosed Mr. Piddle with a dram or so to put him
into a right good tune and bunged him in aside Bailie
Brown ; and off they all drove back to Duncairn, the
coach-drivers were told to take it slow and see they didn’t
get back till dark.
Well, they halted up at the top Mile rank and pushed
the Councillors into taxis ; but Ake and Mr. Piddle made
for a tram ; and were soon at their lodgings in Windmill
Place ; and syne the bittie of trouble began.
Ake took the creature along to his room, and took off
his boots and gave him a bit shake, and went off to his own
bed, thinking no more on’t. But it seemed that the
outing to the High Scaur works had fair let loose the ill
passions of Piddle, he made up his mind to go up the stairs
and pay his respects to little Miss Johns.
So, forgetting he’d taken off most things but his
breeks, he padded up the stairs and knocked at the door,
and went in, he-he! Miss Johns was in bed, the lass sat
up and asked what he wanted and he closed the door and
giggled at her, soft, it doesn’t seem she was frightened,
much. But she nipped out of bed as Piddle came nearer,
138 GREY GRANITE
and called out Ewan ! ; and a minute later there was a
hell of a crash.
Ake was taking off his boots when he heard that crash,
and he tore from his room just as Mistress Colquohoun
tore out of hers, she’d less of a wardrobe on than he had
and fair looked a canty bit dame for a man to handle, he
couldn’t but think. Ake cried What’s up, up there,
would you say ? and she laughed in her cool-like, sulky
way Sounds more as though the ceiling was down ; and up
the two of them ran together and there Ake set eyes on as
bonny a picture as he’d seen for long, Mr. Piddle lying
over the bed like a pock, the lassie Ellen Johns in a scrimp
of a nightie, all flushed and bonny, red spot on each cheek,
and young Ewan Tavendale looking at Piddle—the two
young creatures with their earnest bit faces and their blue-
black hair a sheen in the light looking down at Piddle
like a couple of bairns at a puzzling and nasty thing on a
road.
Ake cried to the quean Has he done you harm ? and
she answered back cool, Not him. He’s just drunk, and
looked at Ewan that was standing beside her : You
shouldn’t have hit him ; that was quite unnecessary.
Syne they all looked at Ewan’s knuckles and saw they
were skinned and dripping blood, it seemed he hadn’t
known himself, he looked kind of dazed and now wakened
up. Yes, sorry. Damn silly thing to do. Ake, will you
help me carry him down ?
So the two of them carried him off like a corp leaving
the women to redd up the soss, the Piddle childe slept
through it all like a bairn. Ake said to Ewan as they
GREY GRANITE 139
laid Piddle in bed that he'd given the poor sod a gey
mishandling, and Kwan said so it seemed, he knew little
about it. He’d heard Miss Johns call and then things
had gone cloudy—interesting, supposed it was much the
same thing happened to stags in rutting time.
Ma said B’God 'twas the best tale she'd heard since
a gelding of her father’s at Monymusk had chased a brood
mare into a ditch—why didn’t you let on to me about it ?
This was to Chris after dinner that day, Chris shook
her head, it wasn’t worth mention. Mr. Piddle had made
a fool of himself, there was no harm done, he was only
a bairn.
Ma said And what about your Ewan, then ? and Chris
said she thought that that had been straightened, Ewan
had told Mr. Piddle he was sorry and Mr. Piddle had asked
him He-he ! What for ? he’d had no memory of the happen¬
ing at all. Now Ma mustn’t worry, she was just to lie
still, the house would be fine and all the things in’t.
Ma shook her head : And to think of me lying flat on
my back when there’s all these fine stravaigings about!
Sfeak of New York—damn’t, it’s not in’t!
October came in long swaths of rain pelting the glint¬
ing streets of Duncairn. Going up and down the Wind¬
mill Steps with her baskets of groceries Chris would see
the toun far alow under the rain’s onset move and shake
and shiver a minute like an old grey collie shaking in
sleep. The drive of wind and rain cleared the wynds
of the fouller smells ; down in the Mile, shining in mail,
140 GREY GRANITE
the great houses rose above the wet birl and drum of the
trams, buses creeping about like beasts in a fog, snorting,
and blowing the wet from their faces, Duncairn getting
out its reefers and bonnets, in drifting umbrella'ed
afternoon tides the half-gentry poured down the Mile
every day. Up in the house it was canty and fine, the
wind breenging unbreeked into room after room whenever
you opened a shutter a bit, Miss Murgatroyd thought it
was Such Rough, and John Cushnie came home from Rag-
gie Robertson's store and said they were doing a roaring
trade, him and Raggie, in selling a new line in raincoats.
J ock the cat shivered so close to the range Chris wondered
he didn’t get in and look out.
Ma got up the second day of her illness, she said it
was no more than sweirty, just, she must redd out the
kitchen press to-day. But half-way through she gave a
bit groan, Chris caught her as she tottered and turned
white, Meg was at hand and lended a hand, they got her
to sit in a chair in a minute. Then Chris said It’s back
to your bed for you, my woman, and back to it they took
her, Ma puffing and panting, God Almighty, lass, don’t look
feared about a small thing like this. There’s more old folk
than me in their time been ta’en with a bit of a paich, you
know. Get out for a bit of fresh air yourself.
Chris went for a walk to fetch the doctor, a thin
young country childe with pop eyes, he came in his car
and looked at Ma and gave her a prod and listened to her
lungs and said what she wanted was quietness and rest
and not to excite herself on a thing. But to Chris he
said she’d a swollen heart, serious enough, she’d have to
GREY GRANITE
141
look out. Chris asked what she’d better do, then ?
and the doctor asked were Mas relatives near, and Chris
remembered about the niece, only she didn’t know where
she bade. The doctor said that it couldn’t be helped—
try and find out without fearing the old wife.
So Chris waited till Ma was sleeping again and then
went and took a bit look through her desk, beside the
great curtain, worm-eaten, old, bundles of papers tied
in neat pilings, a fair soss of ribbons and cards and circulars,
paid bills and bits of tow and old brooches and safety-
pins and a ring or so, and some letters fading off at the
edges, Chris didn’t read them or heed to them except to
peer at the writer’s name. She found no trace of the
niece’s address in the pigeon-holes, Ma sleeping as the dead
in the bed out under the shadow of the patterned wall.
So she opened the lower drawers, old clothes, old papers,
a bundle of photos, a little pack tied up in tape which
came away in her hands as she looked, she stared at the
thing a puzzled minute.
It was the photo of a little lad with Ma's nose and
eyes and promise of her padding, keeking at something
the photographer did, no mistaking Mas face in his. And
below was written “James at 2’’ and inside the package
two other things, tawdry and faded, a hank of bairn’s
hair, brown soft, dead and old, it had lost its shine, and a
crumpled scrap of ancient crape. Tong, long ago it all
had happened. Why had Ma never told she’d a son ?
And Chris stood with the things in her hand in a
dream looking at the faded, puctured face of the little
lad who had died, she supposed, when he was no more than
I42 GREY GRANITE
a little lad, he’d finished quick with a look round about and
gone from Duncairn and gone from Ma, queer that such
things should be—all the care and heed and tears of pain
that had once been given this little childe far back there
in the years where he twiddled his toes. And he d
ceased with it all, a mistake, a journey he would not make,
no rain to hear or grow to knowledge of the dark, sad
things of life at all, no growing to books and harkening
to dreams, like Ewan—no growing to be a queer young man
far from Ma and all she had hoped, only leaving her a
searing memory awhile and then a quiet glow that lasted
forever. Not leaving an unease that washed as a tide
through one’s heart, unending . . . dreaming on Ewan.
How she hated the splatter of the driving rain !
As that rain held on and pelted Duncairn with the
closing in of the storm-driven clouds, great cumulus shapes
that came wheeling down from the heights of the far
brown lour of the Mounth, the roof-tops glistered in the
lights of the Mile and far and near the gutters gurgled,
eddied and swam, piercing down to a thousand drains,
down through the latest Council diggings, down to dark
spaces and forgotten pools, in one place out through an
antique tunnel that the first Piet settlers had made and
lined with uncalsayed stones, set deep in earth, more than
two thousand years before. And far and near as the
evening came under the stour a thousand waters by
gutters and wynd and the swollen Eorthie, dark, brimming,
wheeled down through the darkling night to seek the
GREY GRANITE 143
splurge and plunge of the sea pelting beyond the dunes
of the beach. Ellen heard its cry long ere they reached it,
harsh, soft, the patter of the rain on the waves.
Then Ewan and she had climbed through the Links
and up the railings to the desolate front, wet-shining, with
hardly the glimmer of a light. Here the rain caught
their faces in swaths, warm rain, like corn felled in a
reaper's bout, some Reaper high in the scudding lift.
Ewan said 2 hcyc s a shelter further ulong. Let’s run for it,
and caught her hand and they ran together, both hatless,
both wet, and gained its lithe and sat on the bench, panting,
staring out at the dark.
Ellen closed her eyes and leaned back her head and
stretched out her nice legs, she knew they were nice, and
lovely and tingly, and put her hands up behind her wet
hair. That run was fun, hard to believe that this was
Duncairn, here in the darkness with the forgotten sea.
She peeped at Ewan, sitting near, queer Scotch boy,
solemn and not, wonder if he's ever kissed a girl ? And
she thought not likely and was angry with herself be¬
having just like an idiot shop-girl. She'd been tired and
drowsy to-night with that long, stuffy meeting of the
League, Semple had come and talked for the Reds, she’d
thought him a catty and smelly bore. So when it finished
and they came out into the rain flooding the Crossgate
she d said to Ewan Let’s go a walk before we go home,
half-expecting he’d snub her, he could do that easily.
But instead he’d said Yes, if you like, where’ll we go ?
and shed said The Beach and he’d said Right-o, not
thinking her silly as any other would, Duncairn had
144 GREY GRANITE
stopped going down to the Beach now that Snellie Guff
and his Funny Scotch Band had finished their season
assassinating music. So down through the squelching
Finks they’d come and here they were, and there, a
creaming unquiet, the sea.
And Ewan said suddenly out of the darkness This
would be a splendid night for a bathe.
Ellen turned to the glimmer of his face : What, now ?
 Why not? The rain’s warm enough and I’m sticky
still with the Crossgate heat. The glimmer grew blurred:
I’m going to. Shan’t be out long.
Ellen said You can’t. You haven’t a bathing-dress—
or towels—or anything.
 That’s the beauty of it. Nothing at all.
And supposing he caught cramp down there alone ?
Ellen swallowed : It might be fun. I’m coming in as well.
As she threw off her coat and unbuckled her shoes she
saw him about to go out of the shelter. Funny the tingle
that touched her then, cool enough though she was:
There’s plenty of room for both of us, isn’t there ?
He called I suppose so, and stripped in like haste with
herself, it was cold in the shelter, a long pointer of wind
stroked Ellen’s back as she wrenched off her stockings,
Ewan asked suddenly out of the dark if a girl always took
off her stockings last ?
Ellen raised her head and saw him a white glimmer,
goodness, shouldn’t look ; but why shouldn’t she ? He
was looking at her, she supposed, thank goodness couldn’t
see much. She said Yes, I think so. I’ve never noticed.
Oh, hell, it’s cold !
GREY GRANITE 145
Kwan said It’s not. Come on. Can you swim ?
And Ellen said she could or was trying to say it when the
rain-laden wind whipped the words from her mouth, on
the promenade they were caught and twirled, she thought
in a sudden panic, This is mad we’ll never get back, and
next minute found Ewan had caught her wrist: Down
together. I know the way.
They ran. The way lay over the sand, soft and wet
and slimily warm, the pelting on the water drew their
feet, they forgot Duncairn and the lights behind, all the
hates and imaginings that drowned those sad children
lost from the winds and tides, rain at night, sting of
flesh smitten under rain. Suddenly Ellen’s legs seemed
stroked with fire : they ran out into the play of the
sea.
Beyond the shore-beat they met a great wave, Ewan
tried to cry something, failed, dived, vanished, Ellen
felt herself lost, laughed desperately, dived as well.
Ewan suddenly beside her : Let’s get back. Over-rough,
and she turned about, she seemed sheathed in fire,
saltily grainily slipping through water, she fought off
cramp, struggled, and found her feet abruptly on the
shore again. . . . Idiots ! Goodness, what idiots !
Next minute, wading, she gained the wet sand, saw
a glister beside her, Ewan Tavendale, head bent and
wiping the water from his hair. Then he whispered
Sh—look at that !
Ellen peered up at the promenade and her heart
peered up in her throat. The shelter had squatted dark
on the slope but now it was lighted with a moving light ’.
K
146 GREY GRANITE
Some man or other had gone in there and found their
clothes, he’d switched on a torch—
Ewan whispered there was nothing else for it but to
tackle him, and they ran up, the wind in Ellen’s hair, she
thought I don’t care, it’s fun, she felt warm, suddenly
tingling from head to heel. Ewan glimmered in front:
at the sound of the pelt of their feet on the sand the light
switched about and Ellen for a moment saw Ewan, she
thought He’s nice hips, and at that the light vanished,
Ewan had caught it and flung it down the Beach.
Now then, now then, what’s this that you’re up to ?
Do you know you’re assaulting the police, my lad ?
Ellen nipped past and caught up her clothes, struggled
into her vest, into her knickers, the bulk of the bobby
hiding Ewan from her. He was saying You’ll come along
to the Station with me, the two of you, there’ll be a bonny bit
charge, public indecency down at the Beach.
Ellen gave a gasp, Ewan said nothing, she could see
him move quickly and dimly, getting in his clothes, he
was dressing more quickly than she was, she knew, her
shift stuck to her, it didn’t matter, yet she felt cold now,
her mind a tumult. Oh, they COUEDN’T charge any¬
body with THAT, just for nothing—
Come along, you’re all ready. Mind, none of your
tricks. Here you—this to Ewan—have you matches on
you ?
Ewan made on that he hadn’t heard, the bobby swore
and made to come between them. It was then that Ewan
acted, Ellen saw the play, an instant, dim as a bad-made
film, the bobby vanished, there came a crash and a
GREY GRANITE 147
slither from below, Ewan had said There’s a match for
you, and flung him from the top of the high Beach steps.
He grabbed her hand Run like hell! and they ran like
that till she gasped that she couldn’t do more, else she'd
burst. He told her not to do that, it would be a mess, and
released his hold, and halted beside her.
Out in the Links they stood listening : Nothing,
nothing but the far cry of a seabird desolate about the
turning tide, forward the glimmer of Duncairn in the rain
warm and safe and all unaware. Ellen asked with a
sudden catch of breath : What if the bobby has been badly
hurt ? and Ewan said Let him hurt, it will do the swine good,
cool and unperturbed, she felt sick a moment. It was
only that half-wit Sergeant Sim Leslie who used to dig with
my mother, you know.
Things were fair kittling up at Gowans and Gloag,
a lad had to keep nippy with the new tools that came,
packing and storing and wondering about them, damned
queer frames for new castings, too, nobody kenned what
the bits were for. But there were orders enough to hand
and the management was taking on folk again, it just
showed you the papers were right what they said—that
the Crisis was over and trade coming back.
And meeting Ewan Tavendale outside the office you
cried to him, Ay ! Ewan, what about the collapse of capital¬
ism now ? Doesn’t look very much like it, does it ? He
said No ? D’you know what the new orders are for ?
You said you didn’t and you didn’t much care as long as
148 GREY GRANITE
it gave a bit work to folk, better any kind of a decent job
than being pitched off on the bloody Broo.
Bwan said And better getting ready stuff to blow out
another man s guts in his face than starving yourself with an
empty guts ? Is that what you think ? Then your head’s
gone soft.
You'd never seen him look angry before, you felt
angry yourself and damned hurt as well, you asked who
the hell he was calling names and he said Clean your ears
and you’ll hear quick enough. Bob, be up at the League
room to-night. There’s a meeting on of all the chaps I can
bring.
Who the hell did he think he was ordering about ?
But you went to the meeting all the same, a fair birn
of the Gowans and Gloag chaps there, half the young lads
from Machines and Castings and that thin-necked Bulgar
who worked in the Stores, Norman and Alick and wee
Geordie Bruce. No League folk and thank Christ no
queans, Ewan sat behind the chairman’s table alone and
banged it and stood up and began to speak : and afore
he’d said much there was such a hush you’d have heard
the wind rumble in the belly of a flea.
He said they’d all noticed the new orders coming
into Gowans and Gloag’s. Did they know what the orders
were for—the new machinery, the new parts they made ?
Especially had they noticed the new cylinders ? He could
tell them : he’d found out that morning. They were
making new ammunition parts, bits of shells and gas-
cylinders for Sidderley, the English armament people.
Somebody cried up Well, hell, does it matter? and
GREY GRANITE
149
Ewan said if a man were such a poor swine that it didn’t
matter to him he was making things to be used to blow
Chinese workers to bits, people like himself, then it didn’t
matter. But if he had any guts at all he’d join the whole
of Gowans and Gloag in a strike that would paralyse the
Works. Gas-cylinder cases : he hadn’t been at the War,
none of them had, but they’d all read and heard about
gas-attacks. Here was an account by a hospital attend¬
ant that he’d copied from a book :
I RECEIVED AN URGENT MESSAGE FROM THE
HOSPITAL TO BE IN ATTENDANCE IMMEDIATELY.
I HURRIED THERE AND ALMOST AT ONCE THE
STREAM OF AMBULANCES WITH THE UNFORTU¬
NATE PRISONERS BEGAN TO ARRIVE. AT FIRST
SCORES, THEN LATER HUNDREDS, OF BROKEN
MEN, GASPING, SCREAMING, CHOKING. THE HOS¬
PITAL WAS PACKED WITH FRENCH SOLDIERS,
BEATING AND FIGHTING THE AIR FOR BREATH.
DOZENS OF MEN WERE DYING LIKE FLIES,
THEIR CLOTHES RENT TO RIBBONS IN THEIR
AGONY, THEIR FACES A HORRIBLE SICKLY
GREEN AND CONTORTED OUT OF ALL HUMAN
SHAPE—
There was plenty more, but that gave you a taste.
Well, that’s what he'd summoned this meeting for.
What were they to do about it in Gowans ?
Christ, you’d felt sick at that stuff he’d read, but
then wee Geordie Bruce at the back of the hall sounded
a raspberry and everybody laughed, high out and relieved,
you laughed yourself, only Norman and Ewan didn’t.
GREY GRANITE
150
Ewan said if the chap at the back had anything to say
let him get up and say it, and at that wee Geordie Bruce
stood up and said Ah, to hell with you and your blethers.
What do you think you’re trying to do ?—play the bloody
toff on us again ? It doesn’t matter a faeces to us what
they’re going to do with the wee round tins. If you’re a
Chink or a Black yourself, that’s your worry. And other
chaps called out the same, who the mucking hell did Taven-
dale think he was ?—daft as all the bloody Reds. And
afore you could wink the place was in a roar, Ewan you
could see sitting at the table, listening, looking from this
side to that. Then he stood up and said that they’d take
a vote—those in favour of a strike hold up their hands.
The noise quietened away a bit at that, you looked
round about, nobody had a hand up, and och to hell
suddenly you minded the stuff that Ewan had been read¬
ing about chaps caught in gas, and you felt fair daft,
up your hand shot, and so did Norman’s, and so Alick’s,
and Ewan was counting : For—three. Those against ?—
But there was never a real count, chaps started whistling
and stamping, raspberrying and banging out of the room
and knocking over the chairs as they went. You sat
where you were feeling a fair fool, in a minute there was
only the four of you left.
Syne Ewan called out: Bob, close the door. We’ve
to make ourselves into a Committee of Action.
At half past five it happened again. Running down
the stairs Chris met Ake Ogilvie who’d newly letten him-
GREY GRANITE 151
self in at the door. Ake, Ma Cleghorn’s ta’en ill again.
Will you run for the doctor ? and Ake said Eh ? Oh, ay,
I’ll do that, and asked the address and nodded and went
stamping out into the dark, Chris glanced from the
window and saw it coming down, dark early now the
winter was near. Syne she turned and ran up to Ma’s
room again to ease her out of her stays, poor thing, lying
black-faced and gasping and swearing like a soldier.
The doctor came as he’d done before, had another
look, gave another sniff, and said that Ma must be kept
fell quiet. Chris told him she’d found out the relative’s
address, should she send for her ? The doctor pulled
at his lip and said Oh no, just keep the address by handy¬
like. And don’t worry too much, Mrs. Colquohoun. I’ll
send up medicine, and off he went. Chris went down to
the kitchen to get ready the tea, Ma ill or Ma well folk
would need their meat.
She went to bed dead tired that night. But she
couldn’t sleep, getting up every hour or so to look in
Ma’s room, after midnight the breathing grew easier.
It had grown cold and looking out of the window Chris
saw that snow had come on, soft-sheeting, the early soft
seep of November snow whitening the roofs in a spilling
fall. And she stood and looked at it a little while in the
still, quiet house above the stilled toun, in a cold no¬
thought till the clock struck three—suddenly dirling
beside her head.
Far away through the snow beyond Footforthie the
lighthouse winked on the verge of the morning, and a
feeling of terrible loneliness came on her standing so at
152 GREY GRANITE
that hour, knowledge of how lonely she had always been,
knowledge of how lonely every soul was, apart and alone
as she had been surely even at the most crowded hours of
her life. And she went up the stairs in a sudden fear and
listened outside Ewan’s room a minute and heard his
breath, low and even. In the next room the door hung
open unsnecked, she’d have to see to that lock to¬
morrow. Closing the door she saw Ellen Johns a dim
shape curled like a baby in sleep, and stood, the snow-
hush upon the panes, looking at her in a kind of despera¬
tion, half-minded to waken her up to talk.
Then that daft thought went from her, she went down
the stairs and into the kitchen, cold even there, the fire
in the range had drooped to ash, she stirred it a little and
Jock the cat purred a drowsy greeting a minute, grew
silent; she sat and stared in the fading ash, alone and
desperate—what would she do ?
It was plain enough Ma wouldn’t last long. And
then—Chris hadn’t enough money to carry on the house
herself and whoever heired Ma mightn’t want to come in
with her. So out again, looking for some other thing in
this weary life of Duncairn, seeking out some little shop,
she supposed, somewhere where she and Ewan could bide
and trauchle and fight with the going of the years, he
wouldn’t earn money of account for years. And so on
and on, streets all about, slippery with slime, the reeking
gutters of Paldy Parish, the weary glint of shop-fronts
in the Mile—till she grew old and old and haggard, thin—
who would have dreamed this for her long syne that night
she wedded Ewan in Blawearie, just a night like this she
GREY GRANITE 153
minded now, lights, and Long Rob and Chae at the fiddle,
dancing, warmth, the daftness of being young : they’d
seemed eternal, to outlast the hills, those moments when
Ewan had first ta’en her in his arms, naked, unshielded,
unafraid, glad to be his and give and take for the fun and
glory of being in love ... all far away in the snowing
years down the long Howe on Kinraddie’s heights.
And she thought of the croft in the north wind’s
blow, of the snow driving about it this night lashing the
joists and window-panes, the fly and scurry of the driving
flakes about the Stones high up by the loch, the lost rigs
sleeping under their covering, the peesies wheeping lost
in the dark. Oh idiot, weeping to remember that, all
things gone and lost and herself afraid and afraid and a
morning coming she was feared to face, lost and alone.
And again she got to her feet and wandered through
the hush of the sleeping house, and stood in her own room,
with the sickly flare of the gaslight behind her and looked
at herself in the mirror, hands clenched, forgetting her¬
self in a sudden wild woe that wouldn’t stop though her
mind clamoured it was daft, things would redd up in time,
she wasn’t hungry or starved, she had friends, she had
Ewan. . . . SHE HAD NOTHING AT ALL, she had
never had anything, nothing in the world she’d believed
in but change, unceasing and unstaying as time, light
after light went down, hope and fear and hate, love that
had lighted hours with a fire, hate freezing through to
the blood of one s heart—Nothing endured, and this
hour she stood as alone as she’d been when a quean in
those wild, lost moments she climbed the heights of
GREY GRANITE
154
Blawearie brae. And she covered her face with her
hands and sat down and so stayed there awhile and then
rose and put on her clothes, coldly, mechanically, looking
at the clock. . . . Trudging in the track of those little
feet as a tethered beast that went round and round the
tethering post in the midst of a park—
The Young Teague dance was fair in full swing, chaps
had gone flocking to buy up tickets at Gowans and Gloag’s
and all over Footforthie, a tanner hop was a good enough
chance to take your quean to on New Year’s Bve. And
she’d said But aren’t those creatures Red ? and you said you
were Bulgared if you knew, did it matter ? And she said
Reds were awful, they believed that women—och, stuff that
you wouldn’t speak about. And you said you wouldn’t but
these Reds were different, the head of them was a toff kind
of sod, Ewan Tavendale—
And your quean said Bob! or Will! or Leslie—don’t
use those kind of words to me, and you nearly went off
your head at the runt, trying to make a lad speak genteel.
But she turned up ready to go to the dance down in Tong
Hall, and there was that Tavendale, you’d never spoken
to him, standing at the door and taking the tickets and
nodding to folk ; and up on the platform Jake Forbes’s
band that was wee Jake Forbes all on his own, hard at it
banging out the Omaha Pinks, J ake tootling away with his
big white face like a bowl of lard on the melt by a fire,
queans and chaps all over the floor, your quean looked the
GREY GRANITE 155
bonniest and awful posh, how the hell did queans manage
to dress up like that ?
Then the Pinks struck up and you gave her a grab,
she hadn't on stays or much else below, and off you all
went, slither and slide, one foot in and another out, like
a cock with concussion, tweetle the flute. And Jake
stood up and hit the drum and banged the bell and clattered
the cymbals and looked as though with a bit of encourage¬
ment he’d have kicked hell out of the nearest wall.
Christ, what a row : but it kittled you up.
It was cold outside but the chaps didn’t heed, you
took out your quean for a squeeze between dances, cold
though it was, she breathed You mustn’t, not here—
to hell, she liked it. Then she’d fix up her dress and back
you’d go, New Year coming fast, some of the chaps nipped
over to the pub and brought back a gill of the real Mackay,
kittling everybody up, you forgot you’d got sacked the
day before, and father was cursing like hell and said he’d
have to keep you on the P.A.C. ... or that your job was
a bloody stalemate with no chance of earning a penny
piece more. Funny how fine your quean felt and smelt,
other queans as well as you changed with chaps. And
there was that toff Ewan Tavendale, only he didn’t look
a toff a bit, just one of the lads, he was dancing like hell
when Jake put on a Schottische. Every body cried
Hooch! and wakened up more, a daft old dance, not
up to date, but you fair could swank and give a bit prance,
in and out, now on your own quean’s sleeve, now on that
of the schoolteacher folk said was Red, only a kid, she
was dressed in red, with black hair and a flaming skirt,
156 GREY GRANITE
she laughed and cried Hook! not Hooch!: she was
English.
Jake quietened a minute to wipe his fat face and
Ewan carried him something to drink; and Ewan
called The New Year dance is next. Just a word to
you all before it comes on. You know who’re the people
who’ve got up this dance. They say were some kind of
Reds: let them say. We’re workers the same as all of
you are and as fond of taking a girl to a dance and giving
her a cuddle on the sly as the next. In fact, that’s why we
believe what we do—that every one should have a decent
life and time for dancing and enjoying oneself, and a
decent house to go to at night, decent food, decent beds.
And the only way to get those things is for the young workers
of whatever party to join together and stop the old squabbles
and grab life’s share with their thousand hands. And he
stopped and looked down at the chaps and queans, all
kittled up as they looked, with flushed faces, the lasses
bonny in that hour though they came from the stews
of Paldy and Kirrieben and Footforthie, their thin antrin
faces soft in the light: And isn’t it worth grabbing?
And that’s all the speech.
And as they cheered him and cried his name, the dirty,
kind words of mates in the Shops, a great chap that Ewan,
just one of themselves ... it seemed to Ewan in a sudden
minute that he would never be himself again, he’d never
be ought but a bit of them, the flush on a thin white mill-
girl’s face, the arm and hand and the downbent face of a
keelie from the reek of the Gallowgate, the blood and bones
and flesh of them all, their thoughts and their doubts
GREY GRANITE
157
and their loves were his, all that they thought and lived
in were his. And that Ewan Tavendale that once had
been, the cool boy with the haughty soul and cool hands,
apart and alone, self-reliant, self-centred, slipped away
out of the room as he stared, slipped away and was lost
from his life forever.
And then Ellen Johns was pulling at his arm : Ewan,
you look funny, is there anything wrong? and he moved
and came out of that dreaming trance, and smiled at her,
and Ellen’s heart moved, not the cold smile at all, it
might have been that of any kind boy. Hello, Ellen.
You look lovely to-night. Can I have the next dance?
and she said, wide-eyed, You can have them all if you want
them, Ewan.
And he took her hand and drew her close and waved
to Jake and Jake started it up, tooootle the flute, cla-
boomr the drum, off they all went in the wheel of a waltz,
winkle the lights and Ellen’s head close under Ewan’s
shoulder as they spun. And he looked down and sud¬
denly smelled her hair, strange and sweet, and felt dizzy
a minute, at the tickle of it up under his chin, at the touch
of her up against him close, breast and belly and legs,
soft, sweet, something ran with a torch and fired all his
body. And Ellen looked up and saw his face, white,
and suddenly knew what she’d always known, that she
was his for as long as he liked, and she would like that
till the day she died.
And she knew then that all the old stories were true,
i58 grey granite
while they wheeled together, while they paused and rested,
standing together so that they just touched, her hand
touched his and his fingers closed on it, quick and glad
 troubling fingers—Oh, all true that they d sung in the
olden times in this queer Scotland that had felt so alien,
the dark, queer songs of lust and desire, of men and women
and this daftness of love, dear daftness in soft Scotch
speech, on Scotch lips—daftness like this that she felt
for Ewan, and it didn’t matter what he thought or did,
whatever he might do or say or believe, the glory of it
would last her forever. ...
Jake cried A last one ere Ne’ersday comes. What’ll
it he ? and they cried back A reel!, all the chaps smiling
by then to their queans, the queans that had lost their
clipped, frightened looks, their distrusts of men and hands
and lips, forgetting the dark and the cold outbye and those
dreary dawns that haunted Duncairn, thinking only of
touches kind and shy, weak faces they loved, a moment
to snatch when all this was over, somewhere, anyhow—
to hell with risk when you liked him so well! And they
flushed at their thoughts and said flyting things ; and all
lined up for the last of the reels ; and Jake crashed out
the tune, walloping the drum till it boomed like a bittern,
tankle the melodeon, tootle the flute, and off they all went.
Round and faster and faster still, Ewan with Ellen
and holding her so she was frightened and struggled a
wild-bird moment, Ewan lost in a queer, cruel flame of
wonder, desire, and—heart-breaking—a passion of pity.
Play on, Jake, play on, never stop, Ellen and I, Ellen
and I. . . •
GREY GRANITE 159
And far away Thomson Tower clanged midnight across
the toun and into Tong Hall, the long dark hall where
the League had its dance ; and J ake stopped in the middle
of his clatter of playing and they all stopped and laughed
the queans pulled at their dresses, and Tavendale stood
with the schoolteacher close, close as though glued,
jammed up against Alick and Norman and their queans ;
and Jake cried out Join hands—here’s New Year :
So here’s a hand, my trusty frere,
And here’s a hand o’ mine—
And Ellen wished the mist would go from her eyes ;
and then they'd all stopped and the music was done
and queans were being pushed into their coats, and
coddled, and everybody crying good-night. A happy New
Year! Good night, then, Ewan. Good night to your lass
—what’s her name?—Ellen? Ta-ta, Ellen. And she
cried Ta-ta, standing by Ewan, the mist quite gone, alive
and tingling not heeding at all that some cried back
Hell, it’s snowing like Bulgary !
They left J ake to lock up the hall and went out, snow
sheeting down on the snow-rimed streets, all around the
lighted wynds of Ne'ersday, first foots and greetings and
drams poured in tumblers, the bairns crying Is’t time to
get up ? and their mothers, tired, happy, crying back to
them : Mighty he here, get into your beds. You’ll get all
your presents on New Year’s Day—
But the streets were nearly deserted as they hurried,
Ellen and Ewan, from the Cowgate’s depth across the
Mile and the Corn Market, the cold air blowing on Ellen’s
tfo GREY GRANITE
face, Ewan looked down and saw her face a winter flower
and wanted to sing, wanted to stop and say idiot things,
to stop and go mad and strip Ellen naked, the secret
small cat, slow piece on piece, and kiss every piece a
million times over, and hit her—hard, till it hurt, and kiss
the hurts till cure and kisses and pain were one—mad,
oh, mad as hell to-night!
And she tripped beside him, sweet, slim and demure
in act and look, dark cool kitten, and inside was frightened
at the wildness there. So up Windmill Steps through the
sheet of the snow, a corner with a mirror, here the snow
failed, Ewan halted panting while she made to run on.
But he caught her arm and drew her down, she wriggled
a little, the light on her face, startled, eyes like stars and
yet drowsy, he drew her close to him and they suddenly
gasped, with wonder and fear and as though their hearts
broke and were shattered in the kiss, sweet, terrible, as
their lips met at last.
Thin and lank, with a holy mouth and shifty eyes, she
sat in the kitchen and had tea with Chris : Eh me, and
you think she won’t last the night ? And Chris said, No,
I don’t think she will. Another cup of tea, Miss Urquhart ?
and Ma’s niece Izey sniffled through her nose, godly, and
pecked at her eyes with a hanky : Have you had the minis¬
ter up to see her ?
Chris said No, she hadn’t, Ma had told her in a wakeful
moment that day she didn’t want any of them sossing
GREY GRANITE
161
about, if St. Peter needed a prayer for a passport he’d
be bilked of another boarder, fegs. And Niece Izey
held up her hands in horror, But YOU don’t believe that,
do you, now ? and Chris said more or less, she didn't care,
and Miss Urquhart drew in her shoggly mouth, prim :
I’m afraid we wouldn’t get on very well. I believe in God,
I’ve no time for heathen. And Chris said A/b ? That must
be a comfort. Try a cake, Miss Urquhart, and sat watch¬
ing her eat, she herself couldn’t, over tired with running
up and down the stairs and seeing to the lodgers’ meals
as they came, they needed something special on New
Year’s Eve, and letting Meg go early though she'd offered
to stay. . . . And suddenly the lank Izey said I suppose
you know that I heir it all ?—the share in the house and the
furniture ?
Chris said she’d heard that and knew it to be true,
whatever intention Ma had once had of altering her will
to surprise Niece Izey she’d never had the time to carry
it out. And Miss Urquhart pursed up her holy-like
mouth and said she would realize her share, she’d no
fancy for the keeping of lodgers herself, not a decent work,
she’d always thought. Maybe Mrs. Colquohoun would
buy her out ?
Chris said I’ve no idea what I’ll do. But I’m dead
tired now. Will you watch by your aunt ? Niece Izey gave
a kind of a shiver : Oh, but I don’t know a thing about
nursing. You won’t leave me alone with her, will you?
Chris looked at her in an idle pity, too tired to hate
the poor, fusionless thing, a black hoodie-crow scared of
a body not yet quite a corpse but ready to pick out its
I*
162 GREY GRANITE
eyes when it died. I’m going up to rest in my own room a
while. If there’s any change you can run up and tell me.
Without taking off her clothes she lay on the bed and
drew the coverlet over her, not intending to sleep, only rest
and lose her aches in the dark. But afore she knew it she
was gone, sound, the last whisper she heard the fall of
the snow pelting Duncairn in its New Year s Bve.
She woke from that with a hand on her shoulder, the
lanky niece had lighted the gas, she was all a-dither and
the long face grey. I’m feared she’s gey ill, and Oh, how
you were sleeping. I thought I would never waken you.
Chris got off the bed and tidied her hair. And as
she did so she heard from Ma’s room an antrin sound—a
blatter of words, then a groan of pain. She was down the
stairs and into the room, Izey trailing behind in a lank
unease, and saw that it couldn’t be very long now, she
had better send for the doctor at once.
Ma Cleghorn was fighting her last fight with the world
she had jeered at and sworn at throughout her life, gallant
and vulgar, untamed to the end, her arms beating the air
in this battle. Chris wiped the spume from the swollen
lips, the smell of death already in the air, and did not move
as she sat by the bed, the niece went out of the room to be
ill, down in Duncairn a late tram tootled; and the dreich
fight drew to its close, begun a sixty years before, ending
in this—what for, what for ?
And suddenly Ma’s lips ceased to twist and slobber
with their blowings of brownish spume, her hand in Chris’s
slackened with a little jerk ; and she stepped from the bed
and out of the house and up long stairs that went wander-
GREY GRANITE 163
ing to Heaven like the stairs on Windmill Brae. And she
met at the Gates St. Peter himself, in a lum hat and leg¬
gings, looking awful stern, the father of all the Wee Free
ministers, and he held up his hand and snuffled through
his nose and asked in GAWD’S name was she one of the
Blessed ? And Ma Cleghorn said she was blest if she
knew—Let’s have a look at this Heaven of yours. And she
pushed him aside and took a keek in, and there was God
with a plague in one hand and a war and a thunderbolt
in the other and the Christ in glory with the angels bowing,
and a scraping and banging of harps and drums, ministers
thick as a swarm of blue-bottles, no sight of Jim and no
sight of Jesus, only the Christ, and she wasn’t impressed.
And she said to St. Peter This is no place for me, and turned
and went striding into the mists and across the fire-tipped
clouds to her home.
The sleet had ended. Booking up in the lift Chris
saw it lighten and the cumuli clear, a stiff wind blowing
the New Year’s Day into the eyes of Duncairn below,
wakening down there and about her, wakening while she
stood here frozen like—oh, like a corpse, like Ma up there
in the blinded room, if Ma was there, no day for her, just
the dark, no snow, sun never again or shadow or cold.
Bong ago Robert would have been able to put in fine
words the things that you felt—or could even Robert ?
Could he have put in words both your pity and desire to
laugh—laughter because death was so funny and foolish ?
. . . And whatever next—oh, whatever next ?
GREY GRANITE
164
And then, as always at breaking point, she felt cool
and kind and unworried no longer, brisk and competent,
unwearied, she whistled a little as the sleet went by.
No worry could last beyond the last point, there was
nothing awaiting her but her life, New Year and lyife
that would gang as it would, greeting or laughing, unheed¬
ing her fears.
And she went up the steps to death and life.
Ill
APATITE
COMING down the steps of Windmill Brae in the blaze
of the late May afternoon Chris paused at the mirror,
dust-sprinkled in summer's beginning, and looked at
her blithe self with a cool curiosity. If finery made fine
birds, she thought, she’d peacocks beaten to the likeness
of sparrows, new hat and dress, new shoes, new gloves,
new-bathed—oh, new to her skin at least!
And, so she supposed, behind this newness and those
cool eyes in the mirror, the fugitive Chris was imprisoned
at last, led in a way like the captives long syne whom
men dragged up the heights to Blawearie lyoch to streek
out and kill by the great grey stones. Caught as they
were : she, who had often lain down in the shadow of the
Stones—oh, daft to blether in her thoughts like this, when
all that was happening to her to-day was as common a
happening throughout the world as getting up, getting
down, sleeping and waking. . . .
Sleeping 
Even the cool amusement behind which she shielded
could not restrain that shudder of disgust, goodness knew
why, what was disgusting about the business ? Going
back to a life again full and complete from a half-life,
unnatural, alone and apart. But she pulled off her gloves
and stared at her fingers in a sudden, unreasoning spasm
of panic. Oh, however had she come to betray herself
so ? Better the sleet and the grey despair of that five
months ago when she last climbed here, no road or vision
before her at all—
163
i66
GREY GRANITE
When young Alick Watson talked home one night
to the Cowgate in the middle of J anuary and told the news
that a strike was on, there was no going back to Gowans
and Gloag’s till they’d stopped the making of shell-cases
and cylinders, Meg Watson asked And what does that
mean ?—that a lot of tink brutes like your self’ll gang idle ?
Alick said that it meant she could give him less of
her lip, Christ, wasn’t there even a cup of tea ? And him
on picket the morn’s morning.
Meg was wearied from her work at Windmill Place,
she said he could get the tea for himself, he’d have plenty of
time for cookery classes now he was out on his half-witted
strike. And who did he expect would keep him, eh ?
Father or herself or that Red sod Selden ? She’d aye
known that Alick was a silly gawpus, she could bet they
hadn’t AFF come out on strike.
Alick said she could bet herself blue in the face,
they’d all come out that had any guts excepting a few of
the sods in the office. Meg said she was glad Mr. Taven-
dale and his like had more sense, Alick stared at her and
then gave a laugh: Ewan Tavendale? Why, you silly
bitch, it’s him that’s organized the whole mucking strike—
he’s been going it for weeks now, him and his League. T hey’d
never have brought off the strike at all if it hadn’t been for
the speeding-up as well—chaps doing double work in the
same spread of time. And we’re all out the morn and the
whole damn business led by your Mr. Tavendale, see ?
Then he said in a minute he was awful sorry—I
didn’t mean to vex you, Meg. And she snuffled and
dabbed at her eyes, making out she’d a cold, she hadn’t—
GREY GRANITE 167
what had he said, what was wrong with her ? And he
glowered at his sister in the littered, cold room, with the
rags on the beds and the rickety chairs, something about
her looked queer to a chap. . . .
Why should she greet when he spoke about Ewan r
Stephen Selden, the lodger, came in at that minute,
Alick told him the news, he was fair delighted. He said
that the Communist local would help, they’d take over
the running from this daft young Eeague. Alick asked
what the hell it had to do with the Communists—or
Tavendale’s League, if it came to that ? It was only the
concern of the Cowans chaps. But Selden said it was
every worker’s affair that another was fighting for his
livelihood and to put down the manufacture of armaments.
He himself would be along at the picketing the morn.
And there sure enough he was at the gates with a
birn of others when the morning broke, a crowd of Broo
chaps from all over Duncairn standing about easy and
looking at the gates and watching the half-dozen men on
picket. Folk took a bit dander across the calsays and
cried out to ask what the strike was about ? The pickets
said there was a statement to be issued soon, they’d
nothing to say until that was done. And they stood and
gowked at the gates, damned cold, or looked back up
the streets to the fug of Footforthie, Alick and Norman
and the new Stores chap, Bob, two old men who worked
in Machines, and a young chap who looked like a toff, folk
thought, ’twas said he was a gent who worked in the Office.
Whatever could he be doing on strike ?
At nine o’clock, with the crowd gey thick, two bobbies
GREY GRANITE
168
came barging through the press and stood up on either
side of the gate, one a young constable childe from the
country, that everybody liked, a mere loon, with no harm
and a cheery smile that he couldn't hide though he tried
to look solemn as a sourock now, standing under the eye
of his sergeant, the big ugly sod that had come to Foot-
forthie, some called him Feet and some called him worse,
Feslie his name, a heavy-looking brute with bulging
eyes and a grind of a voice. Stand back there! he cried
to the folk round about, and somebody sounded a rasp¬
berry, and everybody laughed.
Then folk looked round and saw that a car was coming,
the manager’s car, slow, Sergeant Feslie opened the gates
and gave it a wave in. But one of the pickets, the young
toff, held up his hand, every body stared, Christ, didn’t he
know the manager ?
But the car slid to a stop and Ewan went forward and
talked a minute to the manager, he said You is it, Taven-
dale? Yes, I’ve heard all the story. This’ll mean one
thing certain enough, anyhow: YOU’LL not come back
to Gowans and Gloag’s. Ewan said they would see about
victimization when the strike was over : what about the
manager himself coming out ? And the manager reddened
and said to his chauffeur Drive on ! and Sim Feslie caught
Ewan’s shoulder : Stand away there, or I’ll have you ta en
in !
A fair growl went up from the folk at that, no body
could stop strikers picketing their works. Who did the
fat sod think he was—Hitler ? And two loons at the
back threw a handful of clinkers over a baulk, they splat-
GREY GRANITE 169
tered all about the big sergeant’s helmet and his meikle
red face, like a sow’s backside, went a mottled grey :
Stand away there! though not a soul stood within ten
feet. Some chaps cried Let's pitch him into the Dock,
Broo chaps that had nothing to lose anyway, and God
knows the mischief that mightn t have happened but that
some of the older folk with sense cried out to the young
ones not to haver, where the hell did they want to land
 in the nick ? And the young toff nodded to the bobby,
Feet: We’ve a legal right to he here to argue with anybody
who tries to get into the Works. . . . Lads, here s the first
of the blacklegs coming.
Sure enough they were, a dozen of the muckers, the
most of them foremen like old Johnny Bdwards, dander-
ing along in a bouroch, fair hang-dog, though laughing out
loud and gey brassy, fair brave if it wasn t for the wamble
of their eyes and hands. They pushed through the stir,
syne the picket tackled them, there rose a surge and a stour
so that folk couldn’t see. Then the gates were opened
and in they all went, the dirty blacklegging lousy scabs.
Why the hell hadn’t the Reds flung them into the Dock ?
What the hell were Reds for but to take up a row ?
Alick Watson pushed through to relieve Ewan Taven-
dale, Ewan said he didn’t think more would come, the
lot for the day, but the morn—well, there’d be a stamash,
for the union wasn’t supporting the strike and there d
be no strike pay unless they could raise it. . . . Then he
said You look fearfully solemn, Alick, and smiled at a body
that way he had, dark and kind, like a bit of a quean.
Alick went a bit red and said Don t haver. And then»
GREY GRANITE
170
That silly bitch, my sister, seemed awful concerned about
you last night.
Ewan said Meg? Oh yes, I know her. Works at our
house—she’s a nice leg, Meg. But you wouldn’t know,
being only her brother. Bye, bye, I’m off to the committee
rooms. Trease is to raise a fund for the strikers.
He came home soaked to the skin that night with
tramping the rain and helping the Reds to raise an un¬
official strikers’ fund. But Gowans had been killed stone-
dead for the day, they hadn’t even got the furnaces
going. He sat and told this to Chris in the kitchen,
drinking hot cocoa, and then stretched and yawned :
But you’re never bothered about such things, Chris. Wise
woman. Goodness, I’m tired.
Chris told him he wanted a bath and his bed, and off
he should get; but he turned at the door to ask what next
was to happen to the house ? Was Chris to carry on
without Ma Cleghorn ?
Chris said she supposed so as Ma was in heaven or
at least in the kirkyard of Kirrieben. Ewan laughed and
yawned in a breath, Yes, I know. But I meant— Chris
said she didn’t know, she’d see, if he didn’t get tirred and
into a bath she’d be carrying on without HIM, anyhow.
He nodded and came back and kissed her, kind, much
slower and kinder than once he’d been, though his mind
was far off with his strike, she supposed. Queer loon
that he was, lovely loon, on even him change working its
measure as sunlight on granite bringing out the gleams
GREY GRANITE
171
of gold and red through the cold grey glister. For a
little while after he’d gone she stood still, thinking about
him, tender, amused, in a puzzled fear : then sat by the
table and thought of herself and the awful soss that Ma’s
death had left.
Izey Urquhart had had a valuator in and valued Ma’s
things and share of the house at a price that had made
Chris gasp. And Izey had said that unless they were ta'en
over, she’d sell the gear and the house-share as well, she
had no fancy for the keeping of lodgings. If the lodgings
could have spoken they might have answered up canty
that they had no fancy for being kept by her, Chris had
thought, but hadn’t said it, just nodded, and been given
a week to decide.
A week. And when that was over—what ?
She went on with washing the supper dishes, Meg
she’d sent home that afternoon, the quean had looked
queer and nearly fainted, she’d almost ta’en Ma’s place
after her death and worked like a Trojan, too much for a
girl of her size, Chris had thought—absently, noting Meg
filling out a bit, pale still, but not that slat of a board with
a dress tacked on it that once she'd been.
Ewan met in with Ellen the evening of the next day,
going up to her room, and they stopped close and smiled
on the dark stair’s turn. And a queer, sharp pang shot
through Ewan’s heart looking down on the sailing thought-
shapes in her eyes, far down deep in the sweet kitten face.
And he’d kissed her only once in his life !
172 GREY GRANITE
Trembling, he put his hands under her arms, the
lights changed to a hurrying, twinkling flurry, they kissed
and quivered a minute together, and stood breathing,
listening, and kissed again.
He said, mimicking her English phrase That was fun !
and she flashed back I’ve known worse ! and slipped from
him : looked down from the step above : Coming out a
walk ?
He said he’d just come in ; and anyhow it was raining
like— She nodded, Like hell, hut I like the rain. Don’t
you ?
He put up his hand on hers on the stair-rail and felt
the quiver of blood in her fingers : I like you at any rate,
and stared at the fingers so that Ellen whispered Aren’t
they clean ? And pulled them away and ruffled his
hair : There, I’ll he ready in less than a minute.
She was ready in ten and they went out together to
the windy squall of the February night, a flicker and flow
of wet lights and sounds. He asked where they’d go and
she said Doughty Park, and they made that in a little
under twelve minutes, wide open heath that lay furth
of the toun, the great trees shoomed and pattered to the
rain, they passed two bobbies with glistening capes and
came under the shelter of a strumming beech. Here the
lads of Duncairn would take their lasses on summer nights,
fair scandalous, and behave to them in that scandalous
way that first had launched humankind on the globe.
But this night was a treey desolation, rain-pelted, Ewan
remembered that night of the year before when they’d
gone that walk to the Beach and stripped and splashed
GREY GRANITE 173
a mad dip in the sea. He asked Ellen if she minded as
well, she was close beside him, snuggled in the lithe.
Yes. Goodness, how silly we were! Dirty little
tykes. . . . Oh, Ewan, listen to the wind !
So he listened, but only with half an ear. That night
on the Beach—what had been dirty about it ? Ellen
said Didn't you want to see me naked ? I did you ; but I
didn’t say. That was why it was dirty, you know. And
thought: No, I don’t suppose you did, funny Ewan.
She was silent for a long while after that, leaning
up against him, hearing the rain, content and content,
she could stay there all night. She said so and Ewan
said he could as well, only he mightn't be so funny this
time. And at that she said, sobered, that she didn’t
suppose he would, it was damnable for him to have fallen
in love, much better to have stayed out safe and sound
so’s he didn’t much care what she looked, how she was.
And now 
So they began making plans for the future, they’d
get married some time when Ewan had a salary, Ellen
would be forced to leave her school. She asked how much
of a salary he’d get and he said indifferently Perhaps
four pounds, and she said But I get as much as that now—
Goodness, we’d have to stay in the Cowgate!
He said nothing to that, she thought she had hurt
him and was kind to him a little while, playing a child’s
game with him under the patter of the night-blinded trees,
kissing him with eyelids against his cheek, butterfly
kisses, rather fun. Abruptly he pushed her away, cool
and quick : Don’t fool, Ellen, in his old-time voice, hard,
i74 GREY grANITE
the voice of the student Ewan that she hadn t heard since
New Year’s Eve.
She knew he was being only sensible, pity rather,
and said she was sorry, and they didn’t stand over-close
after that, the weight of the rain was seeping through the
branches and now a great low gust of wind swept up
the park, driving the soft ground-spray in their faces.
Ewan began to talk of the strike, he said that Selden and
Trease and himself had already a good strike fund in
hand though the union had been trying to force the men
back. Ellen said it was rather a pity to have to work
so closely with the Communist leaders, they’d a horrible
reputation, both of them liars and not to be trusted ,
and Ewan said perhaps, he didn t know, anyhow their
tactic of rioting for rioting’s sake was pure insanity, it got
nowhere, if a revolution were properly organized it should
be possible for a rising class to take power with little or
no violence. But Trease and Selden were handy in the
strike, stiffening it up. And laughed : Anyhow, whoever
goes back, I shan't. The manager made that plain enough.
Doesn’t sound bright for our marriage, does it? You
should have left me alone that day on the Barmekin and I
might have been good and respectable now, not mixing up
with this mess of a strike, but a gent in a bowler, smoking
cigarettes in spats.
She said if he was sorry he’d mixed up with Socialism
he need never mix up with her, either, then. . . . And
flushed dark in the darkness, but he hadn’t tumbled,
innocent as a babe, nice babe. He sat down against the
bole of the tree and patted the dry ground there, and caught
GREY GRANITE 175
her ankle in a gentle hand : Sit by me a minute before we
go back. You never know what’ll happen to a striker
to-morrow I
As the dozen bobbies cleared the way for the scabs
coming out of the Works, the dark was falling, there came
a hell and pelt of a rush, you were all of you in it, young
chaps and old, one bobby struck at you with his truncheon,
missed, you were past him, slosh in the kisser the scab ; and
all about you, milling in the dark, the chaps broke in and
hell broke out, the bobbies hitting about like mad, tootling
on their whistles, scrunch their damned sticks.
And then the fight cleared from its stance by the gates
and went shoggling and wabbling over to the Docks, the
dozen scabs held firm enough, the bobbies bashing to try
and get at them and rescue them. Old man though you
were, you wouldn’t have that, you pushed a foot in front
of one of the bastards, down he went with a bang on the
calsays, somebody stepped on his mouth and his teeth
went crunch. And there, in the heave and pitch of the
struggle, were sudden the waters of the Dock, dirt-
mantled, greasy in oil from the fisher-fleet, the lights
twinkling low above it, folk cried In with them! Book
the scab sods!
And in they went with a hell of a spleiter, one of them,
the foreman old Johnny Edwards, crying Lads, lads, I
can’t swim ! Alick Watson beside you gave him a kick :
You can’t, you old mucker ? Now’s the chance to
learn, over he went, your heart louped in your mouth.
!76 grey granite
Then some body cried to look out and run, the bobbies
were coming in a regiment, near.
And you looked round and there b’God they were, the
calsays clattering under their feet, waving their sticks,
Christ, never able to face up to them. Around to the left
was the way to take nipping by the timber yard over the
brig. All the chaps running helter-skelter you scattered,
the bobbies wouldn’t spare pickets now except to bash
in their brain-caps, maybe, after seeing one of their lot
on the ground. B’God, this would be a tale to tell when
you got back safe to Kirrieben.
And then the lot of you saw you were trapped, in the
flickering light and the scud of the water, a gang of the
bobbies had raced across and cut you off, big and beefy,
they were crying We've got you, you sods !
And you all half-halted a minute and swore and ebbed
back a bit, you couldn’t see the bobbies’ faces or they
yours they wouldn’t mind, bash down and bash till their
arms grew tired and then haul a dozen of you off to the nick.
Then two of the chaps cried Come on, lads ! and ran
straight for the line of running bobbies, all of you like
sheep at their heels, gritting your teeth, nieves ready for
the crash. Then you saw the foremost of the running
chaps throw up his hand and wave it in front of him right
in the bobbies’ faces, swish, the other did the same and a
yowl went up, bobbies dropping their truncheons and
clutching their eyes, you got a whiff running and staggered,
and near sneezed your head off. Christ, that was neat,
whoever thought of it.
But there'd be a bonny palaver the morn !
GREY GRANITE
177
And next day the Daily Runner came out and told
of those coarse brutes the Gowans strikers, and the awful
things they'd done to the working folk that were coming
decent-like from their jobs. And all Craigneuks read
the news with horror, every word of it, chasing it from the
front page to the lower half of page five, where it was jam¬
med in between an advertisement curing Women with
Weakness and another curing superfluous hair; and
whenever Craigneuks came on a bit of snot it breathed
out Uhhhhhhhhhhhh ! like a donkey smelling a dung-heap,
delighted, fair genteel and so shocked and stirred up it
could hardly push down its grape-fruit and porridge and
eggs and bacon and big salt baps, fine butter new from
the creamery, fresh milk and tea that tasted like tea, not
like the seep from an ill-kept sump. And it said weren’t
those Footforthie keelies awful ? Something would have
to be done about them.
And the Reverend Edward MacShilluck in his Manse
shook his bald head and pursed his long mouth and said
to his housekeeper Ahhhhhhhhhhhh, what they needed
in Duncairn were folk like the Fascists, they knew how to
keep tink brutes in trim. And this nonsense about the
keelies being on strike because Gowans were making
shells and gas-cases—well, wasn’t a strong man sure in
defence ? Wasn’t it the best way to avoid a war for a
country to keep a strong army in the field ?
The housekeeper simpered and said she was sure,
that must have been why the last War had happened,
those coarse brutes the Germans and Frenchies, like, had
M
178 GREY GRANITE
had hardly an army to their name, would it be, and that
was why the war had broke out ?
The Reverend MacShilluck gave a bit of a cough and
said Not quite, you wouldn’t understand. Ahhhhhhhhhhhh,
a fine thing the War in many a way. Did I ever tell you
the story of the nurse and the soldier who was wounded
in a certain place, my Pootsy ? And the housekeeper,
who’d heard it only a hundred times, standing and sitting
and lying down, upstairs and downstairs and ben in the
kitchen and once in the bathroom, shook her bit head and
made out she hadn’t, she’d her living to look after and
she’d long grown used to that look that would come in
MacShilluck’s eyes, a look she’d once thought in a daft-
like minute that stank with the foulest of all foul smells....
Bailie Brown said it was that damn fool the Chief
Constable, why hadn’t he kept enough bobbies on hand ?
The workers were all right, though misled by the Reds, if
they’d trusted their natural leaders, like himself, they
wouldn’t be in the pickle they were in, drowning a foreman
that had aye been a right good Tabour man, and throwing
pepper in the bobbies’ eyes. They should wait till the
next Tabour Government came 
The Chief Constable said it was that bloody Inspector,
he’d told him to look out for trouble at Gowans. Pepper
flung in the eyes of the men—by God, you’d find it revolver-
shots next. He was to tell the Council that unless he
had powers 
179
GREY GRANITE
The Provost motored out to his sawmill to get away
from the stir and stew, and wandered around, with his long
dreich face like a yard of bad milk, till he lighted on Ake
level-testing a lathe. And he said Seen the ficws in th&
Runner this morning ? And Ake asked what news, and
the Provost said about the murder down at the Docks,
the strikers drowming the old foreman Edwards and then
throwing pepper in the police’s eyes. Ake said he’d seen
it and hadn’t wept, a scab was a scab wherever you found
him though ’twas swollen water-dead in the Duncairn
docks or bairning a quean that screamed in a hedge. . . .
And the Provost gave a bit hurried hoast and Ake thought
if ever he was walking alone on a dark-like night and J immy
came on him, he with his bare nieves and Jimmy with a
knife, he’d stand as much chance of getting home safe
as a celluloid cat that had strayed into hell. . . .
The sub-editors’ room gave a yawn and a grunt Piddle
had done a nippy bit work stealing the photo of that
drowned Edwards bloke. Any chance of a few of the
bobbies being coshed good and proper in the next few
dayS p—-half a dozen of them drowned would make a good
spread. Damned neat stunt that pepper-throwing, the
Chief would blame it on the Reds for sure. Tell the
boy to get out Trease’s photo, bet he was under arrest
by now 
Chris read the news and thought, far away, Awful. . . .
Three more days to decide on this house.
i8o
GREY GRANITE
The Cowgate read it and a queer sound started, in
tenement and wynd and went wriggling on like the pas¬
sage of a flying train of powder, twisting and glistering
and louping to and fro, back to Footforthie, up to Kirrie-
ben, a growl of laughing and cursing, Christ, some Bulgar
had dealt with the bobbies fine. And hungry Broo men
that had made up their minds to sneak down to Gowans
and into the gate and try and steal one of the striker’s
jobs gave a bit rub at their hunger-swollen bellies—ah
well, they must try the P.A.C. again 
Jim Trease the Red leader gave a roar of a laugh and
called to his wife to bring him his boots. They’ll be coming
for me in an hour or so. Get on with the breakfast, will you,
lass, I’ll be hungry enough before they finish their questioning
down at the Station. His mistress said What, are they after
you again ? placid as you please, he’d had so much arrest¬
ing off and on in his life that she thought no more of him
marched off to jail than when he marched off to the W.C.
And what have your gowks been doing now ?
He told her and she said that sounded gey clever, that
pepper business, and Jim Trease puffed Clever? Some
idiot loon has been reading a blood. What we need are the
masses with machine-guns, not pepper. ... To hell, and
I suppose if they heard me say that they’d chuck me out of
the Communist Party !
Ewan said to Alick Watson he thought he’d more
sense—who’d bought the pepper, Alick himself or that
dirty little swine Geordie Bruce ?
GREY GRANITE 181
Ellen met in with Ewan after dinner that day, he’d come
up from watching the pickets at Gowans, the bobbies were
keeping them aye on the move, a great birn of folk had been
there all forenoon. He told Ellen this as they went out
together, she to her school and he back to Gowans, in the
clearing weather she looked up in his face, he down at hers
queer what a thrill that faint line of down sent through
one, funny biological freak, thought the old-time Ewan
that wasn’t quite dead 
You can kiss me inside this nook, she said, light-
heartedly and when he’d finished kissed him in return
in a sudden terror : Oh, Ewan, be careful down at the
Docks. Fm—I’m frightened for you !
Making early tea in the kitchen next morning Chris
looked out and saw that the rain had cleared, Spring
was coming clad in pale saffron—the sun hardly seen all
the winter months except through the blanket of Duncairn
reek. She stood and looked out an un-eident minute
till she heard the sound of feet on the stairs, Ake Ogilvie,
big, with his swaying watch-chains and his slipperless
feet, swinging into the kitchen : Ay then, mistress.
She said absently, her thoughts far away, still looking
out at that blink of sun, Morning, Mr. Ogilvie, her worries
forgotten for a lovely minute. Ake sat down and tamped
out his pipe on the range : Well, what are you doing about
the bit house ?
She’d told him something of her plight before, and
182
GREY GRANITE
he’d listened, douce, with his ploughman's face, his stare
of impudent, grey-green eyes. Ay, a gey bit fix, he’d said,
and no more, he wasn’t much interested ; why should he
be ? Now, she thought with a twinge of resentment
against him, did he think it light gossip to be taken
through hand in the early morning to pass the time ?
Pouring him a cup of tea she said shortly I’ve no idea.
Sell it up, I suppose.
—And after that ?
—Oh, something’ll turn up. She turned away with
the brimming tray.
He said Well, just gi’es a minute of your crack. Let
the sweir folk wait for their tea a while.
Chris put down the tray. Well, a minute. What
is’t ?
He sat and looked up at her, drinking his tea, a man
from the farms and the little touns, the eternal barbarian
Robert had once called him. Now he laid down the cup
and gave his mouser a dight: Ah well, this is it: I’ve
a bit of silver saved myself—about enough to buy the share
of the place that Mistress Cleghorn left to her niece. And I’m
willing to come in as your partner, like.
—Ake ! Oh, Ake, you really mean that ?
He said Oh ay, he meant what he said—a habit of his,
like. Mistress Colquohoun was willing to take him on,
then ? He’d look after this lad of hers, Ewan, all right.
Something queer about that: Ewan—what’ll he have
to do with it ?
—Well, damn’t, as his stepfather I suppose I’ll have
more than a bittie to do with him.
GREY GRANITE 183
Chris stared : One or other of us has gone daft. You
were proposing to share my house, weren't you, Ake ?
He looked up and nodded, douce and green-eyed :
Ay, lass, and your bed.
Chris went through that day betwixt anger and laughter,
the last would come on her in the funniest way, pour
over her in a sudden red, senseless wave. Marriage ?
—marry a lout like him, lose all that she’d ever gained in
her life with Robert, the Manse, Ewan her son ? The
impudence of him—Oh, the beast, the beast! And
she’d stand and suddenly picture him, the sneering, half-
kindly, half-bull-like face, the face of the folk of the
Howe throughout, canny and cruel and kind in one facet,
face of the bothies and the little touns . . . and she’d shiver
away from the thought of him, thought of impossible
touches, caresses, those red, creased hands and that sun-
wrinkled body . . . awful enough to make her feel ill.
At the dinner hour he came back with the others, she
served him and them, sitting where Ma Cleghorn once had
sat, no faces missing from about the board. And Neil
Quaritch looked at her : Neat piece of goods. Sulky and
sweet in a breath as one of those damned unbreeked little
novelists would put it. Queer the resemblance between
her and Ogilvie—chips of the same bit of stone in a way—
John Cushnie, sweating, looked over his tie and
wondered, lapsing to keelie-hood a moment, if she were
as put-you-ofi as she looked. Should start with a woman
184 GREY GRANITE
twice your own age, he’d heard. . . . And he coloured
richly over his pimples, not decent to think of a woman
like that, especially now he’d ta’en up with that nice
girl from an office, real superior, that he’d met at a dance—
Archie Clearmont thought, switching off Stravinsky,
Lord, what a thrill to kiss her just once !
Ena Eyon thought she was putting on side, as usual,
and her just a Common Servant.
Ellen looked up from her plate at Chris and smiled
at her, dark, and thought she looked nice and queer in a
way, as though newly cuddled.
Ewan had come back from the picket at Cowans, he
thought Chris looks queer, and then forgot her, trying to
work out in his mind the balance likely to be left in the
voluntary fund when they’d paid out the first week’s
pay to the strikers.
Miss Murgatroyd called Eh me, Mrs. Colquohoun,
You’re fairly looking Right Well to-day. Has your lad
been sending you a love-letter, now ? and beamed round the
table like a foolish old hen, all the others looking down at
their plates, uncomfortable . . . silly old bitch ... blithering
old skate . . . randy dame . . . silly thing . . . sex-repressed
. . . half-witted old wombat. . . . And a sudden impulse
came on Chris, looking down the table and smiling at Miss
Murgatroyd :
No, though it’s something much the same. I had a
proposal of marriage this morning.
There was a dead silence round the table a second.
Ewan hadn’t heard, Chris saw his indifferent face and
her heart sank, on that impulse she’d thought he’d ask
GREY GRANITE 185
Who proposed? and she’d tell the whole table and
watch Ake’s face. But he hadn’t heard; and the
others began a babble : Who was the lucky man ? Was
she to accept ? Chris laughed and shook her head and
said nothing and the talk passed on to other things.
Ake sat and ate up his meat, calm and sonsy, but
biding when the others had gone. Then he looked up
and pushed back his chair, slow, certain : and looked
over at Chris.
Ay, mistress, you cook a gey tasty meal. But a word
in your lug : try no tricks on me. I’m not your fool nor
any body’s fool.
Chris looked at him in a curious pity, It was a silly
caper, Ake.
He said that that was fine, then ; and when would
she let him know about this partnership business ?
Chris said she didn’t know, but soon, anyhow ; and
was moved to a stark curiosity : A ke, why do you want to
marry me so bad ? fust to sleep with a woman : that all ?
I’ve been married twice already, you know, and it doesn’t
seem it was lucky for the men.
He said he was willing to take his risk ; and he didn’t
suppose that Colquohoun or Tavendale had thought them¬
selves cheated, however they ended.
She said she had little mind for any man again, that
was the plain truth of it. If she married at all it would
be with little liking, necessity only the drive.
Ake nodded : We’d soon alter that, never fear. And
fear itself leapt in her heart at his look. There’s no woman
yet that I couldn’t content.
i86
GREY GRANITE
Trease wouldn’t squeal, an old hand him, and the
Station Inspector wouldn’t let the chaps go into his cell and
give the bastard a taste of what he needed, he could raise
hell in the courts over-easily, he knew the law inside out
and bottom up. So he was letten out, laughed, and went
home ; and still there wasn’t the ghost of a clue to point
to the names of the striker sods who’d flung the pepper
or drowned old Edwards.
The Gowans gates pickets had a fair dog’s life,
bobbies badgering them backward and forward, keen to
have out their sticks and let fly. The manager had ta’en
on a bouroch of blacklegs with a bit of the plant on the
go again, but bobbies or no to march by their side the scabs
were scared to their marrow-bones to be seen going in or
out of the Works.
Sergeant Sim Eeslie went to the Inspector and said
he wasn’t sure, but he had an idea, that the striker at the
bottom of most of the business was the young toff
Tavendale from the Gowans office. He’d known him back
in the toun of Segget, as coarse a loon as you’d meet any¬
where.—And the Chief said Is this a moral homily?
or what have you got to say about him ? And Feet habbered
a little and then got it out: That assault on him at the
Beach last year when he was taking a couple in charge for
naked bathing—ay, not a stitch—he was nearly sure 'twas
the Tavendale loon; besides, his stepfather had been
a Red, a minister that fair demoralized a parish. And the
Chief said he wasn’t interested in genealogy, had Feet
any clue to this Tavendale having drowned Johnny
Edwards or thrown the pepper ?
GREY GRANITE 187
Feet said he hadn’t j and went back on his beat on
the Docks patrol that centred now round the Gowans
gates. The picket was dozing away in the lithe from a
stiff bit blow of wind from the harbour as Feet came bap-
ping along the calsays. He stopped and looked at the
nearest picket, a surly-looking young sod he was, cowering
down in the shelter of a barrel. And this picket instead
of raspberrying him as most of the impudent muckers
would do, looked round about him sly and said low :
Hey, Feet, a word with you, there.
Feet asked if he knew who he was talking to, and the
picket said Ay, fine that, think I’m blind ? Look here, if
you want to know who started the pepper business look out
for the next birn of pickets that relieves us and spot a long,
dark-like chap of my age.
Feet near louped in his meikle boots, but he showed
not a sign, just gave a bit purr : Tavendale, d’you mean ?
and the picket said Ay. The bastard hasn t been able to
keep his hands to himself—or other things about his rotten
self either. He's done me dirty and it’s my turn now.
Feet said You’ll come and give evidence ? but the picket
said Away to hell with you. Think I'm your pimp, you
bap-faced peeler? Find out your evidence for yourself.
Feet thought of taking him a whack on the head,
with his truncheon, like, to teach him manners ; but the
rest of the picket was getting suspicious and rising to its
feet and dandering near, it wouldn’t do to rouse the coarse
brutes, they might heave even a sergeant into the Docks,
they’d no respect for the weight of the Daw. So Feet
swung away down to the Gowans gate to the constable
i88
GREY GRANITE
body that was stationed there; and the picket came up
and cried Hey, Alick, what was that whoreson gabbing
about ?
Alick Watson turned up the collar of his coat, and
the chaps thought it funny he was shivering like that.
Chris stood in her room and looked out of the window
at the quick-darkening February afternoon. It was this
day only a year ago that Robert had died in the pulpit of
Segget, the blood gushing suddenly up on his lips as he
preached his last sermon with a broken heart, Robert,
kind, a dreamer, a lover of men, lover of his Chris once
with passion and humour, sweet and leal and compas¬
sionate. And the world had broken his heart and his
mind, his dreams grey ash that had once been fire. In
that last sermon he’d preached for salvation lA stark,
sure creed that will cut like a knife, a surgeon’s knife through
the doubt and disease—men with unblinded eyes may yet
find it—’ not Christianity, or love, or his Socialism, some
dreadful faith that he might not envisage. And then he
had died; and she minded his lips, stained red, bubbly
red, and the curl of the hair on his head, dear alive hair
on a head that was dead. . . .
. . . Oh, less kind to you than I might have been.
And I can’t help it now, that’s by and put past, nothing
helps now, as little as you can I ever see a way out of all
the ill soss. Not that I think I would look if I could,
I’ve no patience with crowds or the things they want,
only for myself I suppose I can plan. And I stand in the
GREY GRANITE
189
bareness, alone, tormented, and you . . . Oh, Robert
man, had you stayed to help somehow we might have
found the road together. . . .
Daft old wife to weep over something long by that
couldn’t be mended, her nature hers, his his, all chances
gone in that dust of days they’d known together in
Segget, in love, in estrangement, in fear and disgust—
all ash with him and finished forever. And on this day
of all she must try to decide . . . sell herself like a cow,
a cow’s purpose, in order to keep a roof over her head.
And abruptly she was minding Robert’s study in
Segget, the panelled walls black-lined with books, the
glint of peat-light on the chairs, the desk, Robert sitting
deep in a chair, head in hands, she herself looking down
at him in pity and disgust because of that weak God
he feared and followed. And with that memory some¬
thing seemed to blow through the room, blowing out the
picture like a candle-flame . . . she had finished with men
forever, and could never again stir to a semblance of life
that something which died when Robert died. Better
a beggar in Duncairn’s wynds than sell herself as she’d
almost planned.
And so she would tell Ake Ogilvie to-night.
When Alick Watson reached home in the Cowgate
after coming off picket at Gowans and Gloag’s he met the
old woman going trauchling out, away to her afternoon
cleaning up for a widow body that bade in Craigneuks.
She said God be here, are you back again ? Well, try and
I90 GREY GRANITE
do something for once for your meat. Your sister s lying
in her bed, no well. If she wants anything, see that you
get it her.
Alick said he could do that without being blackguarded,
Meg was his sister, wasn’t she ? And the old woman said
not to give her his lip, the useless skulking striking sod,
wasn’t he black ashamed to live off his folk’s earnings ?
And Alick said Away to hell. Did I ask to be born in your
lousy bed in this lousy toun ? and brushed past her, swearing
soft to himself because of that stricken look in her eye.
Inside he got ready a cup of tea, bread and corned
beef, and sat and ate, Meg asleep in the other room, he
heard her turn and toss once, and stopped and listened,
better to busy himself with souch sounds he needn’t
think then of what he had done . . . slipped the pepper
poke into Ewan’s pouch, Christ! if the other chaps ever
found out 
And then Meg called Alick, I heard you come in.
Will you bring me a drink of water ?
He carried it to her and put his arm under her, lifting
her, she was heavy already though he was the only one
of the silly sods that had seen it yet. And because he
aye had liked her so well, as she him, though they’d never
let on, he found a sharp pain in his breast as he held her.
Then she pushed him away in a minute, and was sick.
Alick said that he’d better go get the doctor, and she
said not to talk like a neep-headed cuddy, couldn’t a
lassie be sick now and then ?
—Ay, but not that kind of sickness, Meg. When was
it you were bairned ?
GREY GRANITE
igi
She said Eh ? and then lay still for a minute, staring ;
he said it was no good to look at him like that, he’d known
a long time and she might as well tell.
She turned her face to the pillow then, away from him,
and whispered Six months ago. Oh, Alick ! and began to
cry, soft, in the littered bed, in a misery he couldn’t help,
could only stare at helpless. Where did he do it, the
bastard ? Up in his toff’s room in Windmill Place ?
She turned her head and stared again, and he saw the
flyting quean in her eyes : Windmill Place ? What
was he havering about ? The beast was never at the
Place in his life.
Alick said Listen, you bitch, and answer me straight:
and bent over the bed and caught her wrists, crushing
them in sudden, frantic nieves. Who’s the father? Be
quick and tell me !
When he heard her say Steve Selden, he knew he’d
been done, had played the fool. And Oh Christ, Ewan—
if Ewan were caught 
He tore from the room and out of the house, banging
the door behind, down the steps, the old whaler captain
was out in the court, lurching home and singing a hymn,
Ake saw his old wife peering down in fear. But he
brushed past the old carle and ran for the entrance, two
chaps that he knew were entering the court, they tried to
stop him, for a joke, and he flung them aside, and paid
no heed as they cried was it daftness or dysentery ?
And out in the Cowgate he started to run, dodging in and
out the ash-cans on the pavement, a black cat ran across
the street in front, that for luck, hell, there was a bobby.
I92 grey granite
So he slowed to a walk going by the bobby, if a childe
were seen by a bobby running in the Cowgate he was sure
to be chased and caught and questioned. Out of range
Alick took to his heels again and gained Alban Street the
same minute as a tram.
Only as he climbed the steps did he mind that he
hadn’t even a meek upon him, and turned to jump off
as the tram with a showd swung grinding down to the
Harbour : suddenly shining in a glint of sun, gulls above
it, the guff of the Fish-Market meeting the tram like a
smack in the face, it grunted and sneezed and galloped
on through it. But the conductor had seen Alick and
caught his arm : Look out, you whoreson, jumping off
here. You’ll bash out your brains—if you’ve any to bash.
Alick said he’d found he’d no money on him, he was
one of the strikers at Gowans and Gloag’s in the hell and
all of a hurry to get down with a bit of news for the rest
of the lads. He’d jump off here 
But the trammie held fast, a squat, buirdly bird with
a face like a badly-made barn door. And he said Not
so fast, wasn’t he Union as well ? Here, he’d pay the
ticket. Sit down and wait.
That shortened the run, in a minute the Docks, the
trammie slowed down at a bend where he shouldn’t, the
nearest to Gowans, and Alick jumped off and cried his
thanks and took to his heels and ran like the wind.
When the four o’clock picket went on that day
there hadn’t been as big a birn as usual of idle folk to
GREY GRANITE 193
look on and claik. The cold was biting across Footforthie
gnawing through the thin breeks and jackets of Broo
men, sending them taiking off to the Library to read last
Sunday’s Sunday Post, the racing news and the story of a
lassie raped, bairned, killed, and fried up in chips—Ay,
fairly educative, the Scottish newspapers. . . . But a
dozen or so still hung about, not expecting much of a
shindy at all: but you never knew when a strike was on,
there might be a bit of snot flying ere long.
There was only one of the bobbies there, the young
country cuddy, he grinned at the picket and one cried him
the old tale of the bobby whose beat was fair littered with
whores : and a new sergeant came on the beat one night
and set the bobby to jailing each whore : but at last the
bobby put his splay feet down : I’ve run in my sisters and
my auntie to please you, my wife and my daughter and my
cousin Jean, hut I’m damned if I’ll run in my mother as
well 
And they all guffawed, they’d no spite against him,
he none against them, funny a chap like that should have
joined up with the lousy police though you couldn’t
much blame him, fine uniform to keep out the cold, good
pay and a pension and perks for the picking. And you
blew your chilled hands and spat in the Docks and were
just thinking about dandering away home again when you
looked up and saw a half-dozen police coming swaggering
down to the Gowans gates, the meikle sergeant, Feet, in
the lead. You cleared your throat and spat on the ground
to get the stink of their wind from your thrapple, but
the birn went by with hardly a look, they were all speaking
N
GREY GRANITE
194
low and chief-like together : what dirty sodding were they
planning now ?
The only chap of the picket who stood in the road was
the young toff childe folk said was half-Red. He drew
back a bit to let the bobbies gang by, but they weren’t
looking and one of the stots gave a stumble and nearly
tripped over the toff. Then, afore you could wink, a
queer thing was on, the bobby had grabbed the young toff
by the neck and Feet cried out: What’s that—assaulting
the police ? Right, my lad, you can come on up to the
Station.
Young Tavendale said not to talk rot, the constable
had been stumbling all over the street. Some others of
the picket came out from the lithe, hanging round the
bobbies, and called the same, the cuddy of a bobby had
had the staggers, or water on the brain—if he had a
brain. But Feet cried Stand back, or we’ll take you as
well; and he asked Tavendale if he’d come peaceable or
not and Tavendale lifted his shoulders with a laugh and
said he supposed so, he was cool and unfeared : and
turned round sudden on the bobby that had bumped him :
I can see that this is a put-up show 
Afore he could say another word, Christ, what a crack !
the bobby had his stick out and smashed him to the
ground. Then he looked to Feet and the meikle swine
nodded : In self-defence, Dickson. All right, pick him up.
You saw the toff as they carried him past, he was only
a kid, his hair dripping with blood, he hung like a sack
among their fat hands. The picket tailed after crying
that they’d see about this : but at that the rest of the
GREY GRANITE 195
bobbies faced round and in half a minute had cleared the
street, Feet said the picket was trying to prevent an
arrest.
And off they carted young Tavendale; and just as
you were slipping off home yourself to spread the news in
Kirrieben you ran bang into a white-faced young fool,
panting and habbering, What's on at Gowans ? You told
him, and he cried Oh Christ, he’d never meant it, and you
thought he was probably drunk, or daft, or both, and left
him to it, he looked soft enough to pitch himself head
first in the Docks 
Every movement he made sent a stream of pain down
his legs and body, he thought, but wasn’t sure, that his
right arm was broken where they’d twisted it; and thought
again Not likely, that would show too much ; and fainted off
in the fire of the pain.
When next he woke he thought it near morning, his
throat burning, he tried to cry for a drink of water. And
after a minute the cell door opened, a blaze from the pas¬
sage on the blaze in the cell, he saw a dim face, big, it
floated, and the face said he’d get a drink if he owned up
now it was him that had drowned Johnny Edwards and
organized the throwing of the pepper at the Docks ?
And Ewan moved his swollen lips, dull mumble, and heard
himself say You can go to hell! Then his head went crack
on the bobby’s boot. . . .
When he’d come-to after that time at the Docks he’d
found himself on a bench in the Station, they’d started
GREY GRANITE
196
to ask his name and address and take it down in a big
case-book. He’d asked what charge he was arrested on,
and the big sergeant at the desk said he’d know soon
enough, none of his la-de-da lip here, the bastard. Right,
hoys, rape him.
Two bobbies had taken on the job, in a minute they’d
come on a bag of pepper, he’d stared, how the devil had
that got there ? The sergeant had cried What say you
to that ? and Ewan, half-blind with a headache, had said
Rats. Some groceries I was buying for my mother, that
was all, and the sergeant said by Christ, was that so ?
If his mother knew him when he finished with the Force
she’d be a right discerning woman, she would: Take him
off to No. 3 cell, Sergeant Leslie. See he doesn’t try to
assault you again.
He’d thought that a lout joke, suddenly it wasn’t,
three of them came into the cell behind him. And he’d
minded in a flash of a story he’d read of the ghastly happen¬
ings in American jails. Rot: this was Scotland, not
America, the police were clowns and idiot enough, but
they couldn’t 
Two of them held him while Sim Eeslie bashed him,
then they knocked him from fist to fist across the cell,
body-blows in the usual Duncairn way with Reds, one
of them slipped in the blood and swore, That’s enough for
the bastard, he’ll bleed like a pig. Eying on the floor,
Ewan had heard a queer bubbling, himself blowing breath
through bloody lips.
Then, the cell wavering, they’d picked him up and
flung him down on the wooden trestle. Now, answer
GREY GRANITE
197
up or you’ll get the works—And they’d asked him again
and again to declare it was he had caused the drowning of
Edwards ; and he’d bitten his lips, saying nothing, till
their fumblings at last brought a scream shrilling up in
his throat, a bit of it ebbed out and the bobbies left off,
standing and listening, feared it might have been heard
even down this deserted corridor of cells. Then they
said they’d leave him alone for a while, they’d be back
in a wee to the mucking Red sod. . . .
And still he’d said nothing, setting his teeth, though
the pain behind his teeth had clamoured to him to let
go, to confess to anything, anything, they wanted, Oh
God for a rest from this. But that real self that trans¬
cended himself had sheathed its being in ice and watched
with a kind of icy indifference as they did shameful things
to his body, threatened even more shameful, twisted that
body till his self cowered in behind the ice and fainted
again. . . . And now, as he thought, the morning was
near.
He moved a little the arm he’d thought broken,
it wasn’t, only clotted with bruises, the dryness had left
his throat, he lay still with a strange mist boiling, blinding
his eyes, not Ewan Tavendale at all any more but lost
and be-bloodied in a hundred broken and tortured bodies
all over the world, in Scotland, in England, in the torture-
dens of the Nazis in Germany, in the torment-pits of the
Polish Ukraine, a livid, twisted thing in the prisons where
they tortured the Nanking Communists, a Negro boy in
an Alabama cell while they thrust the razors into his flesh,
castrating with a lingering cruelty and care. He was one
198 GREY GRANITE
with them all, a long wail of sobbing mouths and wrung
flesh, tortured and tormented by the world’s Masters
while those Masters lied about Progress through Peace,
Democracy, Justice, the Heritage of Culture—even as
they’d lied in the days of Spartacus, lying now through
their hacks in pulpit and press, in the slobberings of middle-
class pacifists, the tawdry promisings of labourites,
Douglasites. . . . And a kind of stinging bliss came upon
him, knowledge that he was that army itself—that army
of pain and blood and torment that was yet but the ragged-
est van of the hordes of the Last of the Classes, the Ancient
Lowly, trampling the ways behind it unstayable : up
and up, a dark sea of faces, banners red in the blood from
the prisons, torn entrails of tortured workers their banners,
the enslavement and oppression of six thousand years a
cry and a singing that echoed to the stars. No retreat,
no safety, no escape for them, no reward, thrust up by the
black, blind tide to take the first brunt of impact, first
glory, first death, first life as it never yet had been lived—
Trease said Ay, well, we’ll do what we can—and a wee
thing more. But I wouldn’t advise you to come to the court.
Chris asked why, and the big man with the twinkling
eyes in the great pudding face got up from the sofa in the
sitting-room and looked at her as though passing a mild
comment on the weather : I’m feared your Ewan’ll have been
bashed a bit—all in bandages, you know, and a bit broken up.
Chris stared : But he didn’t try to resist! All the rest
of the picket saw his arrest.
GREY GRANITE 199
Trease twinkled his little eyes a bit, a mild joke : Oh
ay, but he’s a Communist, you see, or he’ll be by now, for
his fancy League was no more than the dream of an earnest
lad. Anyway, the bobbies think him a Red and they aye
get Reds to 'resist’ at the Station, they generally mash
them in No. 3 cell. And this is your Ewan’s first go, you
know, they try to kill off the Red spirit right off.
Chris said that was daft, they couldn’t do things like
that in this country, anybody knew the police were fair
and anybody accused got a fair trial. Trease nodded,
faith ay, if you were of the middle class and wore good
clothes and weren’t a Communist. Och, anything else—
a sodomist, a pervert, a white slave trafficker, a raper of
wee queans—any damn thing that you liked to think of.
But if you were a revolutionary worker you got hell.
Fair enough, for the Reds weren’t out to cure the system,
they were out to down it and cut its throat.
He waited while Chris got her coat and hat and left
the house to look after itself. At Windmill Brae they
found a tram and were down at the court by ten o’clock.
Outside were already a birn of men, down-at-heels,
unshaven, they cried Hello, Jim, and stared at Chris and
came drifting around Trease, unwashed, their stink awful,
their faces worm-white, Chris stared at them with a
sinking heart. Were these the awful folk that Ewan had
ta’en up with ?
Bobbies all about the entrance door, one or two had
come down in the street, big-footed, and were pushing
about, beefy and confident, truncheons out and shoulders
squared. Trease stroked his chin and twinkled at the
200 GREY GRANITE
Broo men and strikers : We’ll demonstrate later, lads.
You’d better disperse and not raise a row.
So the two got into the court at last, Chris had never
been in one before, panelled in dark wood, with a witness
box with a curling bit of wood above it that vexed her
because the thing looked so daft. She whispered to
Trease, asking what it was, and he twinkled back ’twas
the sounding-board, and then leaned back in his bench
and yawned, they’d not have her Bwan on for a while,
they’d wait till the Bailie got hot up a bit.
They finished at last with the street queans ta’en
up, a soldier who’d stolen cigarettes from a stall, a man
who’d knocked over a boy with a lorry. But there
wasn’t much in any of the cases, Bailie Brown, the leader
of Duncairn Babour, rapped out his sentences snell and
smart, fair a favourite with all the bobbies and giving
double the sentences a Tory would have given—to show
that he was impartial, like. Then Chris saw an inspector
go whisper to him and the Bailie look at his watch and
nod ; and the far door opened and some body in a bandage
came in unsteadily between two bobbies, Chris knew one,
Sergeant Sim Leslie of Segget.
And then she knew Kwan, and some body cried Order!
and Trease gripped her knee so hard that it hurt, left her
breathless and she couldn’t cry again, couldn’t do any¬
thing but stare and stare at the bandaged figure pass in
front of her and stand in the dock, the bobbies all a-
glower. A little neat man got up with a paper, and hitched
his gown and gave a quick gabble, talking down his shirt-
front low and confidential. Then he asked for a remand
201
GREY GRANITE
. . . death of John Edwards . . . brutal assault on police at
Docks . . . incriminating evidence. . . . Violently resist¬
ing arrest 
The Bailie nodded and looked up at the clock,
Remanded till Friday, and then stood up, every body
stood, and a bobby grabbed the bandaged figure.
As the bobbies passed by below Trease leaned for¬
ward : Okay, Ewan ?
—I’m all right. They’ve got nothing out of me. Hello,
Chris. Don’t worry.
Neil Quaritch said he was damnably sorry but he
couldn’t do anything with the papers about it, he was only
sub-ed and book-hound on the Runner. Besides, the Runner
daren’t make a comment on a case sub judice. Not that
it would make it if it could. Oh, the police were a pretty
low set of brutes, but he couldn’t believe this tripe about
Ewan being tortured—this was Duncairn, not Chicago ;
just Red blah Mrs. Colquohoun could discount. Pity
Ewan had been led away by the Reds, if he wanted social
change there was Douglasism. Financial Credit operated
as Social Credit would ensure that the products of Real
Credit, though privately owned, were not malaccredited—
Mr. Piddle said He-he! he was dreadfully sorry.
Yes, he’d been in the court and seen young Mr. Tavendale,
and yes, he’d written the story for the Daily Runner.
No, he hadn’t intended to offend anyone, but the public
must have its news, Mrs. Colquohoun. Could she give
202
GREY GRANITE
him a photo for the Tory Pictman ? And wasn’t it the
case that her husband, the late minister of Segget, had
also held—He-he !—rather extremist opinions ?
Jim Trease said plain that of course the Communists
would exploit the case to the full—for their own ends
first, not for Ewan’s. They’d do all they could for him,
but Ewan was nothing to them, just as he, Jim Trease,
was nothing.
Miss Murgatroyd said Eh me, it was Awful, and young
Mr. Ewan Such Fine to get on with, right interested in
the books on old Scottish magic that she’d loaned him—
they were Awful Powerful in magic, the Piets. However
had he got in such company ?—It was said he’d assaulted
the police Just Awful and them so kind and obliging, Too.
Ask some of her friends at the Unionist Club to interfere ?
—oh, she couldn’t do that she was feared, it wouldn’t be
right, now, would it ? And they all terrible against the
Reds, not that Mr. Tavendale was really one, she knew,
but there you were, oh, she was terribly sorry 
Archie Clearmont said Hell, was that Ewan ? Didn't
know he was Red. So was Wagner. Anything whatever
I can do to help 
John Cushnie said nothing but handed in his notice,
he couldn’t very well stay on any longer, and him an
employe of Raggie Robertson’s, you ken 
Ellen Johns said, white. Anything you want. I’m a
Socialist, too, and I started him on it—he’s a Socialist,
not a Red, it’s all a ghastly mistake. Oh, Chris, how did he
really look ? . . . Oh, Chris, I’m sorry, I’m a fool to cry,
he’d think me a fool 
GREY GRANITE 203
Ake Ogilvie said to Chris not to fret. He thought
he could maybe fix up this business.
He went off to his work and bade off the whole day
while Chris went about with a mind gone numb, dead
brain in her head, scrubbing and cooking and serving the
meals, helped by the new maid, a big widow woman who
was kind as she could be and never spoke a word about
Ewan or the case. The blink of March daylight closed into
dark and still Chris worked in a numbing fear ; then at
last, as it drew to tea-time, she heard the front door open
and Ake on the stairs, his slow, independent clump on
the stairs. A wee while later he came down again and
opened the door : Ay, mistress, a word with you.
He sat in the sitting-room, filling his pipe: Well,
you're looking on an unemployed man.
Chris said What ? and Ake nodded and struck a match,
and took a bit puff, and said Right on the Broo, Jimmy'd
finished with him and he with Jimmy. But that was
neither here nor there at the moment. The main thing
was that Ewan would be safe—or else Jimmy s bit secret
would be all over Duncairn as fast as Ewan’s Red friends
and Ake could spread it abroad. Ay, a great thing, scandal.
Chris gasped Ake, Ake, is’t true? and he said Oh ay.
There, mistress, don’t take on so. He’s safe, your loon, they
won’t push the case—that’s the quality of justice we’ve got
in Duncairn. Sit you still a wee bit and I’ll tell the tale.
She realized later he told it her so that she might hide
in herself again. But her mind at the time frothed over
GREY GRANITE
204
the telling like a wild thing mad to be out of a cage,
trying to think, to think that Ewan 
And Ake said he’d not made the sawmill that morning,
but sought out Speight and put it to him that he could get
this bit case against the young Red quashed—Ake
knew the lad, there was no harm in him, a decent student,
and he’d been sore mishandled already by the bobbies.
And Jimmy had listened with his long dreich face looking
dreicher than ever, and shaken his head, he couldn’t
interfere, he’d no power to influence the courts or the
bailies. Ake had told him for Christ’s sake not to talk
wet, they were both of them out of their hippens by now,
the Cord Provost kenned as well as he did that there was
as much graft in the average Scots toun as in any damn
place across the Atlantic. Who invited contracts for
agreed-on tenders ? Who arranged the sale of public
land and bought it afore the offer was made public ?
Who took a squeeze off the water rates, and who made a
bit thing from the libraries ? And where did the bobbies,
inspectors and sergeants, get their extra wages for houses
and motors except by acting as pimps for the whores,
living off the lasses and running them in when they wouldn’t
pay up their weekly whack ? And was there a bookie’s
pitch in Duncairn that didn’t pay tribute, week in, week
out ? Not one.
Speight said that all that was just coarse rumour and
scandal, he knew nothing about it, and Ake said Maybe.
And you’ll see that this young Tavendale’s let off with a
caution, or whatever the flummery’s necessary ?
The Cord Provost had nearly burst with rage then,
GREY GRANITE 205
he’d said he’d be damned if he’d be badgered and black¬
mailed in this way any longer, all because of a small mis¬
take in his youth—was he the first young childe to rape
a lass in a hedge, with a bit of darkness to hide his identity ?
. . . And Ake had seen he half-meant what he said, a rat
that was fair being driven in a corner, he’d pressed him
over-hard and his nerve would gang, the next thing might
be Ake himself in the jail.
So he’d laid his proposition in front of Jimmy : if
he’d bring this off in the Tavendale case Ake would never
again breathe a single word about that lassie raped in a
hedge, never a whisper in public or private, nor seek
for any advantage on’t. And the Provost had said And
you’ll leave my sawmill ? and Ake had given a bit shrug
and said Ay. All right, Jimmy, it’s ta-ta, then.
When Alick Watson had settled with Red Steve Selden
he looked more like a mess in a butcher’s shop than a
leader that had once been out in Canada and come back
to Scotland all in a fash to see to the emancipation of
the working class. They fought it out in a Cowgate
wynd, four of the chaps had come to see fair play, in the
end they held Alick and said to Selden he’d best give
best else he’d get bloody murdered.
Selden coughed and spluttered and stood up again
and said he’d never given any man best, it wasn't his
wyte he had bairned the lass and it wasn’t his wyte
she’d never let on. Alick said What the hell! You
knew all the time! but Selden swore by Christ he never
206
GREY GRANITE
had, if he’d known he’d have done the decent thing.
And all the chaps that were standing around cried out to
Alick he might believe that, it was true enough, those
daft Bulgars the Reds were as scared and respectable
about bairning a quean as though they went to the kirk
three times on a Sunday and said a grace afore every
meal, there was hardly a one but was doucely married,
they never looked near a lass if they were, a damn lot
of killjoys a lot of folk said. ... So Alick had had all
his fighting for nothing : and what the hell was his fury
for ?
Alick said they could mind their own mucking business;
and put on his coat and went up to the Slainges Barracks
direct and hung about outside the gates a while, half-
feared and yet desperate, the sentry looked at him and said
Hello, chum! And Alick said Hello. Is this where you
'list?
The sentry, he was swinging to and fro in his kilt
and carrying a wee stick, not a rifle, took a keek at the
guardroom and syne round about, and said For Christs
sake, what's ta'en you ?—have you lain with your sister or
robbed a bank ? Alick said he'd done neither ; and the
sentry said not to be a soft sod, then, why join up in this
lousy mob ? The grub was stinking potatoes, worse beef,
seven shillings a week pay and about half of that docked
in sports and fines. It was just plain hell when it
wasn’t hell decorated.
Alick said Ah well, he’d just take his chance; and
went in through the gates to the office place, a wheen of
poor muckers were wheeling round the square, shoggle
GREY GRANITE
207
and thud, they looked half-dead, punishment drill of
some kind Alick knew. And he half made up his mind
to turn back, then swore at himself for a yellow-livered
sod, they couldn’t do worse to him, could they, than the
bobbies had done to Ewan ?—Oh Christ! And he burst
open the door of the office place and went in and they
asked who the hell he thought he was, the Colonel, may¬
be ? and closed the door ; and that was Alick Watson’s
end for the Cowgate.
Folk heard the news and took it through hand, he must
fair have gone skite, the silly young mucker, wearied no
doubt with the darg of the strike. Most knew he’d a
hand in the drowning of old Johnny Edwards—well,
what of that ? More than a dozen had had a bit hand,
and a damn good job, the lousy old scab. And they
didn’t run off in a fear to ’list, they marched with the band
that Jim Trease got up to demonstrate outside the Central
Court where young Ewan Tavendale was coming up on
Friday.
Banners and slogans, Jake Forbes with his drum, a
cold, dreich, early April day. One or two as they slumped
along thought of Alick ticking to another drum now. And
what would young Tavendale get, would you say ?
Then they heard a bit cheer break out up in front,
and the news came flying down the ranks like fire, it
was true enough, no it wasn’t, yes it was, there he was
coming down the steps himself, his head all bandaged :
he waved a hand. He’d been letten off with a bit of a
208 GREY GRANITE
fine, his mother had paid it for him at once, there she was
behind—Christ, that his mother? I could sleep with her
the morn and think her his sister. . . . Sulky-looking bitch.
Get out, she’s fine. . . . There’s Ewan. Now, lads,
give him a cheer!
Into the procession, Chris never knew how, marching
by the side of Ewan up the Mile, boomr the drum in the
hands of the fat man, big Mr. Trease stumping ahead
with his grin and his twinkle, Ewan’s hand in hers. She
wished they’d left her alone with her son, Ake had stood
aside as they came from the court, No, not me, he had
said to Jim Trease. I’m no body’s servant, the Broo folk’s or
the bobbies’, Chris had liked him for that for she felt the
same, had always felt so and felt more than ever that she
belonged to herself alone. Except for Ewan : Ewan’s
hand in hers. And he looked down and laughed, strained,
cool from his bandages : Cheer up, Chris, it’ll soon be
over and we can slip off and be respectable!
Come dungeon dark or gallows grim
This song shall be our parting hymn !
The procession halted below Windmill Steps, Trease
had seen to that, he did it for her, Chris knew : a little
thing that wouldn’t hurt his propaganda. And the Paldy
folk grabbed hold of Ewan and raised him up on the Steps .
Come on, gi’es a word, Ewan! and a sudden hush fell,
Chris stood back and waited and knew herself forgotten.
And he said in his clear and cool boy’s voice that they
needn’t bother to make a fuss, he’d got no more than any
GREY GRANITE
209
might expect who was out to work for the revolution.
One thing he had learned : the Communists were right.
Only by force could we beat brute force, plans for peaceful
reform were about as sane as hunting a Bengal tiger with
a Bible. They must organize the masses, make them
think, make them see, let them know there was no way
they could ever win to power except through the fight
of class against class, till they dragged down the masters
and ground them to pulp 
Then he fainted away on the Windmill Steps.
April was in with a wild burst of the bonniest weather,
fleecings of clouds sailed over Duncairn with the honking
geese from Footforthie's marshes. Out in the little back-
garden Chris saw the buds unfolding on bush and twig,
and got out her hoe from its winter sleep, over the walls
other garden folk were chintering and tamping on the
drying earth. And Chris thought in that hour of the
bright April day as she hoed round the blackberry bushes
and roses—suddenly, with a long-forgotten thrill—what a
fine smell was the smell of the earth, earth in long sweep¬
ing parks that rolled dark-red in ploughing up the hills
of the Howe, earth churned in great acres by the splatter¬
ing feet of the Clydesdale horses, their breath ablow on a
morning like this, their smell the unforgotten stable smell,
the curling rigs running to meet the sun. Earth . . .
and she sossed about here in a little yard of stuff that the
men she’d once known wouldn’t have paused to wipe
their nebs with !
o
2io GREY GRANITE
If Ewan had been as that other Ewan . . . and she
paused, bent over the hoe, at the thought. Was he so
unalike ? There was something about him since that
awful time when he’d fainted on the Steps of Windmill
Brae that had minded her of his father back from the
War—not the Ewan of the foul mind and foul speech,
but that darker being she’d not kenned in those days,
only later when the tale of his death was brought her :
that being who had been the real Ewan imprisoned, des¬
perate, a wild beast seeking a shelter she hadn’t pro¬
vided, a torn and tormented thing seeking a refuge 
Och, she was silly to think that in this case of her little
lad whom those beasts had mistreated—though he’d had
no great mistreating, he’d told her, he was fine and would
soon be about again.
She heard the sound of footsteps coming from the
house and looked up and saw, and looked down again.
And she thought with a whimsical, cool dismay it was
funny she couldn’t be letten a-be even out in the yard—
a sore-harried body ! And the whimsy went, she was
cool and kind.
Ay, mistress, I want a bit crack with you.
—Yes, Ake.
He blew out a cloud of smoke, brushed it aside, he
was standing with his big, well-blacked boots unlaced,
his waistcoat open, his mouser well-curled, undisturbed,
unhurrying, she felt his gaze on the side of her face. And
he said they’d held up this business of a decision while
he’d loaned her the money to carry on the house and ward
off Mistress Cleghorn’s holy bitch of a niece : but now
GREY GRANITE
211
came an accounting one way or the other : Are you going
to have me, then, as your man ?
And Chris unbent from the hoe and turned to him
and that thing that had once been a poet in Ake’s heart
and was strangled with rage ere it ever reached vision,
started sudden within him, oh bonny she was, sulky and
gay with her bonny bronze hair. And she said, quiet
and sweet, Yes, if he'd have her. She was nothing of a
bargain for all that he'd done.
He thought through the dark of every night Oh God,
if only I could sleep! And sleep came seldom, hour on
hour, while he fought to lock back in his memory those
pictures : pictures of himself in that prison cell, in the
hands of the bobbies while they mauled him about,
pictures . . . and he’d cover his face with his hands, bury
his face in the pillow to forget the sick shame of it. He,
Ewan Tavendale, held like a beast, his body uncovered
and looked upon, jeered at, smeared with the foulness of
those filthy eyes as battered by their filthy hands, held
and tormented like a frog in the hands of a gang of school-
kids. His body that once he’d hardly known, so easy
and cool and sweet-running it had been : now in the dark
it was a loathsome thing that he lay within, a foul thing
he didn’t dare look upon.
In the grip of that fear he locked his room every night,
went about the house swathed up to the chin, Chris was
watching, she’d know, Chris or else Ellen. Ellen and he
212
GREY GRANITE
once—sickening to think of, filthy and dirty, lips like
hers on his. . . . Oh, God, please let wie sleep !
Jim Trease called in that day with the news that the
strike at last had come to an end, he sat with Ewan in
the sitting-room, big, heavy and red, his little eyes
twinkling. They’d all gone back and were cheerily at
work making their armament bits again twas even
said that Gowans were to install a gas-loading plant soon.
Oh, the strikers had got the speeding up slowed down and
a bit of an increase on all the piece-rates, Bolivia and Japan
were in a hell of a stamash to get arms: and Gowans
were dancing in tune.
 And I went through what I did—just for that?
Jim Trease nodded, Ay, just for that. And for
just the same kind of result he’d been going through the
like things a good fifteen years—living on pay a little
better than a Broo man’s, working out his guts for those
thick-witted sods. . . . He twinkled his eyes and smoked
his cigarette, looking like a Christmas pig, Ewan thought,
with some foolish toy stuck in its mouth by a butcher.
And he’d do it another fifteen years till the bobbies
got him down in some bit of a riot and managed to kick
in his skull, he supposed—For it’s me and you are the
working-class, not the poor Bulgars gone back to Gowans.
And suddenly was serious an untwinkling minute:
A hell of a thing to be History, Ewan !
And for awhile his words and the image they painted
abided with Ewan when Trease himself had gone shamb¬
ling away across Windmill Place, turning, stout, shabby,
to wave ta-ta. A hell of a thing to be History !—not a
213
GREY GRANITE
student, a historian, a tinkling reformer, but LIVING
HISTORY ONESELF, being it, making it, eyes for the
eyeless, hands for the maimed ! 
And then he was shrinking back from the window at
the sight of Ellen ; but she’d seen him ; waved. And
across his memory there swept again, picture on picture,
an obscene film, something they’d stick in him while he
writhed, a bobby’s hand 
Ewan !
He kept his face buried in his arms, feeling her arms
around him, tight, her hair against his cheek, shivering
away from the touch of that. And he said to her Go
away ! and she wouldn’t, kept close to him, holding him,
shaking him : Ewan, listen, you’re to tell me what’s wrong
with you—what I’ve done that you avoid me like this. Ewan,
do you hate me so much and so suddenly ?
He told her he didn’t hate her at all, it was just that
he was white-livered, he supposed. And sat up and pushed
her away, not looking at her, looking a boy still, with the
scar down his temple healed by now. Ewan scarred :
last time it had been the keelies, this time the police :
who next ? and she shuddered as he himself had done.
And then in the queerest fashion it came to her that she
knew what was wrong, suddenly, she tingled with a blush
that spread all over her body, neck, cheek and breast,
goodness knew how far, a blush of unbearable shame and
compassion : Oh Ewan, poor Ewan !
But she didn’t say that, crouched beside him with her
chin in her hands looking at him and loving him so that
she almost wept; and was desperate while her mind
2I4 GREY GRANITE
sought round and round for a way to get at him, to help
him.
And slowly, with a queer unemotion, she realized the
only way—if she’d take it for him.
He’d sat staring out of the window the while, now she
ran to that window and pulled open the curtains and
stared up at the sky. April was in, the weather would keep
all day she thought: Ewan, what are you doing this
week-end ?
He said Nothing. Read a book. Hadn’t an idea.
—I want to go out a long ride on a bus. Somewhere.
I get so sick of Duncairn. Will you come with me ?
—Oh, if you like. I’ll be poor enough company.
She said she’d risk that, she’d go and find out about
the buses. Would he be ready in an hour’s time ?
It felt the most crowded hour of her life, dragging
on her hat and running from the house down to the bus-
stance in Royal Mile, long lines of buses like dozing dragons,
the drivers yawning and staring at the sky, staring at
newspapers, buses innumerable, with all signs on them :
where would she go ? Then she saw a bus with GTEN
DYE upon it, and she’d never been there, it was safe
enough. So she found out the time when the bus was
to start, the conductor said in a fifty minutes—Don’t
be late, are you bringing your lad ? And Ellen said
Quite and smiled at him, a bonny black pussy-cat of a
creature, he straightened his tie and looked after her—
’Od, keeks of that kind were unco scarce.
GREY GRANITE 215
But Ellen had scrambled aboard a tram, it shoomed
down the Mile as though knowing her haste, she stared
in the gaudy windows of Woolies—would that do ?
for she hadn’t much money to waste.
So she hurried in and looked in the trays, at the glitter,
at the dull dog eyes of the girl at the counter, and fool¬
ishly felt sick, sentimental idiot. No, she wouldn’t,
she’d get it real, silly though that was !
Out of Woolies and off the Mile and found a passable
place in George Street, and went in there, into a great
clicking of clocks and watches, glimmer of silver, and
bought what she wanted, and came out in the flying sun-
scud of Spring. What next?—This’ll try your courage, my
girl
It did, but she stuck it, looking cool as a cucumber,
the shopkeeper an elderly, slow-moving man, he listened
to her wants in the little shop with the ghastly books and
the half-hid door, and said he thought another thing
better. Had she ever tried it ? And showed it to her,
and Ellen said she hadn’t, was it really good ? And the
shopman said Ay, unemotional as a boiled turnip, he
could recommend that. x\nd Ellen said Thanks, I’ll
have it then. And I’m in a hurry. And he said Fine
weather.
Back to the Mile. And now—what else ? Rucksacks ?
She’d one of her own, Ewan hadn’t, Woolies again and get
one for him. Running up through the crowds she looked
at her watch and found she had still a half-hour to spare,
saw her face as she whipped into Woolies, flushed and
dark, that hair on her upper lip horrid in a way, Spanish
2i6 GREY GRANITE
and nice in another way. Rucksack and straps and
she was digging out the sixpences, three of them, and
had the thing tied up in paper. Now for Windmill
Place again and see Chris after she d bought some choco¬
lates and fruit.
Running up the door-steps she peeped through the
window and saw Kwan sitting where she had left him,
staring out, that nerved her for the thing she’d to do.
She ran up to his room and looked quick about and saw
the old wardrobe hid in the corner and opened the packet
she’d bought from Woolies and stuffed in things from the
wardrobe, quick, stopping and listening for feet on the
stairs. Then into her own room like a burglar, quiet,
panting and working there like a fury, running to and fro
and cramming her knapsack, anything forgotten ?
Oh Tord, the things from the little shop ! Here they were,
safe, cheers, that was all.
Chris was making scones in the kitchen when Ellen
looked in, looked sweeter than ever, Ellen thought,
lovely those tall Scotch cheekbones, nice sulky face.
Hello, Ellen lass, come for a scone ?
Ellen said she hadn’t, but she d eat one, though ,
and sat on the table, eating it, and they smiled one at the
other, mistrust long past. And Ellen said Mrs.
Colquohoun, Ewans not well.
The lovely, sulky face went dark in a minute, like
her son’s then despite all the differences. Where is he ?
 Oh, nothing new happened. But ever since that
time in the jail. I want to take him out to the country—■
somewhere ; and I want to know if you’ll mind.
GREY GRANITE 217
Chris looked at her a minute and then laughed, saying
they surely could go where they liked, they were neither
of them bairns, Ellen nodded and jumped off the table.
/ know. But I don’t know if we’ll be back to-night.
And then she thought Ewan's mother understood,
her eyes changed and grew darker and glassed over with
gold in that way that Ellen had seen before. She said
quietly and kindly : / won’t worry. But, Ellen 
—Yes ?
—It’s your life and his, but I think I ken Ewan. He's
like this for the time, but he won’t be long. And when
he’s once better . . . he’s a funny lad. I don’t think he’ll
ever be any lass’s lad.
For a second Ellen felt cold to her spine. True in a
way—and she didn’t care ! Chris liked the gay smile
on the scared pussy-face: We’re only going hiking.
Bye-bye, Mrs. Colquohoun.
Plodding teams blue steam in the parks as the fat
bus grunted up the Hill of Barras, Ellen beside Ewan
looked up a moment, he’d just asked, in his soft Scotch
voice and as though wakening up, what were a couple of
rucksacks for ?
She said For fun. I’ve brought some lunch.
Below them all the eastwards Howe lay spread, grey
saffron and thinly wooded, cold-gleaming under the quick
Spring sun—a bare and wild and uncanny land, she’d never
be at home here she thought with a shiver, though she
trilled her r’s and lived to be a hundred. Hideous country,
2i8 GREY GRANITE
ragged and cruel . . . but Ewan’s shoulder against hers
sweet.
And Ewan looked out and saw the Howe and far
away high in the air beyond the cold parks and the dark
little bourochs of nestling trees under the lithe of the shin¬
ing hills, the line of the mountains, crested in snow, un¬
melting, Trusta Peak over High Segget, the round¬
breasted hills like great naked women waking and rising,
tremendous, Titanic. Watching, Ellen saw his face
suddenly darken, she said Headache going ? and he an¬
swered her hardly (poor Ewan !) Yes. I’m all right.
Down by the Pitforthies and by Meikle Fiddes into
the main road winding broad, chockablock with traffic
tearing south, loaded lorries and glistening cars, swaying
shapes of the great Dundee-Aberdeen buses squattering
the ancient tracks of the Howe. Cattle were out from the
winter byres, flanks laired in sharn and eating like mad
on the thin, lush pastures that couched from the wind
under the shelter of the olive-green firs. With a chink
and a gleam and a slow, canny stamping the ploughmen
faced up against far braes, the dirl of little stones pattered
the windscreen as the bus ran through a great skellop
of tar, roadmenders resting and giving them a wave,
every soul in a fairly fine tune to-day.
And then, queerly and suddenly, Ewan’s heart moved.
He said to Ellen : We’re into Kinraddie.
She’d never heard of it, he’d been born here, away
up in a little farm in the hills, they’d see the place in a
minute or so. And sure so they did, ringed round with
its beech, Blawearie wheeling and unfolding, high, Ewan
GREY GRANITE 219
minded a day as a little lad standing by the side of his
mother by the hackstock and watching a man in a soldier's
gear going out of the close and not looking back : and his
mother paying no heed to the man, the man’s hands
trembling as he fastened the gate. . . . So bright and near
and close was the picture he shook his head to shake it
away, he’d never remembered it before. That man—
his father, he supposed, in the days of the War, going to
the War, had he and Chris quarrelled ? . . . Tong ago,
it had nothing to do with him.
His movement made Kllen ask if he was cold, and he
turned and looked into her face, bright, flushed, little
beads of sweat along her dark brows, she had opened the
neck of her dress, skin warm and olive, he stared at that,
looked like silk, maybe felt like it to touch. She
asked, peeping a smile, if there was a smut on her nose ?
and saw the grey-gold eyes lose their dull film a moment.
He said Nice of you to take me out. No, I’m not cold—
and there isn’t a smut. Devil of a stour this bus is raising !
The roads were dry and they ploughed a dust cloud
in the wake of a wandering bouroch of sheep, maa’ing
and scattering, the shepherd waved a canny hand to
the driver and the driver wormed a canny way forward.
Then the bus picked up and shoggled up through Drum-
lithie, the steeple still there : tell Ellen the joke.
They both craned out to look up at it, the steeple
bell with no church behind ; and Ellen’s smooth braid
of short-cut hair, blue-black, whipped Ewan’s cheek like
the touch of a bird, swift, with the smell of the Spring.
And his mind at that touch remembered again the
220
GREY GRANITE
Horror : but it was in some way dimmer, queer, as though
something were hiding it away. And he sat and puzzled
on that while Ellen looked sideways at him and thought
in a panic he looked more shut-away and lost than ever,
what if she failed ?—Oh, she couldn’t do that. . . . And
again that flush started near the tips of her ears and spread
out and under, cheekily, and the bus wheeled on and up
into Segget, shining half-dead with its whitewashed
walls.
Ewan looked back as they left the place and saw the
Manse high up from the toun, and above it the ruined
castle of the Kaimes where he’d gathered flints when he
was a kid—a million and a half or so years ago. God,
what a solemn young ass he had been !
And he minded the rolling drummle of names of those
hill-hidden touns through the parks of which he’d searched
out the flints—Muir of Germany, J acksbank, Tannachie,
Arnamuck, Bogjorgan, Droop Hill, Dillavaird, Goose-
craves, Pittengardener, Cushnie, Monboddo—he could
run the list for a hundred more, queer he’d never before
seen those names for the real things they were, the lives
and desirings of many men, memories of their hopes and
possessions and prides though their own names and dates
had vanished forever. And he thought of Trease saying
that he and the rest of the Reds were nothing, they just
worked the will of history and passed. . . . And suddenly
Ewan’s mind trembled on the verge of something, some¬
thing that he couldn’t name, maybe God, that made this
strange play with lives and beliefs: and it seemed
a moment that the shambling bus was the chariot
GREY GRANITE
221
of Time let loose on the world roaring down long fir-
darkened haughs of history into the shining ways of
to-morrow.
They came into Auchinblae, clatter and showd, the
mountains near now, and Ewan looked out. Ellen had
the tickets : where were they going ?
Ellen said she’d taken tickets for Glen Dye but they
needn’t go there if he’d rather not. And Ewan looked at
her shoes and then at his own and said Let’s get out and
climb Drumtochty and then go over to Finella.
Down in the Strath an hour or so later they came into
the road through the Garrold Wood, dark the pines, here
the sun was lost. Ewan had taken one of the rucksacks
and asked again what she’d brought them for ? And
Ellen had smiled a secret smile at the road—Oh, for fun !
—slim, like a boy, not feeling like one, and stared up
through the woods at the heights of Drumtochty tower¬
ing far in the April air, dark at this time of the year, the
sky behind waiting and watching with a fleece of clouds
like an old woman’s cap. Ewan looked up when she
pointed that out, he said that that was Finella’s mutch,
had she never heard of Finella ?
And they sat and talked on a little bridge, the water
below spun coolly and softly down to the hidden Euther
water, and he told her the tale of the Eady Finella and
222
GREY GRANITE
the old-time wars in the Howe of the Mearns. And Kllen,
sleek head uncovered to the sun, listened and asked were
those the Covenanting Times ? Ewan said Oh no, they
had come long after, funny chaps the Covenanters, he
always had liked them—the advance guard of the common
folk of those days, their God and their Covenant just
formulae they hid the social rebellion in. They had
fought up here in the 1640’s and away in Dunnottar
Castle the gentry had imprisoned and killed them in
scores. . . . And his face grew dark, no boy’s face :
There's nothing new under the sun—not even torture.
She said gently Ewan, what did they do to you ?
He didn’t change colour or alter at all, just turned
and looked at her and began to speak, low and steady,
she whispered in a minute Ewan, oh my dear! and then
felt sick, knew she’d faint, gripped herself not to, and felt
sick again, she’d fail him completely if she were that. So
he went on and finished; in the silence that followed
they heard the whisper of the Luther hushaweesh in the
reeds and far away in the listening trees long and con¬
tented—the croon of a dove, terrible in its soft and sleepy
content.
Ewan took out his handkerchief and wiped his face,
and then queerly and tenderly wiped Ellen’s, sweat on
it as on his own though the wind blew snell. And
holding his hand below her chin something lost ran a
strange quiver up his arm, he didn t heed it, smiling into
the misery of her eyes, speaking Scotch who so seldom
spoke it, that blunted and foolish and out-dated tool.
You needn’t fash for me. I’ve been the gypedest of gomerils
GREY GRANITE 223
to let on and vex you so, but I’m better now, I’ll forget, we
forget everything.
They left the road and went into the wood and were
presently tackling the chave of the slopes, sharp and tart
the whiff of the broom, crackling underheel the old year’s
whins. All the hills and the world in their background
stilled except that far off above the ploughed lands that
shored red in clay to Drumelzie woods the peewits cried,
in a breathing-space they halted and listened, laplaplap.
Then they took to shinning the haughs again and saw
the scrub open in front and far up, ridge on saffron ridge,
Finella riding the southern lift.
When they gained the utmost ridge in early afternoon
the Howe below was mottled in fog, sun with them here
in a little hollow high on the crest where they sat and ate
the lunch they had brought. Then Ewan lay flat and
looked at the sky, hardly they’d talked in the last hour
or so, and talked little now, Ellen squatting beside him
said You need a pillow, and meant the rucksacks. And
then didn’t; and was sensible.
His head in her lap he lay quiet, nice head, the weight
sent through her a queer delight, foolish and tender,
she bent over to speak to him. Then she saw his eyes
closed : he was fast asleep.
When he woke he was looking at the westerning sun
low down in the Howe of Drumtochty. He ached all
over, sun-sleepy, sun-tired, yet vaguely refreshed and his
sins forgiven. Then he found where his head still rested,
224 GREY GRANITE
heavy, and started up, Ellen moved at last and cried out
at a sudden sting of cramp.
—Why didn’t you wake me ? You must feel half-dead.
She said, with a pretence at perky Scots, More whole
than half, but you slept so sound, and stood up beside him,
dark as him. With the drowse still in his eyes he smiled
at her : That was nice of you.
She said absently I thought you were going to kiss me,
don’t bother now, there still are some oranges! . . . But
what wouldn’t I give for a cup of tea !
He thought it must surely be late by now, but she
showed him her watch, only four o’clock, they’d have
plenty of time to get back to Auchinblae and get a bus
to Duncairn in time, the last passed through at six
o’clock.
So they sat down, yawning, and ate the last orange,
and Ellen began to speak about Socialism and the world
revolution that was coming soon when the workers were
led in a sane way to power, no blood and mess, reorganiz¬
ing things for the good of all, building great healthy
cities, schools (what fun there would be in gutting Dun¬
cairn !), endowing the sciences, endowing motherhood,
no more weeping and no more tears : I couldn’t go on
living if I hadn’t that belief.
And the dark Scotch boy shook his head and said
you could go on living though you might believe in noth¬
ing at all—like Chris ; and that struck Ellen as queer
and then as true, and then queerer still. Funny freaks
the Scotch, rather dears sometimes. . . . And she stopped
her mind bothering about them at all, only about Ewan,
225
GREY GRANITE
and peeped at her watch when he wasn’t looking, then
at the sun and as she did so a long, cold shaft of wind
blew up the heath at their feet and they raised their eyes
and saw the fringes of the darkness on the land, below
them the Howe stirring as though someone had stirred
a dark drink in the mixture. Ewan jumped to his feet:
Your watch must have stopped. And took her wrist:
Let’s see.
The watch had stopped. They packed up the ruck¬
sacks and slung them on their backs., Ellen s mind in a
flurry. Shouldn’t she have done it up here ?—she could,
easily, nothing to have stopped her. Only—a mess ;
and she wanted it proper. What now, what the devil
the best thing to do ?
Ewan called to her not to take that way, the other
was the nearest to Auchinblae, she cried back that here
was a clearer track and he came to her side and they ran
hand in hand, plunging and slipping from tuft to tuft,
the woods stared up and came gambolling to meet them,
bound on bound, Euther gleaming beyond, up in the oppo¬
site heights rode a castle, all curlecue battlements, a pork-
pie in stone. Then it vanished from view as they still
fell west.
Ewan said it didn’t matter, over late now to reach
Auchinblae, and looked worried a minute, and a clump
of larch came and a shoulder of hill and, winding wide
and deserted, the road. Ellen stumbled against him
of a sudden dog-tired, the outing had won, not her, no
need to go on with the thing to the end—oh, thank good¬
ness, for she'd never have managed 1
p
226
GREY GRANITE
He said Ellen ! in a strange, hushed boy’s voice and
put his arms under her arms, she saw his face suddenly
blind, she gave a little sob, kissing he drew her tight and a
wild fear came and struggled and escaped, she didn’t want
to escape him, hadn’t done this to help him, she just wanted
him for herself, for delight. And she held him away and
told him that and he blushed, funny Ewan who could
kiss like so ! But his voice was cool and clear as glass :
I’m going to kiss you all over. Soon.
She said that would be fun, trying not herself to go
foolish again ; and told him to sit down and asked what
he knew of the countryside here, he didn’t know much,
two or three miles away was a little inn, he thought,
he’d once seen it, picture-book place with honeysuckle
in the summer. . . . ShesdlAOh Lord, NOT honeysuckle!
and he said he was sorry, but it wouldn’t be out; and they
smiled at each other, stared, laughed, kissed once—too
damn dangerous more than once.
And then she remembered and sought out the wedding
ring she had bought that day : Ewan, will you put this
on for me ?
When she woke near morning in the little inn-room
he was sleeping beside her, hallowed and clean and made
whole again, light faint on the dark face turned to her
shoulder ; and in tenderness she lay and looked at him
and thought Yes, that was fun, Oh Ewan, funny boy !
He woke at her movement—quickly, at once, and knew
her, put his right arm under her head, and said sleepily
GREY GRANITE 227
did he tell her last night that Yes, she felt as well as looked
like silk ? Some funny grain in skin-texture, no doubt:
he’d find out some time, unless he first ate her. . . . And
he’d forgotten to kiss her as completely as he’d promised.
But when he’d done that and slept again, Ellen didn’t,
holding him in a quiet compassion that he wouldn’t have
understood and would never know , and that didn t matter,
she was his forever, in desire or hating, his till they ended
or grew old and remembered, far off, the terror and
wonder of those first moments that made you suddenly
so frightened of God because there must be a God after
all.
And Chris stood with gloved hands on the hot May
railings and looked down at Duncairn where her marriage
was waiting. What a reel of things in a short few months,
what an antrin world that waited to-morrow !
Well, that had to be faced, and whatever else it
would be (she thought, and smiled to her sulky self
trigged out in the glass of the Windmill Steps) it wouldn’t
be the to-morrow she expected now. No to-morrow
ever was though you planned it with care, locked chance
in the stable and buried the key.
To-morrow.
Ake.
Ewan.
Ellen.
Ewan and his Ellen. What had happened with them ?
Nothing but the thing that had happened so often as
228
GREY GRANITE
any fool of a woman might know. And now that it had
happened—what came next ? And she thought Ah
well, it's no matter of mine, though her thoughts strayed
a little even as she thought that, half in tenderness, half
in anxiety, wondering what they’d said, what they’d
done, what their compact was, not caring greatly they’d
done ill by old standards though she hoped to God they’d
at least been careful. And she minded their faces at
breakfast that day and that look they’d exchanged while
she sat and watched, Ellen’s open and lovely, unashamed,
Ewan’s open as well, but the kind of smile that no lad
ever yet kept for his lass. Grey granite and thistledown—
how would they mix ?
Oh, that unguessable to-morrow would tell!
IV
ZIRCON
THE hill slopes were rustling with silence in the glimmer
of the late June gloaming as Chris Ogilviemade her way
up the track, litheness put by for a steady gait.
On the bending slopes that climbed ahead to the last
of the daylight far in the lift the turning grass was
dried and sere, a June of drought and swithering heat,
the heather bells hung shrunken and small, bees were
grumbling going to their homes, great bumbling brutes
Chris brushed from her skirts. Half way up she stopped a
minute and rested and looked down with untroubled eyes
at the world below, sharp-set and clear each item of it in
that brightness before the dark came down, mile on
mile of coarse land and park rolling away to the distant
horizons that tumbled south to her forty years in the
distant Howe.
She looked down at herself with a smile for her gear
and then took to the climb of the brae again, following the
windings of the half-hidden path, choked with whins
and the creep of the heather since the last time men had
trauchled up here. Then, greatly cupped and entrenched
and stone-shielded, she saw the summit tower above her,
so close and high here the play of the gloaming it
seemed to her while she stood and breathed if she stretched
up her hand she could touch the lift—the bending bowl
of colours that hung like a meikle soap-bubble above her
head.
Treading through the staying drag of the heather she
made her way under the shoggle of the walls to a high,
229
GREY GRANITE
230
cleared space with stones about, to the mass of stone where
once the astronomers had come a hundred years before
to take an eclipse of the moon or sun—some fairely or
other that had bothered them and set them running and
fashing about and peering up at the lift and gowking,
and yammering their little supposings, grave : and all
long gone and dead and forgotten. But they'd left a
great mass of crumbling cement that made a fine seat
for a wearied body—a silly old body out on a jaunt instead
of staying at home with her work, eident and trig, and
seeing to things for the morn—that the morn she might
get up and see to more things.
That the reality for all folk’s days, however they clad
its grim shape in words, in symbols of cloud and rock,
mountain that endured, or shifting sands or changing
tint—like those colours that were fading swift far in
the east, one by one darkening and robing themselves in
their grave-clouts grey, happing their heads and going to
the dark. . . . Change that went on as a hirpling clock,
with only benediction to ring at the end—knowledge that
the clock would stop some time, that even change might
not endure.
She leaned her chin in her hand and rested, the
crumbling stone below her, below that the world, without
hope or temptation, without hate or love, at last, at long
last. Though attaining it she had come a way strewn
with thorns and set with pits, like the strayings of a bare¬
foot bairn in the dark 
GREY GRANITE 231
She’d not failed in her bargain she told herself
that night in the house on Windmill Place, been glad for
the man with kindness and good heart, given that which
he needed and that which he sought, neither shrinking
nor fearing. And he’d given her a pat Ay, lass, but you
fine, and thrust her from him, assuaged, content, and
slept sound and douce, alien, remote. Her husband,
Ake Ogilvie.
She bit her lips till they bled in those hours that
followed, seeking not to think, not to know or heed or
believe when every cell of her body tingled and moved
to a shivering disgust that would not cease—Oh, she was
a fool, what had happened to her that wasn t what she d
known, expected to happen ? Idiot and gype to shiver
so, she’d to sleep, to get up in the morning and get on
with her work, get her man’s meat ready, his boots fresh-
polished, sit by his side and eat in a kitchen, watch his
slobberings of drink and his mouthings of food while he
took no notice of her, read his paper, laced his boots and
went showding out to look for a job, a contented childe.
. . . She’d all that waiting for her the morn, all morns :
sleep and be still, Oh, sleep and be still!
And at last she lay still with memories and ghosts,
Ewan with dark hair and boy’s face, Ewan beside her,
Ewan from the dust, who’d thought her the wonder of
God in the wild, dear daftness of early love, Ewan whom
she’d loved so and hated so, Ewan—oh, little need to
come now, she’d paid the debt back that he’d given for
her when they murdered him that raining morning in
France, paid it to the last ounce, body and flesh. And
232 GREY GRANITE
then in the darkness another came, a face above her, blue¬
eyed, strong-lined, only a moment as that moment’s
madness between them long syne. Not in longing or
lust had they known each other, by chance, just a chance
compassion and fear, foolish and aimless as living itself.
Oh, k-ong Rob whose place was never with me, not now
can you heed or help me at all. . . .
Quiet and quiet, because not that third, not look at
him or remember him. And she buried her face in the
pillow not to see, and then turned and waited rigid:
Robert.
And she saw him for the first time since he’d died
Robert completed, who’d had no face in her memory so
long, Robert with eyes and face and chin and the steady
light of madness in his eyes. Robert not the lover but the
fanatic, Robert turning from her coughing red in sleep
in that last winter in Segget, Robert with red lips as he sat
in the pulpit—she stared at him dreadfully in the close-
packed dark, far under her feet the clocks came chiming
while she lay and looked and forgot to shiver.
Not Ake alone, but beyond them all, or they beyond
her and tormenting her. And she knew in that minute
that never again in memory or reality might any man
make in gladness unquiet a heart passed beyond lust and
love alike—past as a child forgetting its toys, weeping
over their poor, shattered shapes no longer, and turning
dry-eyed to the lessons of lyife.
Ewan tramped Duncairn in search of a job—he knew
233
GREY GRANITE
it would be too expensive a job to try and fight on the
apprentice's rights which Gowans and Gloag had torn
up with his agreement. No chance of winning against
them, of course, they could twist any court against
a Red. He told that to Chris, cheery and cool;
but his coolness was something different now. Cold and
controlled he had always been, some lirk in his nature
and upbringing that Chris loved, who so hated folk
in a fuss. But now that quality she’d likened to grey
granite itself, that something she’d seen change in Dun-
cairn from slaty grey to a glow of fire, was transmuting
again before her eyes—into something darker and coarser,
in essence the same, in tint antrin queer. More like his
father he seemed every day, if one could imagine that
other Ewan with his angers and hasty resentments
mislaid. . . . She told him that and he laughed and teased
her : Only I’m a lot better looking! and she said absently
he would never be that, there was over-much bone in his
face.—And what job are you thinking of trying to get ?
He said he’d no idea, any old job, there’d likely not
be much opening for a Red : I’m sorry to have upset
your plans, you know, mother.
Chris asked What plans ? and he asked with a grin
hadn’t she wanted him to be respectable, genteel, with
no silly notions and a nice office suit ? Chris didn’t laugh,
just said she hadn’t known she’d mothered a gowk :
if he knew as little of the beliefs that had made him a Red
as he knew of her—faith, it would be long before he and
Mr. Trease ruled in Duncairn.
He sat and listened to that with a smile: Faith, it’ll
GREY GRANITE
234
be long anyway, I’m afraid. And as for what you call
my beliefs, they’re just plain hell—but then—they ARE
real. And you ought to like them, you’re so much alike !
She asked what he meant, and he said Why, you’re
both real, and stood up and cuddled her, laughing down
at her, Ewan who’d once had no sense of humour, had he
found that in torment in a prison cell ? Didn’t you know
you were real, Chris, realer than ever? And stepfather
Ake’s pretty real as well.
Real ? She watched through the days that followed,
manner and act, gesture and gley, with a kind, quiet
curiosity, hike Ewan he was tramping Duncairn for a
job, she’d listen to his feet on the stairs as he went, and
the stride never altered, an unhastening swing. And at
evening they’d sit long hours in the kitchen, Chris sewing,
him reading, hardly speaking a word, Chris because she
had nothing to say, Ake because he’d no mind for claik.
Then he’d drink his cocoa and look at the clock, and say
Lass, it’s time we went off to bed, and off he’d go, in his
socks, no slippers or shoes, she’d follow and find him
winding his watch, feet apart, independent, green-eyed,
curled mousered, taking a bit glance at the night-time
sky. And even while they undressed he’d say no word,
getting cannily into the bed and lying down. Then
he’d swing over on his pillow and off to sleep without a
good night or a single remark : would a man be as daft
as say good night to his own wife ?
And Chris as those nights went by, padding at the
GREY GRANITE
235
heels of unchanging days, slept well enough now without
fears at all on that matter that had set her shivering at
first, she shivered no longer, he came to her rarely, eidently,
coolly ; and with a kind honesty, unhurtable now, she
awaited him, paying her share of the price of things, an¬
other function for the woman-body who did the cooking
and attended the house while he still kept up his hunt for
a job.
Kisses there were none, or caresses even, except a
rare pat as she leaned over to set a plate in front of him.
They said bare things one to the other : Ay, it’s clearing.
. . . Rain in the lift. . . . Eggs up in price. . . .
That’ll be Ewan. . . .
She was finding ease who had known little.
The Reverend MacShilluck had never heard the like,
he’d advertised for a gardening body and the morning
the advertisement appeared in the Runner, the first to
come in search of the job—now, who do you think the
young thug was ?
The housekeeper simpered and said she didn’t know :
could it be the young man was an ill-doer, like ?
The Reverend MacShilluck said Not only that, far
worse than that, ahhhhhhhhhhhh, far worse. And the
housekeeper said Well, God be here. Was the smokie
to your taste ? for she wanted away back to the kitchen
to add up the grocer’s account for the week and see how
much she could nick on the sly and save up against the
day that would come when she’d be able to clear out
236 GREY GRANITE
completely and leave the clorty cuddy forever. . . .
But he was fairly in full swing by then and went on to
tell that the young man who’d come was no other than
that thug Ewan Tavendale who’d led the strikers at
Gowans and Gloag’s and been sacked for it, he’d been in
the jail and yet had the impertinence to come looking for
a job about a Manse. So the Reverend had refused him,
sharp and plain, he’d seen the young brute was a typical
Red, born lazy, living off doles and never seeking an
honest day’s work 
The housekeeper said God be here, like that? Then
he couldn't have been seeking the job at all? And the
Reverend MacShilluck gave a bit cough and said he would
never trust a Red, not him ; had he ever told her the tale
of the way at the General Assembly he’d once choked off
a Socialist, Colquohoun—shame on him, and him a
minister, too ! . . .
Miss Murgatroyd said Eh me, if was Awful, but had
Mrs. Colquohoun—oh, sorry, she meant Mrs. Ogilvie
—heard of the Dreadful Occurrence at Gawpus’s shop ?
And Chris said she hadn’t and Miss Murgatroyd said she
didn’t know how to speak, she was sure Mrs. Ogilvie
would understand her point of view and that she didn’t
really believe that young Mr. Ewan had behaved like
that. And Chris asked what was this about Ewan ?
and Miss Murgatroyd told her the dreadful story, just as
she’d got it from that dear Mrs. Gawpus that afternoon
at the Unionist Eadies. It seemed that Mr. Ewan had
got employment in the basement of Bailie Gawpus’s
shop, and oh me, it was awful to tell the rest. He’d
GREY GRANITE
237
been there only a day or so when the other workmen in
the basement had started raising a din because there
wasn't a proper, you know, W.C. there, the Bailie had
thought it would be just pampering keelies, wasn’t there
the yard outside ? The Bailie had gone down to see
what was wrong, and then he’d set eyes on Mr. Ewan, so
unfortunate, for the Bailie remembered him—he had
seen him when he was arrested for taking a part in that
dreadful strike. Bailie Gawpus hadn’t known that Mr.
Ewan was one of his employees, a foreman had engaged
him—such a nice man, the Bailie, but awful strict, a
little stout, she was sure it was his heart 
Well, he became Such Indignant at seeing Mr. Ewan,
and sure that he was causing the bother, that he ordered
him out of the basement at once, he was so against the
Communists and the dreadful things they had done to the
Common People in Russia. He told Mr. Ewan he was
dismissed on the spot, Such a Pity, Bailie Gawpus perhaps
not as nice as he might have been—in fact, Mrs. Gawpus
admitted that her husband perhaps exceeded his powers,
he laid hands on Mr. Ewan to push him out. And then
 it was dreadful, dreadful, a man old enough to be his
father—Mr. Ewan seized Bailie Gawpus by the collar
of his coat and ran him out to the yard at the back, the
Bailie almost dying of rage and heart-failure, and showed
him—you know, the place that those awful basement
people Used. And he asked how the Bailie would like
to use it ? And before the Dear Bailie could say any¬
thing at all he was down on his hands and knees and his
face being Rubbed in It—feuch, wasn’t that awful ?
238 GREY GRANITE
Worse still, the rest of the dreadful keelies came out from
the basement and cheered and laughed and when Bailie
Gawpus got up to his feet and threatened to send for a
policeman Mr. Ewan said there was no need to do that,
he was off to get one himself and report the sanitary
conditions of the place. So dreadful for the Bailie.
He'd to pay up a week’s wages to Mr. Ewan and promise
to have a proper W.C. constructed; and the Bailie was
just Boiling with Rage. . . .
Almost every night after that week-end in Drum-
tochty Ellen would slip through her doorway, sly pussy¬
cat, and trip along to Ewan’s room, scratch on the door
and be letten in, and taken and kissed and looked at and
shaken, because they were mad and the day had seemed
—Oh, so horribly long ! And Ellen would forget the
vexatious Scotch brats whom she tried to drum up the
steep cliffs of learning, sour looks and old women and the
stench from the drains of the Ecclesgriegs Middle, the
sourly hysterical glares of Ena Eyon—everything every
time in that blessed minute when inside Ewan’s door she
was inside his arms, tight, arms hard and yet soft with
their dark down fringe, Ewan’s face bent down to hers
to that breathless moment when she thought she would
die if he didn’t, in one second—oh, kiss her quick !
And he did, and her arms went up round his neck,
fun, thrilly: you’d often wondered what men’s necks
were for. And the two of you would stand still, so cuddled,
not kissing, not moving, just in blessed content to touch,
GREY GRANITE
239
to hear the beating of each other’s hearts, each other’s
breathing, know each other’s being, content and lovely,
without shelter or shyness one from the other, blessed min¬
ute that was hardly equalled in all else, not even the
minutes that followed it later.
But first she made tea on Ewan’s gas-ring with the
kettle and teapot they’d bought together in a Saturday
evening scrimmage at Woolies, China tea, Ellen kneeling
to make it, having made Ewan sit and be quiet and not
fuss, tired out with haunting the streets for a job. And
he’d say But I’m not, and she’d say then he ought to be—
Sit still and read and don’t argue. Ewan would laugh and
drag down a book, silence in the room but for the gas-
hiss, Ellen drowsy as she watched the bubbling gas-
flame and the kettle begin to simmer and stir. House¬
keeping comfy and fun, alone in a room with Ewan :
though the house wasn’t theirs, nor the room, nor the
furniture, nothing but a sixpenny kettle and teapot and
cups and saucers at a penny a piece !
She'd glance up at him, deep in his book, and not
heed the book, but only him, nice arms bare and the curve
of his head, strange and dear, nice funny nose, lips too
thick, like her own, brown throat—she could catalogue
them forever, over and over, and know a fresh thrill every
word every time—oh, damnable and silly and lovely to
be in love !
And they’d drink the tea in a drowse of content and
talk of his books and the men of old time, the Simple
Men who had roamed the earth before Civilization came.
If ever men attained that elemental simplicity again 
240 GREY GRANITE
And Ellen would rouse : But then, what's the use ?
If we don’t believe in that we’re just—oh daft, as you Scotch
people say, wasting our lives instead of— And Ewan
would ask Instead of what ?—Saving up to get married ?
and laugh and hold her face firm between his hands, young
rough hands, the look in his eyes that made her responses
falter even while at his laugh and the thing he laughed
at something denying struggled up in her, almost shaped
itself to words on her lips. Sometime, surely Oh,
sometime they’d get married when the Revolution came
and all was put right.
And sometimes she’d feel just sick and desolate the
way he would talk of that coming change, he didn’t ex¬
pect it would come in their time, capitalism had a hundred
dodges yet to dodge its own end, Fascism, New Deals,
Douglasism, War : Fascism would probably outlast the
lot. Ellen said that she didn’t believe that a minute else
what was the good of all their struggles, what was the
good of dissolving the Feague and both of them joining
the Communist Party ? And Ewan would smile at her.
No good at all. Child’s play, Ellen, or so it’ll seem for
years. And we’ve just to go on with it, right to the end,
History our master not the servant we supposed. . . .
He’d fall to his books again, dryest stuff, economics
she never could stick, she would reach up and catch the
book from him and his eyes meet hers, blank a while,
cold, blank and grey, horrible eyes like a cuttle-fish s
—like the glint on the houses in Royal Mile, the glint
of grey granite she thought once, and shivered. And
he asked her why and she said she was silly and he said
GREY GRANITE 241
he knew that, eyes warm again, and they fooled about,
struggling a little in the fading June night: and then were
quiet, her head on his knee, looking out of the window
at summer-stilled Duncairn, little winds tapping the cord
of the blind, far off in the fall of the darkness the winking
eye of Crowie Point lighting up the green surge of the
North Sea night. And Ellen would say Oh, aren’t we
comfy? Fun, this, he’d say nothing, just cuddle her,
staring out at that light wan and lost that bestrode the
sky.
In bed, beside him, breathing to sleep, the little sleep
after those moments that she still thought fun, she would
tickle his throat with her hair, feel sure and confident
as never in the light, here in the dark he was hers un¬
questioned, hers and no other’s, breathing so, sweat on
his brow, hair curling about her fingers from the dark,
sleek head. He would stroke her with a swift, soft hand,
like a bird’s light wing, into that little sleep till somewhere
between two and three she would awake, he wakeful as
well, and they’d kiss again, cool and neat, and slip out of
bed, slim children both, and stand hand in hand and listen,
all the house in Windmill Place silent. Then they’d
pad to the door and lug it open and peer out, nothing,
the lobby dark below, no glimmer about but faint on the
landing the far ghost-radiance of Footforthie. Ewan
would open her door for her, sleepily they’d hug, and yawn
at each other in the dark, giggle a bit because of that,
and Ellen close the door and slip into her bed, asleep
before she had reached it, almost.
Q
GREY GRANITE
242
But one morning she saw his hands cut and bruised
and asked why, and he said oh that was from his new job,
up at Stoddart’s, the granite-mason’s, he’d been taken on
there as a labourer.
The table looked at him, the first any had heard :
Chris asked if he liked it, were the other folk nice ?
Miss Murgatroyd simpered she was awful glad he had
found Respectable Employment, like. Such Pity not to
be in the office though ; they were awful respectable
folk, the Stoddarts.
Mr. Piddle said he-he! and ate like a gull landed
famished on the corpse of a whale.
Mr. Quaritch cocked his wee beard to the side!
You’ll be able to study the proletariat at first hand now.
Tell me when you get sick of them, lad. I might be able to
find something better.
Ena Eyon sniffed and said she Just Hated gravestones.
Ellen sat and stared in blank, dead silence, feeling
sick and forgotten while they all talked. Oh goodness,
hadn’t they heard, had they all gone deaf ? Ewan—
EWAN A EABOURER !
July came in slow heat over Duncairn, and with it
the summer-time visitors. John Cushnie took his feeung-
say down to the Beach every night that his mecks would
meet, in to hear Gappy Gowkheid braying his jokes in the
Beach Pavilion, awfully funny, Christ, how you laughed
when he spoke the daft Scotch and your quean beside
you giggled superior and said Say he was sure the canary's
GREY GRANITE 243
camiknicks, she was awful clever and spoke a lot like
that that she’d heard at the Talkies—though if you had
mentioned her camiknicks she’d have flamed insulted
right on the spot.
Or you’d take her down of a Wednesday afternoon,
when Raggie’s had closed, birring on the tramcars loaded
for the Beach, wheeling out from Footforthie, there
glimmering and pitching and reeling in the sun the Amuse
ments Park with its scenic railway, Beach crowded with
folk the same as the cars, you and your quean would sit
and listen to the silly English that couldn t speak proper,
with their eads and ’ands and alfs and such. Then off
you’d get and trail into the Amusements Park, you’d only
a half-dollar but you wouldn’t let on, your feeungsay
was so superior and you only the clerk in Raggie Robert¬
son’s. She was fairly gentry and said how she’d enjoyed
her holiday away with her Girl Friend, they d gone for a
week out in the country, and the farmers were awful
vulgar and funny. And you said Yes, you knew, hicks
were like that, and she said You’ve spilt it—with their
awful Scotch words: Tyesday for Tuesday, and Foersday
for Friday, and no proper drainage at all, you know. And
you said again that you knew; she meant there weren’t
real W.C.’s but rather would have died than say so right
out.
So you asked if she’d like the scenic railway, and
she said It's okay by me, on you got, she screamed and
grabbed you and the hair got out from under her hat, you
were awful proud of her but wished to hell she wouldn’t
scream as though her throat were chokeful up of old razor
244 GREY GRANITE
blades, and clutch at her skirt, and skirl Oh, stop ! Christ,
hadn’t she legs like other folk and need she aye be ashamed
of them ? So you gave her a bit grab about the legs and
she screamed some more and hung on to you : but when
the ride finished she was real offended and said she wasn’t
that kind of girl, Don’t try and come it fresh on me.
You said you were sorry, so you were, and were just
trying to make it up with her when she saw her friend and
cried Cooee, Ena ! and the quean came over, all powder and
poshness, and who should it be but Miss Ena Eyon that
you’d known at the lodgings in Windmill Place. She
said she was just having a stroll about, and no, she hadn’t
a boy with her. And your quean giggled, and Miss Eyon
giggled and you felt a fool, queans were like that; and
as you followed them into the tea-tent you wished a coarse
minute they’d stop their damned showing-off and be
decent to a chap that was treating them—wished a daft
minute you’d a quean who didn’t care about Talkies and
genteelness or was scared at her legs being touched or
her feelings offended—one that would cuddle you because
she liked it, liked you, thought her legs and all of herself
for you, and was douce and sweet and vulgar and kind—
like a keelie out of the Cowgate. . . . Christ, it must be
the sun had got at you !
Your quean and Miss Eyon were at it hell for leather
talking about their holidays and where they had bade,
and how much they paid for digs in Duncairn. And Miss
Eyon said she thought she’d move hers, the landlady
had once been a minister’s widow but now she had married
an Awful Common person, a joskin just, that lorded it
GREY GRANITE 245
about the place and wasn’t a bit respectful at all. Worse
than that, though, the landlady’s son was a Red. . . .
You said that you’d known that, that’s why you’d left,
Raggie Robertson was dead against the Reds. . . . And
your quean said Don’t be silly. Go on, Ena.
And Miss L,yon said that another of the lodgers was
a schoolteacher, Red as well, and she was sure there were
Awful Things between them. She’d heard—and she
giggled and whispered to your quean and you felt yourself
turn red round the ears, what were the daft bitches gig§-
giggling about ? And your quean made on she was awful
shocked and said she wouldn t stay there a minute, the
place was no better than a WICKED HOUSE, just.
Miss Lyon said that she’d got no proof, of course, and
your quean mustn’t say anything, and your quean said
she wouldn’t but that Ena could easily get proof and
show up the two Reds and then leave the place. And
then you all talked together about the Communists,
coarse beasts, aye stirring up the working class—that
was the worst of the working class that they could be led
astray by agitators, they’d no sense and needed to be
strongly ruled.
You told the queans that but they didn’t listen, they
were giggling horrified to each other again, your quean said
What, did you really hear the bed creak ? and Miss Eyon
said Yes, twice, and their faces were all red and warmed
up and glinting, they minded you suddenly of the faces
of two bitches sniffling round a lamp-post, scared and eager
and hot on a scent. . . . But you mustn’t think that, they
were real genteel.
GREY GRANITE
246
For your quean was the daughter of a bank-clerk
in Aberdeen and Miss Ena Lyon’s father had been a post¬
master, some class, you guessed, you didn’t much like
to tell them yours had been only the hostler at the Grand
Hotel, what did it matter, you were middle-class yourself
now and didn’t want ever to remember that you might
have been a keelie labourer—Christ, living in some awful
room in Paldy, working at the Docks or the granite-
yards, going round with some quean not genteel like
yours but speaking just awful, Scotch, no restraint or
knowing how to take care of herself, maybe coming into
your bed at night, smooth and fine and kissing you,
cuddling you, holding you without screaming, just in
liking and kindness. . . . Your quean asked Whatever’s
come over you, red like that ? and you said Oh, nothing,
it’s stuffy in here.
And home you all went on the evening tram, your
quean and Miss Lyon sitting together and your quean
telling Miss Lyon what fine digs she had, the landlady
so respectful, a perfect old scream : and Ena should wait
about to-night and catch the two Reds and show them up,
and then leave the place and come bide with your quean.
And Miss Lyon said that she would, too, she was sick
of the place, anyhow—the dirty beasts to act like that,
night after night. . . . And they giggled and whispered
some more and for some funny reason you felt as though
you’d a stone in your gall, sick and weary, what was the
use ?—what was the use of being middle-class and wearing
a collar and going to the Talkies when this was all that
you got out of it ? And your quean, whispering some
GREY GRANITE 247
direction to Miss Lyon, turned round and said Don’t
listen a minute, and you nearly socked her one in the jaw
och, ’twas the summer night s heat that was getting you.
Chris’s roses were full and red in bloom, scentless and
lovely, glowing alive in the Sunday sun as she herself
came out to the little back garden. Ewan and Ellen
were out there already, their backs to the house, one
kneeling one standing, their dark hair blue in the sunlight,
young, with a murmur of talk and laughter between them.
And she saw indeed they were children no longer, Ellen
a woman, slim, a slip of a thing, but that pussy-cat dewi¬
ness lost and quite gone, Ewan with the stance and look
and act of some strange species of Gallowgate keelie who
had never hidden or starved in a slum and planned to
cut all the gentry’s throat, politely, for the good of
humankind. . . . And Miss Ena Lyon was no doubt right
in all she had said : Chris must tell them somehow.
But standing looking at them she knew that she
couldn’t, not because she was shamed to speak of such
things to either but because they were over-young and
happy to have their minds vexed with the dirty sad angers
of Miss Ena Lyon, poor lass. She’d never had a soul
slip into her room of a night, maybe that was the reason
for her awful stamash about Ellen and Ewan exchanging
visits. . . . She’d bade up last night, she had told to
Chris, and waited on the stairs to confirm her suspicions.
And sure enough it had happened again, oh, Disgusting,
at Eleven o’clock Miss Johns slipping into Mr. Tavendale’s
GREY GRANITE
248
room. And she couldn’t stay on any longer in a place
like this, it was no better than a Brothel, just.
Chris had looked at her in a quiet compassion and
said there was no need to stay even a week, she’d better
pack and get out at once. Miss L,yon had stared and
flushed up raddled red : What, me that's done nothing ?
You’ve more need to shift those 
She’d called them a dirty name, Chris had said without
anger You’ll pack and be gone in an hour ; and left her to
that and gone down to the kitchen and shortly afterwards
heard a tramping overhead as Miss Byon got her bit things
together—thrown out of her lodgings for trying to keep
keelies respectable.
Working in the kitchen with Jock the cat stropping
himself up against her legs, Chris had thought that funny
for a moment, then it wasn’t, she’d have to ask the two
what they meant to do. And she thought how awful
it was the rate that things tore on from a body’s vision,
only a year or so since she’d thought of Ewan as a little
student lad, her own, jealous when he talked to the pussy¬
cat : and now she'd have to ask him when he meant to
marry !
So she’d made the oatcakes and scones all the lodgers
cried for, Ake had come swinging in from outbye, out to
buy his bit Sunday paper, no collar, his boots well-blacked,
his mouser well-curled, he’d sat down and eaten a cake
while he read. Chris had brought him some milk though
he’d said he’d get it for himself, he’d taken to saying that
kind of thing, queer, though she’d paid it little attention,
looking at him quiet and friendly, just, this business of
249
GREY GRANITE
getting a job was a trauchle. She’d asked was there any
sign of work and he’d said not a bit in the whole of Dun-
cairn, and folded back his paper and looked up at her with
green-glinting eyes as he drank his milk ! A job ? Devil
the one. And I’m thinking I know the reason for that.
Chris had asked What reason ? and he’d said Jimmy
Speight, no doubt he’d sent a message all round Duncairn
to the joiners and timber-merchants and such, warning
them against employing Ake. Chris had said that surely
he’d be feared to do that seeing that Ake knew the
scandal about him, Ake had shaken his head, Ay, but
he’d promised never to use that knowledge again and
Jimmy knew that he’d keep the promise, a body must
keep a promise made even to a daft old skate like the
Provost.
And then he’d said something that halted Chris :
I’m sorry, mistress, that I drove you to marrying me.
Chris had said Why, Ake ! in surprise, and he’d nodded :
Ay, a damn mistake. Queer the daft desires that drive
folk. I might well have known you’d never mate with me,
you’d been spoiled in the beds of ministers and the like.
I’d forgotten that like an unblooded loon.
Chris had stood and listened in a kind surprise, beyond
fear of being startled or hurt any more by any man of
the sons of men who brought their desires their gifts
to her. She’d said she’d done all she could to make them
happy, and Ake had nodded, Ay, all that she could, but
that wasn’t enough, och, she wasn’t to blame. Then he’d
said not to fash, things would ravel out in time, he was
off for a dander round the Docks.
250
GREY GRANITE
So he’d gone, leaving Chris to finish the cooking and
set the dinner and watch the taxi drive up and take
away Miss Lyon’s luggage, a pile of it, and hear the cabman
ask if she shouldn’t have hired a lorry instead ? And Miss
Lyon had said she wanted none of his impudence, she’d
had enough of that already, living in a brothel. Chris
had started a little, overhearing that, but the cabman
just said Faith now, have you so ? T rade failing that you re
leaving ? and got in and drove off.
And now, the pastry browning fine and Jock the cat
purring away, Chris had come out to the noon-time yard
to ask Ellen and Ewan what they meant to do over this
business of sleeping together without the kirk’s licence
and shocking Miss Lyon.
But the picture they made took that plan from her mind,
she saw now what it was they were laughing about, they’d
gotten in the baby from over next door, the bald-headed
father had been left in charge and had wanted to mow his
lawn awful bad and the bairn had wakened up in its pram
and started a yowl, frustrating the man : till Ellen looked
over and said Shall I ? And he’d handed it over, all
red and thankful, and now Ellen squatted by the rose¬
bush, the bairn in her lap and was wagging a bloom in
front of its nose. And the bairn, near as big and bald
as his father, was kicking his legs, gurgling, and burying
his nose and mouth in the rose, sniffing, and then kicking
some more in delight. And Chris saw Ewan looking down
at the two with a look on his face that made her stop.
Not the kind of look at all a young man should have
given his quean with a stranger’s bairn—a drowsy content
GREY GRANITE 251
and expectation commingled. Instead, Kwan looked at
the two cool and frank, amused and a little bored, as he
might at a friend who played with a kitten. . . .
And Chris thought, appalled, Poor Ellen, poor Ellen !
Gowans and Gloag’s had quietened down after
the strike, the chaps went back and said to themselves
no more of listening to those Communist Bulgars that got
you in trouble because of their daftness, damn t, if the
Chinks and the Japs wanted to poison one the other, why
shouldn’t they ?—they were coarse little brutes, anyhow,
like that Dr. Fu Manchu on the films. And wee Geordie
Bruce that worked in Machines said there was nothing
like a schlorich of blood to give a chap a bit twist in the
wame. But you, though you weren’t a Red any longer,
said to Geordie that he’d done damn little blood-letting
against the bobbies; and Norman Cruickshank took
Wee Geordie’s nose and gave it a twist, it nearly came off,
and said Hey, sample a drop of your own. Christ, and to
think it’s red, not yellow !
You took a bit taik into Machines now and then for a
gabble with Norman on this thing and that, the new
wing they’d built, called Chemicals, where the business
of loading the cylinders with gas was to start in another
week or so. Already a birn of chaps had come from the
south with a special training for that kind of work,
Glasgow sods and an Irishman or so. You and Norman
would sneak out to the W.C. for a fag, and you’d ask if
Norman had seen anything of Ewan ? And Norman
GREY GRANITE
252
would say he’d seen him once or twice at meetings of the
Reds down on the Beach, he'd fairly joined up with the
Communists now and spoke at their meetings—daft
young Bulgar if ever there was one, and him gey clever
and educated, Boh.
You said rough enough that you knew all that, and
Norman looked at you queer and said Oh of course, you
yourself had been a bit of a Red a while back and belonged
to that league that Tavendale had raised. Why had you
scuttled ? Got the wind up ?
You took him a smack in the face for that, he was at
you in a minute, you couldn’t stand up to him, the fore¬
man came running in and pulled you apart: Hey, what
the hell do you think this is ? Boxing gymnasium ? Back
to your work, you whoreson gets. And back you both went,
b’God you'd given the mucker something to think of,
saying that you had the wind up—you !
It was just that you’d seen the Reds were daft, a chap
that joined them never got a job, got bashed by bobbies
and was sent to the camps, never had a meek to spend of a
night or a shirt that didn’t stick to his back. Och to
hell! You wanted a life of your own, you’d met a quean
that was braw and kind, she and you were saving up to
get married, maybe at New Year and maybe a bit sooner,
you’d your eyes on two rooms in Kirrieben, the quean
was a two months gone already but you’d be in time if
your plans came off ; and you weren’t sorry a bit, you’d
told her, kissing her, she’d blushed and pushed you away,
awful shy Jess except in the dark. So who’d time at
all for this Red stite and blether that never would help a
GREY GRANITE 253
chap anyway, what was the use of getting your head
bashed in for something worse than religion ?
But that evening you and some of the chaps had a bit
of overtime in the works, clearing up the mess of some
university loons allowed down to potter about in Castings.
You finished gey late and as you came out there was some
kind of meeting on at the gates, a young chap up on a kind
of platform, speaking low and clear, who could he be ?
And you and the rest took a dander along, a fair crowd
around, Broo men and fishers, stinking like faeces, and a
dozen or so of the toff student sods that had messed about
that evening in Castings. The toffs were laughing and
crying out jokes, but the young chap wasn’t heeding them
a bit, he was dressed in old dungarees, all whitened, a
chap from the granite-works, no doubt, with big thick
boots and red rough hands. And only as you got fell
close did you see that the speaker was young Ewan Taven-
dale himself.
He was saying if the workers would only unite—
when one of the university toffs made a raspberry and
called Unite to give you a soft living, you mean ? Ewan
said Quite, and you a hard death, we’ll abolish lice in the
Communist state, and then went on with his speech, quick
and cool, the students started making a rumpus and some
of the fishers gave a bit laugh and started to talk away
home at that, quiet old chaps that didn’t fancy a row.
But Norman Cruickshank called out to Ewan to carry
on with his say, would he ? they’d see to the mammies'
pets with the nice clean collars and the fat office dowps. And
Norman called to the Gowans’ chaps : Who’ll keep order ?
254 GREY GRANITE
Most of the others cried up that they would, you
didn’t yourself but taiked away home, you’d your quean
to meet and were going that night to look at a bit of
second-hand furniture in a little shop in the Gallowgate.
Only as you turned the bend of the street you looked back
and saw a fair scrimmage on, the whey-faced bastards
down from the colleges were taking on the Gowans chaps,
you nearly turned and ran back to join—och, you couldn’t,
not now, mighty, what about Jess ? And you started to
run like a fool, as though feared—feared at something
that wasn’t yourself, that leapt in your heart when you
looked at Ewan.
Jim Trease said that was one way of holding a meeting,
not the best, you should never let a free fight start at
your meetings unless it was well in the heart of a town,
with plenty of police about and folk in hundreds and a
chance of a snappy arrest or so, to serve the Party as
good publicity.
Ewan said Yes, he knew, but he’d taken the oppor¬
tunity to stir up antagonism between the Gowans chaps
and students. Deepening the dislike between the classes.
Obvious enough that the day of the revolutionary student
was done, he turned to Fascism or Nationalism now,
the fight for the future was the workers against all the
world. Trease nodded, a bit of heresy there, but true
enough in the main. Anyhow, there was no great harm
done, Ewan had barked his knuckles a bit, he’d better
255
GREY GRANITE
come up to the Trease house in Paldy and get them
iodined. And maybe he’d like a cup of tea.
Ewan said he would and folded up his platform, the
fight was over and the students had gone, chased up the
wynds by the Gowans men. But Norman Cruickshank
came panting back: All right, Ewan ? and Ewan said
Fine. Thanks to you, Norman. When’ll I see you ?
—I don’t know, but to helT—sometime. Never heard
anybody speak about things as you used to do in the Furnaces.
And he asked what Ewan was doing now and Ewan
told him he was a labourer at Stoddart’s, and Norman
said Christ, what a job for a toff, and Ewan said he wasn’t
a toff, just a worker, and Norman said tell that to his
grandmother: only, where would they meet again ?
So they fixed that up, Trease standing by, big and sonsy,
with the twinkle in his little eyes and his shabby suit
shining in the evening light.
Mrs. Trease held out a soft hand and said Howdedo ? .. t
Jim, I’m away out to the Pictures. See and not start the
Revolution without me, there’s two kippers in the press if
you’d like some meat, the police have been here this afternoon
and the landlord’s going to give us the push. That s all.
Ta-ta. Trease gave her a squeeze and said that was fine,
so long as nothing serious had happened ; and told her
to see and enjoy the picture, who was the actress ?
Greena Garbage ? Well, that was fine ; and gave Mrs.
Trease a clap on the bottom, out she went, Ewan stand¬
ing and watching. And Trease came back and smiled at
Ewan, big, creased : Ay. Think her a funny bitch ?
Ewan said No, she seemed all right, was she a
256 GREY GRANITE
Communist as well ? Trease gave his head a scratch,
he’d never asked her, he’d aye been over-busy, her as well,
moving from this place and that, chivvied by the bobbies,
her ostracized by the neighbours and the like, never
complaining though, canty and cheery—they’d had no
weans and that was a blessing.
Kwan nodded and said he saw that, there wasn t much
time for the usual family business when you were a revo¬
lutionist. And Big Jim twinkled his eyes and said No, for
that you’d to go in for Socialism and Reform, like Bailie
Brown, and be awful indignant about the conditions of
those gentlemanly coves, the suffering workers. And
Bwan grinned at him, he at Bwan, neither had a single
illusion about the workers : they weren’t heroes or gods
oppressed, or likely to be generous and reasonable when
their great black wave came flooding at last, up and up,
swamping the high places with mud and blood. Most
likely such leaders of the workers as themselves would be
flung aside or trampled under, it didn’t matter, nothing to
them, THBY THBMSBhVBS WBRB THB WORKERS
and they’d no more protest than a man’s fingers complain
of a foolish muscle.
And Trease made the tea and they cooked the kippers
and had a long chat on this and that, not the revolution,
strikes or agitprop, but about skies and stars and Bwan s
archaeology that he’d loved when he was a kid long ago,
Trease knew little or ought about it though he’d heard
of primitive communism. He said he misdoubted they d
ever see workers’ revolution in their time, capitalism
had taken crises before and would take them again, it
GREY GRANITE
257
was well enough, organized in Great Britain to carry ten
million unemployed let alone the two and a half of to-day,
Fascism would stabilize and wars help, they were coming,
the wars, but coming slow.
Ewan said he thought the same, for years it was
likely the workers’ movements would be driven under¬
ground, they'd to take advantage of legality as long as
they could and then prepare for underground work—
perhaps a generation of secret agitation and occasional
terrorism. And Trease nodded, and they left all that to
heed to itself and Trease sat twinkling, his collar off,
and told Ewan of his life as a propagandist far and wide
over Scotland and England, agitprop in Glasgow, Lanark,
Dundee, the funny occurrences that now seemed funny,
they’d seemed dead serious when he was young. He’d
tramped to lone villages and stood to speak and been
chased from such places by gangs of ploughmen—once
taken and stripped and half-drowned in a trough ; he’d
been jailed again and again for this and that petty crime
he’d never committed, and in time took the lot as just the
day’s work ; he’d been out with Connoly at Easter in
Dublin, an awfully mismanaged Rising that. But the
things he minded best were the silly, small things—nights
in mining touns when he’d finished an address to a local
branch and the branch secretary would hie him away home
to his house : and Trease find the house a single room,
with a canty dame, the miner’s wife, cooking them a
supper and bidding them welcome: and they’d sit
and eat and Trease all the time have a bit of a worry on his
mind—where the hell was he going to sleep ? : and the
S258 grey granite
miner would, say Well, look this way, cowiYade, and Trease
would hear a bit creak at the back of the room—the
miner’s wife getting into bed : and he and the miner would
sit and claik the moon into morning and both give a yawn
and the miner would say Time for the bed. I ll lie in the
middle and you in the front: and in they’d get and soon
be asleep, nothing queer and antrin in it at all, not even
when the miner got up and out at the chap of six and left
you lying there with his mate, you’d as soon have thought
of touching your sister.
And Ewan laughed and then grew serious and spoke
of his work in the Stoddart yard, he was raising up some¬
thing of a cell in the yard, could Jim dig out a bundle of
pamphlets for him ? They’d all been labour when he
went to Stoddart’s, but already he’d another four in the
cell. Trease said he’d give him pamphlets enough,
Stoddart’s was a place worth bothering about, how long
did Ewan think he would last before he was fired by the
management ? Ewan said he thought a couple of months,
you never could tell, damned nuisance, he was getting
interested in granite. And that led him on to metallurgy,
on and on, and Trease sat and listened and poured himself
a fresh cup of tea now and then . . . till Ewan pulled him¬
self up with a laugh : Must clear out now. I’ve been
blithering for hours.
But Mrs. Trease came back from the Talkies and
wouldn’t hear of it, Jim would need a bit crack and a
bit more supper, she thought there was some cheese.
Greena Garbage had been right fine, cuddled to death
and wedded and bedded. Would Ewan stir up the fire
GREY GRANITE 259
a little and Jim move his meikle shins out of the way ?
Ta-ra-ra, ’way down in Omaha 
Trease twinkled at Ewan: That’s what you get.
Not revolutionary songs, but Ta-ra-ra, ’way down in
Omaha. Mrs. Trease said Fegs, revolutionary songs
gave her a pain in the stomach, they were nearly as dreich
as hymns—the only difference being that they promised
you hell on earth instead of in hell.
And Ewan sat and looked on and spoke now and then,
and liked them well enough, knowing that if it suited the
Party purpose Trease would betray him to the police
to-morrow, use anything and everything that might
happen to him as propaganda and publicity, without
caring a fig for liking or aught else. So he’d deal with
Mrs. Trease, if it came to that. . . . And Ewan nodded to
that, to Trease, to himself, commonsense, no other way
to hack out the road ahead. Neither friends nor scruples
nor honour nor hope for the folk who took the workers
road ; just life that sent tiredness leaping from the brain ;
that sent death and wealth and ease and comfort shivering
away with a dirty smell, a residuum of slag that time
scraped out through the bars of the whooming furnace of
History 
And then he went out and home through the streets,
swinging along and whistling soft, though he hardly knew
that till he heard his own wheeber going along the pave¬
ment in front, the August night mellow and warm and
kind, Duncairn asleep but for a great pelt of lorries going
up from the Eishmarket, the cry of a wakeful baby some¬
where. And he smiled a little as he heard that cry,
26o GREY GRANITE
remembering mien and her saying that Communism
would bring a time when there would be no more weeping,
neither any tears. . . . She was no more than a baby
herself.
A bobby stopped in a doorway and watched him
go by : there was something in that whistle that was
bloody eerie, a daft young skate, but he fair could whistle.
It was plain to Chris something drastic must be done
to reorganize the house in Windmill Place. With Cushnie
first gone and syne Ena by on and Ake still seeking about
for a job she’d have to get new lodgers one way or the
other. But the price Ma Cleghorn had set on the house
had made it for folk of the middle-class, except such rare
intruders as Ake—and he’d come in search of her, she
supposed, much he’d got from the coming, poor wight.
She asked Neil Quaritch when he came to tea, he
looked thinner and stringier and tougher than ever, a wee
cocky man with a wee cocky beard, pity his nose was as
violent as that, hedgings ?—he’d ask some of the men
in the Runner. Especially as they might never see Mr.
Piddle again.
Chris said Why ? and Neil licked his lips and thought
Boadicea probably looked like that. She’d strip well—and
damn it, she does—for Ogilvie. Then he pushed his cup
over for replenishing, they were sitting at tea alone, and
told the tale about Mr. Piddle that had come up to the
office as he left. Mrs. Ogilvie knew this side-line of
Fiddle’s ?—sending fishing news to the Tory Pictman ?
26i
GREY GRANITE
Well, he’d been gey late in gathering it to-day, doing
another side-Hne down in Paldy, prevailing on a servant
lassie there to steal him the photo of an old woman body
who had hanged herself, being weary with age. Back
at last he’d come to the office, he-he ! photo in hand and all
set fine, and looked at the clock and saw he’d a bare three
minutes to tear down the Mile and reach the train at the
Station in time. So he flittered down the stairs like a hen
in hysterics and got on his bike and tore up the Mile,
and vanished from sight, the Runner subs leaning out
from their window and betting on the odds that he’d meet
that inevitable lorry right now—it was an understood
thing that he’d die under a lorry some day, and be carted
home in a jam-pot.
Well, it seems that he reached the Station all right,
the lorries scattering to right and left and Piddle cycling
hell for leather, shooting through the taxi-ranks at the
Station and tumbling into the arms of a porter. And
the porter asked who he thought he was, Amy Mollison
doing a forced landing ? Piddle said He-he ! and dropped
his bike and ran like the wind for the Pictmun train, he
knew the platform for it fine, he’d to run half-way up
to the middle guard’s van.
Well, he rounded into No. 6 platform and gave a bit
of a scraich at the sight, the Pictman train already in
motion and pelting out of Duncairn toun. It was loaded
up with Edinburgh students, clowning and playing their
usual tricks, a bit fed up with their visit to Duncairn,
they’d been leaning out to shout things to the porters when
Mr. Piddle came hashing in sight, head thrust out like a
262
GREY GRANITE
cobra homing like hell to the jungle with a mongoose
close on his tail. And they gave a howl and started to
cheer, Mr. Piddle running like the wind by now to reach
the middle brake. The guard looked out and yelled
to him to stop, he’d never make it and do himself a
mischief. But the van was chockablock with students,
they pushed the guard aside, a half dozen of them, and
thrust out their hands, Piddle thought that fine, if only
he could get near enough to hand up the Pictman packet
to them. And at last, bursting his braces and a half-
dozen blood-vessels, or thereabouts, he got close in
touch—down came the hands, the students all yelled,
and next minute Piddle was plucked from the earth and
shot, packet and all, into the guard’s van. And then the
train vanished with a howl of triumph, an express that
didn’t stop till it got to Perth.
Chris sat and laughed, sorry for Mr. Piddle though
she was, poor little weasel howked off like that. Then
Kwan came in and heard the tale and laughed as well,
ringing and hearty, no boy’s laugh any longer, Neil
thought—far from that lad who’d once thought those
silly happenings to folk had little or nothing of humour
in them. Damned if one liked the change for all that,
a difficult young swine to patronize, growing broader
and buirdlier, outjutting chin and radiating lines around
the eyes—Quaritch knew the face on a score of heads,
he’d seen them on platforms, processions, police courts,
face of the typical Communist condottiere, cruel and
pig-headed and unreasonable brutes with their plan¬
ning of a bloody revolution to-morrow when Douglasism
GREY GRANITE 263
were it only applied and the maze of its arguments
straightened out would cure all the ills that there
were of our time : the only problem was distribution,
manufacture and function couldn t be bettered.
It was as though a great hand had battered, broad-
nieved, against the houses that packed Footforthie.
Windows shook and cracked, the houses quivered, out in
the streets folk startled looked up and saw the lift go
suddenly grey. Then, belly-twisting, the roar of the
explosion.
Folk tore from their houses and into the streets, pointed,
and there down by Gowans and Gloag’s in the afternoon
air was a pillar of fire sprouting a blossoming to the
sky, it changed as you looked and grew black and then
green, blue smoke fringe—Christ, what had happened ?
Next minute the crowd was on the run to the Docks,
some crying the fire had broke out in a ship, but you knew
that that was a lie. And John-Peter-Thomas-Neil-
Oh God, he was there, in Furnaces, Machines—it was and
it couldn't be Gowans and Gloag s.
Then, rounding into the Dockside way you found the
place grown black with folk, bobbies there already crying
to keep back, forward the left of the Works like a great
bulging blister, a corral of flame, men were runmng out
from Gowans clapping their hands to blackened faces, some
screaming and stitering over to the Docks to pitch them¬
selves in agony into the water. And as they did that the
blister burst in another explosion that pitched folk head-
264 GREY GRANITE
first down on the ground, right and left—Forward, against
the green pallor of the Docks, a rain of stone and iron
stanchions fell.
And out of the sunset, and suddenly, the lift covered
over with driving clouds.
The Tory Pictman got the news from Duncairn over
the telephone, clear-the-line, from Mr. Piddle he-heing!
like fun: all about the charred bodies, the explosion,
the women weeping, the riot that broke out against the
Gowans house up in Craigneuks when they windows were
bashed in by Reds. And the Pictman printed a leader
about it, full of dog Ratin and constipated English, but
of course not Scotch, it was over-genteel: and it said the
affair was very regrettable, like science and religion experi¬
ment had its martyrs for the noble cause of defending the
State. The treacherous conduct of extremists in ex¬
ploiting the natural grief of the Duncairn workers was
utterly to be deplored. No doubt the strictest of in¬
quiries would be held 
The Reverend Edward MacShilluck preached from his
pulpit next Sunday and said the catastrophe was the Hand
of Gawd, mysteriously at work, ahhhhhhhhhhhh, my
brethren, what if it was a direct chastisement of the proud
and terrible spirit of the times, the young turning from the
Kirk and its sacred message, from purity and chastity and
clean-living ? And Craigneuks thought it a bonny sermon,
and nearly clapped, it was so excited ; and the Reverend
MacShilluck went home to his lunch and fell asleep
GREY GRANITE 265
when he’d eaten it and woke with a nasty taste in his
mouth and went a little bit stroll up to Pootsy s room, and
opened the door and peeped in at her and shoggled his
mouth like a teething tiger 
Jim Trease said to Ewan they hadn't done so bad,
twenty new members had joined the local, damn neat
idea that of Ewan's to have the Gowans windows bashed
in. Ewan was to take Kirrieben for the week-end meet¬
ings, he himself Paldy and Selden Footforthie. And be
sure and rub in the blood and snot well and for God's
sake manage a decent collection, he’d be getting in a row
with the E.C. in Eondon, they were so far behind with the
Press contribution.
Eh ? Of course the Works had been well-protected,
that kind of accident would happen anywhere. But
Ewan had been right, that was hardly the point, he could
rub in if he liked that there had been culpable negligence.
. . . Eh, what was that ? Suggest it had all been de¬
liberately planned to see the effect of poison-gas on a
crowd ? Hell! Anyhow, Ewan could try it. But for
Christ's sake mind about the collection 
Alick Watson said in his barrack-room : See what’s
waiting us in the next war, chaps ? Skinned to death or
else toasted alive like a winkle in front of a fire, see ? And
the rookies said Christ, they all saw that, what was there to
be done about it ? And Alick said to organize and stick up
for their rights, would they back him to-day down in the mess
if he made a complaint about the mucking meat ? They
266
GREY GRANITE
could force they sods to feed them proper, no fear of that
if they'd stick together, no need to knuckle-down to the
bloody N.C.O.'s. And if a war came and the chaps in
the companies were well-organized : what the hell could
the officers do to them then ?
Norman Cruickshank lay in the hospital and didn’t
say a word, quiet and unmoving, half of his face had been
eaten away by the flame.
Jess would never see Bob again. She thought at his
graveside, decent in her black, Young Erchie’s been awful
kind to me. Maybe the furniture me and Bob’s bought
will do if he’s really serious, like.... But she mustn’t think
of that, even with her Trouble, poor Bob that had been
so kind and sensible even though he’d once mixed with
those dirt, the Reds 
Ellen Johns said, sick, it was horrible, horrible, but,
Ewan, you know that THA T was a lie. It was sickening of
you to suggest that they let loose the gas deliberately. . . .
Ewan, it’s just cheating, it’s not Communism !
Chris had said But, Ake, why are you leaving me ?
He’d tapped out his pipe by the side of the fire,
fust for what I’ve said, mistress : I want a change. So I’ve
ta’en on the job of ship’s carpenter, on the Vulture, bound
for Newfoundland. That’s all about it.
She’d said But it wasn’t all; what was this stuff
GREY GRANITE 267
about not coming back ? And at that the Ake Ogilvie
of Segget had awakened, a minute, as he told her why :
that he’d never had a minute since his marriage day when
he was a free and happy man, aye knowing how she looked
on him, thought of him—oh aye, she’d done her best,
he knew, it was just that the two of them never should
have wed, You were made for somebody different from me,
God knows who, neither me nor Colquohoun. But it s
been like hell, we just can't mix. Lass, do you think I
haven’t seen you shiver over things another woman would
laugh at or like ?
She’d said that that was just foolishness, she’d liked
him well and had aye done so. And he’d said she looked
bonny standing there, trying to be kind. It was more
than kindness he’d once hoped to get; and now they d
speak of the soss no more.
And he’d told her his plans, he was off in three days,
and he’d maybe write her, had he anything to write about,
when he got to Newfoundland or Canada. He thought
of crossing over Canada and taking a look at Saskatchewan,
plenty of work there for a joiner, he’d heard. Of what
money he made he’d let her have half.
Chris had said quiet she wouldn’t have that, if they
parted she’d no need to live off him, they parted for good
and all—if at all.
And Ake had nodded, Ay, that would be best.
So, watching from the doorway as he went this last
morning, she minded in pity and smiled at him, kind.
He hoisted the case on his shoulder and nodded, Well,
I’ll away. Ta-ta, mistress.
268
GREY GRANITE
Her heart was beating high in her breast and her
throat felt tight so that hardly she could speak : and all
that meant little enough, as she knew. If she tried even
now she could keep him by her—who would soon have
so few to fall back upon. But he wasn’t for her, she for
any man, they’d each to gang their own gait.
She’d finished with men or the need for them, no
more that gate might open in her heart, in her body and
her soul, in welcome and gladness to any man. Quick
and quick in the flying months she passed with hasting
feet over ways that once had seemed ever-lasting : the
need not only for a lover’s caresses, but the need for any¬
one’s liking, for care, kind words and safe eyes. . . . That
dreadful storm she’d once visioned stripping her bare was
all about her, and she feared it no longer, eager to be
naked, alone and unfriended, facing the last realities with
a cool, clear wonder, an unhasting desire. Barriers still,
but they fell one by one 
She stared from the doorway, standing still, motion¬
less, almost the last sight Ake saw, it twisted his heart
and then left it numb. Ay, a strange quean, yon. And
not for him. He’d thought that glimmer in her eyes a
fire that he himself could blow to a flame ; and instead
’twas no more than the shine of a stone.
Bwan at last had been fired from Stoddart’s he told
to Ellen as they drove from Duncairn in the little car
they’d hired for the week-end. Ellen had hired it and sat
aside now while Ewan took the wheel and a reckless
GREY GRANITE 269
road through the lorry traffic of Kirrieben in the whistling
spatter of December snow. She’d been deep in thought:
on the road, on herself, on the week-end that waited
them in that inn in Drumtochty. Now she started :
Oh Lord, what’ll you do now ?
He said he hadn’t the ghost of a notion, something or
other, and whistled to himself, dark and intent, growing
tall, still slim, with the mouth that was losing its lovely
curves, growing hard and narrow she suddenly thought.
dismissed that thought—he was just Bwan still.
And some time she’d tell him. But not to-night.
For a while Ewan drove without saying more. Topping
the Rise the storm had cleared, the snow no more than an
inch or so thick scarred with the passing of buses and
lorries, a lorry came clanging to meet them, chains on,
and once the little car caught on a slide and skidded and
galumphed a wiggling moment till Ewan’s hands switched
it into line again. Up here the full blow of the wind was
upon them ; behind, down in its hollow, Duncairn was a
pelting scurry of flakes, browny white as smoke rose to
snow and commingled and presently drew down a veil,
capped with darkness in the early sunset, over the whiten¬
ing miles of grey granite. Forward the country wavered
and shook, no solid lines as they held the road, a warm,
birring dot, tap-tap the hardened flakes on the shield.
Ellen snuggled up closer to Ewan and he reached out a
hand and gave her a pat and nodded thanks as she put
a cigarette between his lips. She lit it and then said
Goodness, we’re comfy. Wish we’d a car like this of our
own.
270
GREY GRANITE
He said he'd have to get Selden’s job for that:
and he doubted if it would be as easy next time ! She
asked what on earth he was talking about and he steered
through a drifting drove of cattle, head down to the storm,
drover behind, and didn't answer her for a moment.
Then he asked her hadn’t she heard the news ?—oh no,
she hadn’t been down to the Communist local for nearly
a couple of weeks, lazy thing. The point is that Selden’s
bunked with the funds.
—Selden ? With the funds of the Party ?
—Every cent, and there was a decent amount. I
thought it risky to have him treasurer, and so did Trease, but
he’d got in well with the E.C. in London. Cleared us out
to the very last copper.
She said the man was a beast, it was filthy ; but
Bwan had started his whistling again, hardly heeding her,
only the road and the car, he said Selden had shown a
lot of sense in waiting till the local had a spot of coin.
Been sick of unemployment and his wife wasn't well—
her that used to be Chris’s maid—remember ?
—You speak as though you might do the same.
He laughed at that, cheerfully, I’m a Communist.
And fell to his whistling again, but soberly. And when
he next spoke there was steel in his voice, the steel of a
cold, unimpassioned hate : I could tell long ago that Selden
would rat ; you can tell a rat easily among revolutionists
—yeasty sentiment and blah about fustice. They think
they’re in politics or a parlour game.
And what did he himself think it was ? But she didn't
ask, didn’t want to hear more, wanted to forget Dun-
GREY GRANITE 271
cairn and all in it and that dreadful paper they had made
her sign. And Ewan drove as though he owned the road
and all the Howe and half of December and had specially
arranged the storm effects, the storm coming rolling down
from the Mounth and pelting across the grey fields in wan
tides, now snow, now sleet, once, curling and foaming,
combers of hail. The shrouded farms cowered in by their
woods, here and there a ploughman wrapped to the ears
went whistling up to the end of a rig, the lapwings flying,
Lost; lost! their plaint above the wheel and fall of the
snow.
Ellen drowsed against Ewan’s sleeve, and woke and
looked out, they were past Auchinblae going down into
the Glen of Drumtochty, here no snow fell, far in the lift
Drumtochty rose with its firs going climbing to the racing
clouds. She said Remember that day there, Ewan ? and
told him to be careful, he’d nearly turned the car in a
ditch, kissing her, he laughed, he’d remembered as well,
something like a shadow went over his face, not from it,
and a moment she saw again the shamed hurt boy whom
she’d loved, still loved, deeper and madder and worse
than ever.
The landlady said God be here, they’d expected no
visitors on New Year’s Eve, but they both were welcome.
If they’d wait a while she’d stir up those sweir meikle
bitches the maids and see that a room was set in order.
Och, she minded the two of them fine back in May and
she’d known another thing though she’d never letten
on—that the two of them had been on their honeymoon.
Wasn’t that true ?
272
GREY GRANITE
Ellen said it was, but the landlady was looking at
Ewan, hardly heard, she said he’d take a bit dram with
her ?—and his good lady too, maybe ?
So they sat and had their dram, all three, and the
landlady and Ewan were at it in a minute, gossip that
somehow left Ellen out, though she didn’t know how,
she was just as interested in floods and storms and hens
and chickens and farm boys as Ewan was (and once a
lot more). But as always with the working people every¬
where, however she dreamed of justice for them, flamed
in anger against their wrongs, something like a wall of
glass came down cutting her off from their real beliefs,
the meanings in tones and intonation, the secret that made
them bearable as individuals. But Ewan had now the
soap-box trick of pretending to be all things to all kinds
of keelies— That was damn mean and wasn’t true,
there was no pretence, he WAS all things—sometimes,
frighteningly, it seemed to her that he was the keelies,
all of them, himself.
But they were served a warm supper ben in the parlour
and sat there thawing in front of a fire, resin-spitting,
curling bright amber flames up the wide lum, it whoomed
in the blasts of the storm driving night, hunted, down
through Drumtochty. Sometimes the whoom in the lum
would still, then roust and ring as though the storm going
by beat a great bell in the lowe of the lift. And Ellen
felt happy and content again, sleepy as a cat, a little bit
like one : and something a moment touched through
to Ewan, a hand from other days, other nights, queerly.
He said You're thinner, you were always slim, but plump
GREY GRANITE 273
in a way as well that time we climbed the Baymekin. She
shook her head, she was just the same, only horribly
sleepy, was he coming now ?
He went to the window and looked out at the storm,
solid in front of the inn it went by, speckled in the lights,
a great ghost army hastening east, marching in endless
line on line, silent and sure ; and he thought a minute
Our army's like that, the great lost legion, nothing to stop
it in heaven or hell; and that thought lit him up a little
moment till he closed it away in impatient contempt.
Bunk symbolism was a blunted tool.
So he said he’d look in at the bar a minute, and sent
Ellen to bed : looked a tired kid. When he got up the
stairs in a half-hour or so the house was shaking in every
gust, the candle-flame leaped as he opened the door,
Ellen lying in bed in silk nightie, pretty thing, drowsy,
she said Hurry, it’s cold.
But soon it wasn’t, the candle out, the lights from the
fire lay soft in the room, he said Warm now ? and she said
That was fun : remember the first time I said that ? And
she laid her head in the hollow of his arm sleeping the
New Year in.
The storm was over when they woke next day, break¬
fast ready and a tramp in the snow to follow, they climbed
to the top of Cairn o’ Mount, bare ragged and desolate
under the snow, no exaltation of the storm left; around
them, mist-draped, the jumble of hills. It seemed to
s
274 GREY GRANITE
Ellen the most desolate place that God ever made, and
she hated it.
But Ewan said one could think up here and sat on a
stone and filled his pipe, and dusted the stone clear of
snow : Sit down. I've something to ask you.
She sat down and cuddled up close to his shoulder
and said if the question was if she still loved him, the
answer was in the affirmative, worse luck. And did he
know he was, oh damnably thrilling ?
He said Listen, Ellen. About the Patty. Why
haven't you been to the meetings of late ?
She watched a puff of wind come over the snow, ruffling
it like an invisible snake, nearer and nearer, and caught
her breath, if it didn’t reach them—for a luck, a sign. . . .
It blew a white dust over her hands.
She said quietly as him Just because I can't, or I’d
lose my job.
He said Oh, and knocked out the pipe and filled it
again with the cheap tobacco, his suit was frayed and the
coat collar shiny, she saw, sitting away from him : funny
she had never noticed these things before. . . . What’s
happened, then ?
She laughed and caught his shoulder Ewan ! Don’t
use that tone to me ! EWAN !
His face was a stone, a stone-mason’s face, carved
in a sliver of cold grey granite. You might as well tell me.
Suddenly frightened she stared at him, and told him
she couldn’t do anything else. The Education Authority
had got to hear and had put the choice plainly enough.
She’d to sign a paper saying she’d take no more part in
GREY GRANITE 275
extremist activities and stop teaching the children—what
she’d been teaching them. Oh, Ewan, I couldn t help it!
—Does that mean you've left the Party as well as left
off attending its meetings ?
And then anger came on her : Yes, I’ve left the Party !
And it wasn’t only that. I’ve left because I’m sick of it,
full of cheats and liars, thieves even, look at Selden, there’s
not one a clean or a decent person except you and perhaps
Jim Trease. And I’ve left because I’m sick of being without
decent clothes, without the money I earn myself, pretty
things that are mine, that I’ve worked for. . . . Oh, Ewan$
you know they’re hopeless, these people—the keelies remember
you used to call them ?—hopeless and filthy ; if ever there’s
anything done for them it’ll be done from above, not by
losing oneself in them. . . . Oh, CAN’T you see ?
He nodded, not looking at her. And colour came
back into Ellen’s cheeks—oh, he was going to understand !
She leaned forward and told him all that she planned : he
would get away from ridiculous jobs, Mr. Quaritch had
promised to find him another. They could save up like
anything and get married in a year or so, have a dinky
little flat somewhere in Craigneuks. Even that car down
there at the inn—it had been hired with her money,
hadn’t it ? Well, they’d soon get one of their own, you
couldn’t have any fun without money. And it needn't
mean they must give up social work completely, there
was the Eabour Party 
He stood up then, dark and slim, still a boy, and brushed
her off carefully, and the snow from his knees : Go to
them then in your comfortable car—your Labour Party
GREY GRANITE
276
and your comfortable flat. But what are you doing out here
with me ? I can get a prostitute anywhere.
She sat still, bloodless, could only whisper : Ewan !
He stood looking at her coolly, not angered, called
her a filthy name, consideringly, the name a keelie gives
to a leering whore ; and turned and walked down the
hill from her sight.
The extremists were getting out of hand again said
the Daily Runner in a column and a half ; and Duncairn
was the centre of their sinister activities. There had been
several strange and unexplained phenomena in the blow¬
ing up of the new wing of Gowans and Gloag’s : and though
no definite charge might be laid at any door hadn’t there
been similar occurrences abroad inspired by the Asiatic
party of terrorism ? And what had followed within a
few months of the explosion ?—a soldier of the North
Highlanders arrested and court-martialled for circulat¬
ing seditious literature in the barrack-rooms—an ex¬
employee of Gowans and Gloag’s. He had been dealt
with with the severity appropriate to his case, but behind
the muddled notions of Private Watson what forces were
aiming at the forcible overthrow of Society and suborning
the loyalty of our troops ? It was true the soldiers had
no sooner become aware of the contents of the leaflets
than, with admirable promptitude, they had seized the
culprit and marched him off to the guard-room. The tales
of the barrack-room riots in his defence might be dis¬
counted as malicious gossip. . . .
GREY GRANITE 277
And here the sub-editor who wrote the leaders stopped
and scratched his head in some doubt and stared at the
Spring rain pelting Duncairn and streaming from the
gutters of the grey granite roofs. He wondered a moment
what had really happened when the furniture was smashed
in two barrack-rooms and five rounds issued to the
N.C.O.’s ? Better cut out that bit and keep bloody
vague. Something about the absolute and unswerving
loyalty of our Army and Navy throughout the hundreds
of years of their history ? What about Parker and the
Mutiny at the Nore ? Or, closer in memory, the Navy
at Invergorden ? Or the Highlanders in France ? . . .
Better miss it all out. Some blah about the bloody
hunger-march now 
. . . In civil affairs the same state of things, culminat¬
ing in the organizing of this hunger march down through
Scotland and England to Fondon. Hunger—there was
none anywhere in Duncairn. For their own ends ex¬
tremists were deluding the unemployed into the privations
of a march that would profit them nothing, a march
already disowned by official Fabour 
Bailie Brown said Ay, B’God that was right, the
Fabour Party would have nothing to do with it: if the
unemployed would wait another three years and put the
Fabour Party back in power, their troubles would all be
solved for them. But of course it was no class party,
Fabour : wasn’t it Fabour had instituted the Means
Test? It stood for a sound and strong government,
justice for all, peace and progress, sound economy and
278 GREY GRANITE
defence of our rights. . . . And hurrying to the
police court at ten o’clock he sentenced two keelies to two
months a-piece, for obstructing the police near the Labour
Exchange, and to show the low brutes what Reform would
be like 
The Reverend MacShilluck said straight from the
pulpit we could see the mind of Moscow again, deluding
our unemployed brothers, ahhhhhhhhhhhh, why didn't
the Government take a stern stand and put down these
activities of the anti-Christ ? The unemployed were fully
provided for and the Kirk was here to guide and to counsel.
Straitened means and times were the test-gauge of
God 
And he wondered what Pootsy would have for lunch ;
and finished the service and got into the car and drove
home, the streets shining white in the rain. And he let
himself into the Manse, rubbing his hands, and called
for the woman to come take his coat. But he heard no
reply, the place sounded empty ; and he couldn’t find
her ben in the kitchen or yet upstairs or yet in the sitting-
room. In the dining-room he came on his desk smashed
open and gaping, the Kirk fund gone, and where had the
silver gone from the sideboard ? But there in the middle
of the desk was a note : I've cleared off at last and taken
my wages—with a little hit extra as a kind of a tip for sticking
your dirty habits so long, fust try and prosecute and I’ll
show you up so you can’t show your face anywhere in Dun-
cairn-
GREY GRANITE 279
In Paldy Parish and the Gallowgate, in Kirrieben,
Ecclesgriegs and Gower Footforthie, folk stood and debated
with a bit of a laugh this hunger march that the Reds were
planning. And those that had jobs said Christ, look out,
they’re just leading you off to get broken heads, they don’t
care a damn for themselves or any other, the Communionists,
the sods aren’t canny. And those that hadn t jobs said
Maybe ay, maybe no. Who got the P.A.C. rates raised
if it wasn’t the Reds, tell us that ?
Not that you were a Red, Christ, no, you had more
sense, and you wouldn’t be found in this daft-like March,
you hadn’t the boots for it for one thing. And the wife
said Mind, fim ... or Sam ... or Rob . . . you re not
being taken in by this coarse March of the Reds, are you now ?
And you said to her Away to hell. Think I’ve gone gyte ? ;
and took a stroll out, all the Gallowgate dripping and
drooked, most folk indoors but chaps here and there
nipping in and out of the wynds and courts, what mucking
palaver was on with them now ?
Then, afore you could do a sneak back and miss him,
there was Big Jim Trease bearing down upon you, crying
your name, he’d been looking for you as one of the most
active and sure of the chaps. The March wouldn’t be a
march unless you were in it to stiffen the backbone of the
younger lads. And you said To hell, you hadn’t any
boots ; and he said that they’d be provided all right
and wrote your name down in a little book, and you saw
Will’s there and Geordie’s and Ian’s and even old Mal¬
colm’s—Christ, you could go if they were going;
and it was true what Big Jim said, you wanted a
28o
GREY GRANITE
pickle of the older men to put some guts in the younger
sods 
And in and out through the courts and wynds and
about the pubs all through that last week were Trease and
that mad young devil Kwan Tavendale, prigging with
folk and taking down names and raising the wind to
buy chaps boots. The bobbies kept trailing after them,
the sergeant called Feet and a couple of constables, who
the hell were they to interfere ? They’d never let up on
young Tavendale since he’d shown up the explosion at
Go wans and Gloag’s as the work of the Government
testing out gas to see its effect in a crowded shed. So you
guarded him and Trease in a bit of a bouroch, a bodyguard,
like, wherever they went, young Tavendale whistling
and joking about it, a clever young Bee—and Christ,
how he could fight! They said he was a devil with the
queans as well, though you hadn’t heard that he’d
bairned one yet.
Trease said the last afternoon to Ivwan that he’d
better get home and put in a bit sleep, he’d want it afore
setting out the morn to tackle the chave of the march
down south, the windy five hundred miles to Tondon.
Tucky young devil that he was to be going, Trease wished
it was him that was leading the March, but the E.C.
had given its instructions for Fwan and intended keeping
him down there in Tondon as a new organizer—right in
the thick. . . . And for God s sake take cave on the line
of march to keep the sods from straying or stealing or
28i
GREY GRANITE
raising up trouble through lying with queans, they d find the
Labour locals en route were forced to give them shelter
and help, never heed that, never heed that, rub it well
in through all the speeches that the workers had no hope
but the Communist Party.
Ewan said with a laugh that Jim needn’t worry, rape
Labour’s pouches, but not its wenches, he’d got that all
fixed ; well, so long, comrade. You'll lead us out with the
band to-morrow ? And Trease said he would, and then
So long, Ewan, and they shook hands, liking each other
well, nothing to each other, soldiers who met a moment
at night under the walls of a town yet unstormed.
The workmen from Murray’s Mart had come up and
bade in the house all the afternoon tirring the rooms of
their furniture. Chris had made the two men each a
cup of tea, they’d sat in the kitchen and drank it, fell
grateful: You’ll be moving to a smaller house, then, mistress ?
Chris said Yes, and leaving Duncairn, and the older man
gave his bit head a shake when he heard the place she
was moving to. He doubted she’d be gey lonely, like.
He was all for the toun himself, he was.
Now, in the early fall of the evening, Chris went from
room to room of the house, locking the doors and seeing
the windows were stubbed up against the beat of the wind.
The floors sent up a hollow echo to her tread, in Miss
Murgatroyd’s room a hanky lay in a corner, mislaid,
she'd be missing it the morn and maybe sending for it.
282 GREY GRANITE
She d said Kh me, she was Such Sorry that the place was
breaking up, but maybe for the best, maybe for the best,
she d be Awful Comfortable in her new place she was sure.
And would Mrs. Ogilvie take this as a Small Bit Present ?
And this for young Mr. Ivwan, if he’d have it ?—two
Awful Nice books about the ancient Scots, such powerful
they were in magic, Mr. Kwan had once read the books
and So I^iked them.
Chris closed that door and went ben the corridor,
to Archie Clearmont’s, and peeped in a minute ; he’d
flushed, standing in that doorway, trunk behind him :
/ say, I m damnably sorry to leave. Given you a lot of
trouble, often. I say—and flushed again, looking at her.
And Chris had known and smiled, known what he wanted,
and kissed him, and watched him go striding away,
and thought, kind, Nice boy ; and forgotten him.
Nothing in here, nor in Mr. Quaritch’s, except the
pale patches along the walls where his books had rested,
still the fug of his pipe. He’d said You were never meant
for this, anyhow. Mind if I ask : Is your husband coming
back ? Chris had shaken her head and said No, they had
separated, Ake was settling in Saskatchewan. And
Neil had fidgeted and then proposed, she could get a
divorce, he had some money saved, get a decent house
and he wouldn t much bother her. When she shook her
head he gave a sigh .’ Well, luck go with you if you're not
for me.
Mr. Piddle hadn’t bidden good-bye at all, he’d brought
a cab and loaded in his goods, and gone cycling off in the
rear of it, head down, neck out, without a He-he ! And,
GREY GRANITE 283
queer, that had hurt Chris a bit she found that the
funny thing couldn’t have said good-bye. The cracked
pane in his window was winking in the light from the
lamps new-lit outside as she looked round his room ,
then closed it and locked it. That was the lot. Oh no,
there was one.
So she climbed up the stairs and stood in that, the
room above her own, next to Kwan s, half-dark and quite
empty but for its shadows. It had had no lodger a
three months now, Kllen Johns herself had never come
back from that week-end she’d gone away with Ewan :
Ewan himself had come back mud-splashed as though
he’d been walking the roads like a tink. And then
next day a messenger had come with a little note, asking
Mrs. Ogilvie if she’d pack Ellen’s things, Ellen was too
busy to come herself and here was a week’s pay in place
of notice. And she hoped Mrs. Ogilvie would be awfully
happy. . . .
Chris had ceased wondering on that long ago ; but
now, going down to the kitchen where Ewan sat and the
fire was whooming and the supper near ready, she minded
it as in an ancient dream. As she closed the door Ewan
looked up, he’d been deep for hours in papers and lists,
marking off items of marching equipment, addresses,
routes, notes for speeches : Chris had looked over his
shoulder earlier and seen the stuff and left him a-be.
But now, with that distant stare upon her, she asked if
he’d ever seen Ellen since then ?
He said Seen whom ? and looked blank, and then shook
his head. Not a glimpse. Why ?
284 GREY GRANITE
Chris said Oh nothing, she’d just wondered about her ;
and Kwan nodded, forgetting them both, finishing his
lists while she laid the supper, the house unquiet without
furnishing, filled with rustlings and little draughts.
Then she called Kwan to supper and they ate in silence,
night without close down on Duncairn.
He said suddenly and queerly The Last Supper,
Chris. Will you manage all right where you're going ?
She said that he need have no fear of that, she was
going to what she wanted, the same as he was going.
And they smiled at each other, both resolute and cool,
and Chris cleared the table and re-stoked the fire and
they sat either side and watched the fire-lowe and heard
the spleiter of the wet on the panes. And Ewan sat
with his jaw in his hand, the briskness dropped from him,
the hard young keelie with the iron jaw softening a
moment to a moments memory : Do you mind Segget
Manse and the lawn in Spring ?
Chris said that she minded, and smiled upon him,
^ P^yj seeing a moment how it shook him, she herself
beyond such quavers ever again. But his thoughts had
gone back to other things in Segget: that day that Robert
had died in the kirk—did Chris mind the creed he’d bade
men seek out, a creed as clear and sharp as a knife ?
He d never thought till this minute that that was what
he himself had found—in a way, he supposed, Robert
wouldn’t have acknowledged, a sentimentalist and a
softie, though a decent sort, Robert.
Chris stirred the fire, looking into it, hearing the Spring
wind rising over Duncairn, unending Spring, unending
GREY GRANITE 285
Spring ! . .. . Rain to-morrow, Bwan said from the window,
rotten for the march, but they’d got those boots. Then
he came and sat down and looked at her, and asked her,
teasing, of what she was dreaming. She said Of Robert
and this faith of yours. The world's sought faiths for
thousands of years and found only death or unease in them.
Yours is just another dark cloud to me—or a great rock
you're trying to push up a hill.
He said it was the rock was pushing him ; and sat
dreaming again, who had called Robert dreamer . only
for a moment, on the edge of to-morrow, all those
to-morrows that awaited his feet by years and tracks
Chris would never see, dropping the jargons and shields
of his creed, thinking again as once when a boy, openly
and honestly, kindly and wise :
There will always be you and I, I think, Mother. It s
the old fight that maybe will never have a finish, whatever the
names we give to it—the fight in the end between FREEDOM
and GOD.
The night was coming in fast Chris saw from her
seat on the summit of the Barmekin. Far over, right of
Bennachie’s ridges, a gathering of gold cloud gleamed a
moment then dulled to dun red. The last of the light
would be going soon.
Alow her feet, under the hills, she could see the
hiddle of Cairndhu, all settled for the night as she’d left
286
GREY GRANITE
it, the two kye milked and the chickens meated, her corn
coming fine in the little park that ran up the hill, its
green a jade blur in the soft summer light. To¬
morrow she d be out to tackle the turnips, they were
coming up fairly choked with weed.
At first they’d been doubtful about letting her the
place, doubtful of a woman body at all. But they’d
long forgotten her father, John Guthrie, and the ill
ta’en in which he had flitted from Edit twenty-three
years before. To them she was just a widow-body,
Ogilvie, wanting to take on the coarse little place that
hadn’t had a tenant this many a year. She'd moved
in early in the April, setting the house to rights, working
till she near bared her hands to the bone, scrubbing it
out both but and ben, the room where she herself had
been born, the kitchen where she’d sat and heard her
mother, long syne, that night the twins were born.
And sometimes in the middle of that work in the house
or tinkling a hoe out in the parks she’d close her eyes a
daft minute and think nothing indeed of it all had hap¬
pened Kinraddie, Segget, the years in Duncairn—that
beside her Will her brother was bending to weed, her
father coming striding peak-faced from the house,* she
might turn and see her mother’s face. . . . And she'd
open her eyes and see only the land, enduring, encom¬
passing, the summer hills gurling in summer heat, un¬
ceasing the wail of the peesies far off.
And the folk around helped, were kind in their way,
careless of her, she would meet them and see them by
this road and gate, they knew little of her, she less of
GREY GRANITE 287
them, she had found the last road she wanted and taken
it, concerning none and concerned with none. . . .
Crowned with mists, Bennachie was walking into the
night: and Chris moved and sat with her knees hand-
clasped, looking far on that world across the plain and
the day that did not die there but went east, on and on,
over all the world till the morning came, the unending
morning somewhere on the world. No twilight land
anywhere for shade, sun or night the portion of all, her
little shelter in Cairndhu a dream of no-life that could not
endure. And that was the best deliverance of all, as
she saw it now, sitting here quiet—that that Change who
ruled the earth and the sky and the waters underneath
the earth, Change whose face she’d once feared to see,
whose right hand was Death and whose left hand Dife,
might be stayed by none of the dreams of men, love, hate,
compassion, anger or pity, gods or devils or wild crying
to the sky. He passed and repassed in the ways of the
wind, Deliverer, Destroyer and Friend in one.
Over in the Hille of Fare, new-timbered, a little belt
of rain was falling, a thin screen that blinded the going
of the light; behind, as she turned, she saw Skene Loch
glimmer and glow a burnished minute; then the rain
caught it and swept it from sight and a little wind soughed
up the Barmekin. And now behind wind and rain came
the darkness.
Lights had sprung up far in the hills, in little touns
for a sunset minute while the folk tirred and went off to
their beds, miles away, thin peeks in the summer dark.
Time she went home herself.
288
GREY GRANITE
But she still sat on as one by one the lights went out
and the rain came, beating the stones about her, and
falling all that night while she still sat there, presently
feeling no longer the touch of the rain or hearing the sound
of the lapwings going by.
THE END OF A SCOTS QUAIR
MIG6i
DAUMOAK
FifViSbi
>0ATi»grMeA—7
CHA^6}>y7
•UftA/s'
(Kv/coLtcr
OUNOrr Alt,
CHAIN Tort
ocnewet^?^
TAireAu/vi
KlNN*PfJ
fl£NHOLjA£
Tjohnsmaven
>TS QUAIR^
ABERDEE»V<
\/ <c J 6>v
^ V o
^»'?nSTONEHAVGN
>0«TH 65A
aMBK==BHBK
