^ ll+S.
National Library of Scotland
lllllllllllll
*8000393383*
PERSIAN DAWNS, EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
MR. J. LESLIE MITCHELL
has also ivritten
HANNO, OR THE FUTURE OF EXPLORATION,
an essay in prophecy
ANCIENT AMERICA, an Outline of Pre-Columbian
history
and Jive novels
STAINED RADIANCE, a Fictionist’s Prelude
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE, Being Portrait and
Saga of Malcom Maudslay
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO {Introduced by H. G. Wells
and Leonard Huxley)
THREE GO BACK
THE LOST TRUMPET
If
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
PERSIAN DAWNS,
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
With a Foreword by
J. D. BERESFORD
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34 Paternoster Row E.C.<[
y
MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
The Mayflower Press, Plymouth. William Brendon & Son, Ltd.
TO
H. G. WELLS
7
These two story-cycles have appeared in the Comhill Magazine.
To its Editor more than the usual acknowledgments are due.
J. L. M.
3
GOOD WINE
A Foreword by J. D. Beresford
LIKE many old proverbs, that which says
j ‘ Good wine needs no bush ’ has little appli¬
cation to modern needs. There was a time when
connoisseurs knew where to find the right stuff, to
read or to drink. In the case of literature they
might be mistaken in their taste, since among
experts you may trust a judge of wine but not
always a judge of poetry. But those were the days
in which the world could maintain its population
in ease and security; in which a man went to his
inn to find good company and not to forget his
condition, in which books were treasures to keep
and re-read and not a mere diversion in idleness.
Moreover, and more appositely in this connection,
the recommendation of quality was then sufficient
to advertise the wares of the producer, whether they
were wine or books. Books were as few as good
wine was rare, and a local reputation would provide
for an author’s necessities—with the help of his
patron.
In the world of to-day, the General Reader to
whom an author looks for his living has no con-
noisseurship and before he makes his dip into the
turbulent spate of fiction flowing in perpetual flood
through the circulating libraries, the recommenda¬
tion of quality must be vouched for by someone
whom he regards as a competent authority. And
if this General Reader is not a member of the Book
Society, to whom shall he look for guidance ?
9
IO
GOOD W'INE
Reviewer, publisher, library assistant, friend ? Fal¬
lible authorities, all these, as he knows to his cost.
Which of them, for instance, will recommend
the works of J. Leslie Mitchell ? The publisher,
of course, but you cannot trust a publisher’s
advertisements of his own wares, however honest
the author of them may be. The friend is probably
as unenlightened as the enquirer, since the friend
of the G.R. is himself a G.R., and the difference of
odds in favour of Mr. Mitchell’s being selected
increases only from about a million to one to a
million to two. And I refuse to say a single word
about the Reviewer or the Library Assistant.
Wherefore those who have some kind of belief
in their own taste in literature come forward now
and again to introduce an author whose work has
tickled their educated palates. H. G. Wells and
Leonard Huxley, for example, are my predecessors
in answering for Leslie Mitchell’s quality, both of
them having put their names to a testimonial of his
abilities in an earlier volume of his stories entitled
T/je Calends of Cairo. Nevertheless, it was not
through their recommendation nor through that of
any one of the four other authorities cited above that
I discovered him. It was, indeed, merely good
luck—mine, not his—that sent me his novel The
Thirteenth Disciple, and I am exceedingly grateful to
the great god Chance—now being backed by the
physicists for a high seat on Olympus—for sending
me a book by a young writer who had something /
to say and knew how to say it.
GOOD WINE
ii
But I do not propose to spend myself in collecting
appreciative adjectives about the stories in this
volume. When you, my dear G.R., Reviewer, or
Library Assistant, have got so far as this, you will
have my authority for going much further. I, in
better company, have hung up a bush before Leslie
Mitchell’s door to apprise you that within may be
found good cheer and a sound wine. Savour it
well; and if you do not agree with me, blame your
own lack of taste, which will probably be due to
a tired palate.
CONTENTS
PERSIAN DAWNS
CHAPTER
I. The Lost Constituent
II. The Lovers
III. The Floods of Spring
IV. The Last Ogre
V. Cartaphilus
VI. Dawn in Alarlu
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
UAllegro
I. Amber in Cold Sea
ll Penseroso
II. Revolt
U Allegro
III. Camelia Comes to Cairo
II Penseroso
IV. Dienekes’ Dream
U Allegro
V. Siwa Plays the Game
II Penseroso
VI. The Children of Ceres
PERSIAN DAWNS
I
THE LOST CONSTITUENT
MIRZA MALIK BERKHU was bom in the
hut of a Nestorian silversmith of Mu’adhan
in the year of Our Lord 1200. Ten years after his
birth he was sold as a slave to the Janissaries
Regiment of the Pultow . . .
This is no tale of mine, you understand, but one
transcribed and edited from the wordy chronicles
of Neesan Nerses, sometime Nestorian Bishop of a
long-vanished diocese in the Persian hills north of
bar-i-Mil. It is one of the earliest and shortest of
his tales those fabulous pseudo-histories leavened
with ingenuous moralisings little to modern taste
or the point generally. Living in an unliterary
century—he began writing about the year 1245 in
the Gregorian calendar, though twelve years earlier
according to his Julian reckoning—he had no com¬
petitors to fear, and in his darkness of medieval
ignorance knew nothing of the vivid phrase or the
startling opening. No living reader but would skip
the first three thousand words and fifty years of
narrative to reach Baghdad of the year ad 1250
on a morning of the second date-harvest.
cit7 colourful enough that morning, as the
Bishop paints it: banner-hung, crowded and pros-
Wltk its siieen °f lacquered minarets and
gilded towers its Tigris a rippling scimitar in the
sunlight. Half the palace guards had ridden out
B 17
PERSIAN DAWNS
an hour before sunrise to bring the conqueror in
from his camp beyond the Western Gate. They
had ridden out, stout young men who had never
known war, with much beating of drums and clang¬
ing of gongs, to the amusement of an irrevemnt
populace already thronging the streets The
shouted advice and aspersions of the Baghdadese
the Bishop records with unclerical zest, but the
passage is best left untranslated, especially as it
delays both the action of the story and the passage
of the sleek and sulky guards. Men with gievances,
the guards. They had ceased to count. They were
out of favour, forsooth, because that unquiet fool
Mirza Berkhu was returning from one ot his
wearisome victories.
Their private thoughts they appear to have kept
to themselves, however, the while their captain
spoke a long address of welcome to Berkhu at t e
head of his dusty and saturnine troops. Berkhu
himself greeted the address with a sardonic grin.
In chain-armour, six feet in height, mounted on
a black Arab, his nose under the peak of his Chris¬
tian hat looking more beaked and aggressive than
ever, he rode beside the captain under the archway
of the Western Gate. And there indeed he halt-
halted.
‘ What’s this smell ? ’
The guards’ captain smiled sourly. Roses, he
Sill cl
Rose-scent it was. The Baghdadese had sur¬
passed themselves in preparation for the return o
THE LOST CONSTITUENT 19
their hero. They had had camel-trains of roses
brought from the surrounding suburbs, and with
great blossoms, white, yellow, red, had hung River
Street in scented curtains. Berkhu was almost
startled, though he recovered quickly enough, and
thereafter for nearly an hour rode forward between
parallel banks of screamed approbation and shower-
ing favours, till his horse and armour were
smothered with roses. Once he glanced up towards
the gleaming heights of the Citadel—the palace
where, as boy-slave to an entire regiment, he had
been lucky to steal as much as three hours’ sleep a
night. . . . But God ! how he had slept! Never
such sleep as then !
Black faces, brown faces, small wizened yellow
faces, even—those last the faces of little Hun traders
*r°rj~ ;l:elno^:e north. So, amidst a kingdom of
uplifted faces, rode Mirza Malik Berkhu, First
General of the Caliphate, a Minister of the Divan,
a poet, a heretic, and a notorious lover and wine-
bibber. Fresh from the slaughter of raiders on the
borders of Turkestan he came, and at either saddle-
horn dripped a dozen severed heads: heads of
hideous raiders whose kin would yet very terribly
avenge them. But of that Berkhu suspected
nothing. Nor would he have cared greatly had he
done so. J
Hideous heads. They might give thanks to God
they were freed from the necessity of embarrassing
their owners. Dead. They who had been quick
now very slow. What had happened to them ?
20 PERSIAN DAWNS
And, staring down at the trunkless dead, for the
first time in his life he found himself thinking of life.
He had been too busy living ever to think of it
before. Living—since those days as the slave-boy
in Citadel. . . . Weariness and sleep, thirst and
satiety, dust and boredom—unceasingly, unendingly.
Life ; his life. All life ? Nothing else in it ? Or
had he mislaid some ingredient that might have
transformed the whole to a thing like like a bugle-
cry in a camp at morning ?
Sound without earache? ...
So, the bored General in fantastic speculation, he
rides through the streets of Baghdad and the lengthy
prosings of Neesan Nerses, who arrogates to him¬
self considerable knowledge of the happenings
inside Berkhu’s head, and approves them not at all.
They were, one gathers, wrong-headed.
The palace gates : Fanfare of trumpets, the carpet
of state, dismounted procession. And there, within
the great rooms, remote in that building like a worm
remote in the woodwork of a cabinet, says Nerses,
Berkhu came into the presence of the Caliph. A
little, dried-up man, white-faced, the Caliph, and as
Berkhu prostrated himself with clash of chain-
armour he sat a long while considering his general.
And Berkhu knew himself very near to death, and
grinned sardonically in his beard, considering the
floor under his nose. He had become too popular
and well-loved in Baghdad. Besides, the mullahs
had been at their work against the heretic.
Presently the Worm-King spoke, and at his words
THE LOST CONSTITUENT 21
guards and pages, saints and sinners, dwarfs and
diviners who enlivened the lighter hours of Muham-
rnud s successor, withdrew. Then Berkhu heard
himself addressed.
‘ Rise, General.’
So they faced each other. The Caliph was blunt.
‘ I had no need of this victory or campaign. The
populace forced it on me. Nor have I any need of
you. So you do not return to your army.’
Berkhu laughed. It was characteristic of him,
this unseemly levity, says Nerses. ‘ Not even my
head ? ’
Now those two had once been friends—long
before, in the days when a gallop across the sands
and the strife of spears was like wine in the mouths
of their youth. And they peered at each other in
that dusk and scented room, and the Caliph sighed.
‘ O Malik, we’ve come far, you and I, since those
morning rides to Baqubah. What have they given
you, all those years that have passed since then ? ’
/ Fools to fight and much weariness to endure,’
said the heretic General, and also was blunt. ‘ But
not so much as they have given you.’
The dried-up little man who ruled Islam nodded.
‘ That is true. Now the weary should rest. For
me there is none, but for you ’
And again he considered him, and Berkhu
thought amusedly of the dripping heads waiting
outside on his saddle-bow. But that memory of
the Baqubah rides had disturbed the Caliph’s
intention.
22
PERSIAN DAWNS
* You will retire to your palace and garden on
Tigris-bank. There you will remain until I give
you leave to come forth.’
Thus the little Worm-King, looking in Berkhu’s
mocking eyes. Then the General made another
prostration, rose, and passed from that room—-
passed, indeed, from all the colourful life of Bagh¬
dad, and for ten long years, in macabre pursuit of
life’s own secret, was remote from it as the dead.
ii
But that pursuit began not at once. The first few
months of exile merely accentuated his boredom—
though Nerses gives it a more theological name—
to an agony almost unendurable. Wearied though
he had been of camp and field, his army and com¬
mand, never had he known such weariness as that
endured, day on day, in the great blue-painted
rooms of the Tigris-bank palace. They were set
with gilded screens of fine mushrabiyeh work, those
rooms, hung with Persian cloths, their floors
mosaic’d by the cunning hands of Shiraz workmen.
In one of them multitudes of chryselephantine
statuettes, idols of pagan gods and spoil of a raid
on raiders of the Hindu Tiger King, stood to peer
unholily from floriated niche and lacquered pedestal
upon the flowing of the Tigris. Fountains sprayed
in the inner courts—fountains in eternal cannonade
of besieging legions of lilies through the early
summer and of roses and mimosa in the intenser
THE LOST CONSTITUENT 23
heats. The garden-scents haunted Berkhu even in
the remotest cellars to which he betook himself.
But he also wearied of wine very quickly. He
wearied of the innumerable palace women, their
squabblings and their lusts. In his library, unrolling
from their scrolled silver cylinders the tales and
romaunts of Arab imagination, he found no sur¬
cease. Rest from himself—there was none. What
rest indeed had any man ever found from himself
except in the blind restlessness of youth ?
So for three months, while in Baghdad the in¬
dignation and curiosity over his dismissal began to
die out. Within six months, his army dispersed
to the limits of Iraq, he was forgotten as hero and
conqueror. Over-clouding that once burnished
reputation arose another.
The heretic General was engaged in sorcery.
in
It was a common enough pursuit in that age and
country and the word covered a multitude of dark¬
some activities. What led Berkhu into his quest
of the life-essence Bishop Nerses—who at this
point mysteriously abandons the narrative and
involves himself in an entirely irrelevant denuncia¬
tion of the Latin Rite—only hints at in a belated
and hurried aside. It was a devil-inspired memory
of the dripping heads that had hung from his saddle¬
bow and the aching speculations they had
aroused.
24
PERSIAN DAWNS
Life, this burden and weariness of days and years
—yet if a man could re-live it deliberately might he
not search out some secret certainty and splendour
to light the years as with a torch ? If youth came
twice . . .
Slowly the hope kindled. At first his studies
were little more than an amusement—a bored
amusement. He had a great Riverwards room
sealed to his own exclusive use, and there immersed
himself in such Satanic literature as was then
available; and might never have passed beyond
such harmless whiling away of time but for the
fact that a Greek slave from Istambul, newly come
into his possession, discovered himself a chemist of
some little note and considerable pretension.
Instantly he was impressed into the service of
Berkhu’s private room, absolved from all other
duties, and promised his freedom when, by creation
or rejuvenation, they had run to earth the life-
formula.
Abiogenesis was as favourite a dream of the
pseudo-savant of that time as it is of his successor
of this. The Greek’s private opinions are not
recorded. Probably they were highly sceptical.
Nevertheless, he taught to Berkhu all he knew, and,
having been wrung dry, found himself relegated
to the position of sweeper-up and bottle-washer
the while his amazing pupil went on into mysteries
the Greek had never essayed—not even with the
aid of the still-unproven algebra.
Days swept seaward on the southern flow of the
THE LOST CONSTITUENT 25
Tigris, according to the poetical but unastronomical
bishop. Weeks followed them into months, into
years, and remote, unapproachable in his palace¬
wing, Mirza Malik Berkhu, once the first soldier of
Islam, still climbed and adventured unceasingly
amidst the ghoul-haunted slopes of sorcery.
What he had begun as an amusement, a relaxa¬
tion, had become an obsession—a fact which tempts
Nerses into a lengthy disquisition, unnecessarily
Freudian, on the psychology of the Devil. The
quest of youth, the life-essence, the life-formula
had beckoned him through experiment after ex¬
periment. Gradually the immense treasure accumu¬
lated during forty years of campaigning was largely
dissipated, though the Tigris-bank palace continued
to house some hundred women, guards, slaves, and
parasites unclassifiable. The Greek assistant had
died and his place been taken in rotation by
innumerable others, drawn to Baghdad by rumour
of fabulous reward. One by one they had been
tested, found wanting, and dismissed—renegade
mullahs, shamans from the far North, even, accord¬
ing to Nerses, Buddhist priests from remote Thibet.
Their promises and formula; wilted under perform¬
ance, for, however otherwise changed, Berkhu
remained disconcertingly practical even in his
sorcery.
He had had an immense furnace installed in the
room of the chryselephantine statuettes—heat being
a natural corollary of hellish studies, according to
his chronicler and appears to have gathered
26
PERSIAN DAWNS
together a laboratory equipment of tanks and test-
tubes and coolers extraordinary enough for his
day. He had progressed from his first crude experi-
mentings with the bones and blood of this, that
and the next animal to the attempting of more
complex syntheses. The furnace would whoom, the
retorts bubble reddishly, and the sorcerer and his
assistant of the moment pore over charts and
diagrams the while some new concoction—the
brain of a slave, the poison-sac of a cobra, poppy-
essence, mandragora—seethed to an odoriferous
spume. Then would come the testing of its efficacy :
Berkhu had strong belief in testing the results on
his assistants, and the emetics of the time, much
in demand after each test, were crude and forcible.
It was seldom an assistant stayed for a second
experiment.
But Berkhu went on undiscouraged, through list
after list of unhygienic recipes, the mildest ingre¬
dients of which seem to have been the livers of
wolves and the hearts of bats. Until that phase
passed also. The ingredients fined down. The
sorcerer General was on the track of the simple,
elemental things, amazed that he should have
neglected them.
He had great bouquets of flowers brought to
him for dissection. The laboratory was turned
into a hothouse for the forcing and observation
of innumerable seeds which sprang overnight,
strangely manured, into sudden plants. And these,
in turn, were culled and ground and pounded into
THE LOST CONSTITUENT
27
nauseous mixtures which sometimes maddened and
sometimes slew. . . . And still the secret eluded him.
Yet, looking back over his experiments, a strange
conviction grew upon him. Again and again, by a
score of different routes, he had neared success in
manufacture of the life-essence—but for the dis¬
covery of a single constituent. Mysterious, un¬
named, unsegregated, this lost ingredient slipped
betwixt the bars of formulas and tests. Again and
again . . .
In research a forerunner of the moderns, he
abandoned his furnace. He had a new laboratory
built on the roof of his palace. There, in the blaze
of the sun, great crystals were erected to concen¬
trate light into pools of wine and water and oil and
liquids unnamable. Sometimes the wavering
gleams from the palace roof would scare the strayed
stranger in Baghdad’s streets at night, the while
Berkhu experimented with the radiance of the full
moon.
And still the secret eluded him.
And outside Baghdad advanced the Mongols.
IV
But Berkhu was deeper in the devil’s toils than
ever, says Nerses. He cared nothing for Mongols,
but only for his search. A long-forgotten figure
began to appear in the streets of Baghdad, to wander
the heat and dust and din of the daytime bazaars, the
soqs of the cameliers who came from the Gulf of
28
PERSIAN DAWNS
Ormuz with pearls and sandalwood and outrageous
travellers’ tales, the quarters of the Persian poets,
the kennels of the Somali dervish-troupes. At
night the drowsy mullah would start at sight of that
wanderer on the floor of his mosque, some ghaffir
shrink into his doorway at sight of that beaked,
thin nose and sardonic, searching eyes. The heretic
General had abandoned his palace roof and gone
out into the world in quest of the lost constituent.
If neither in blood nor bones, drugs nor scents
nor sunshine lay the secret towards which he
had struggled by so many roads, might not. the
ultimate bridge to it, this last evanescent ingredient,
abide in some creed or phrase or stanza, all unwitting
its own power ?
But neither in fable nor fantasy, incantation nor
dogma, the droning of the mullahs or the screamed
revelations of epileptic dervishes could he find a
clue. Nor by purchase of Christian scripts and long
poring over the forgotten creed of his childhood
did he find it. For, as Nerses sententiously points
out, he sought not life eternal but youth on earth.
His was the quest not of the humble heart but the
golden grain—to recapture the years of the slave-
boy in Citadel and with that as beginning upbuild
a life full, perfect, unhaunted by a mysterious weari¬
ness and frustration.
And then a dreadful fear came on him and all one
night he tramped the palace roof-spaces in agony—
albeit a questioning, sardonic agony still. How if
the lost constituents of the life-essence he sought
THE LOST CONSTITUENT 29
and the life he had lived were the same ? He
himself—perhaps it was he who was at fault. . . .
He fell to a night-long examination of himself,
under the circling stars, with far lights twinkling
meaninglessly on the Persian hills and once or twice
vexing him from his inquisition. What did he
himself lack that the life-essence eluded him ? Ex¬
cept youth, he had everything : Courage, strength,
passion, ardour even yet, wit, fantasy, invention.
Love he had known, hate he had known, fear,
exaltation, hope. . . . Everything. What dream
or desire in the minds of men had not been his ?
Women ?
Next morning he abandoned his hermit-existence.
He emerged into the life of the palace again—a
procedure which struck the palace with the amaze¬
ment due to a divine advent—had his principal
wife garrotted, the rooms cleansed of her lovers and
favourites. Then, in this last pursuit of the lost
constituent, he indulged in such debauch as the
palace had never known even in its heyday. He
clad himself in fine robes again, feasted on delicate
foods and wines, and sent out his steward to the
slave-market to purchase women. There was less
selection than of old, but they brought him gorgeous
creatures still—white Circassians, damask-skinned
Persians, dusky and sly and spirited women of the
mountains. And in their arms, in wine and laughter
and song Berkhu still searched unavailingly for the
golden grain.
And the Mongols drew ever nearer.
3°
PERSIAN DAWNS
v
They were battering at the gates. They brought
up great Chinese bombards and hurled jagged
rocks into the city. Their battering-rams clove in
the Western Gate and they poured in and swept
the Janissaries back. Then the Worm-King,
roused from his half-life in the Citadel, fled across
the Tigris and across the desert. Mutinous, dis¬
ordered, the Janissaries made but a half-hearted
defence against the attacks of the yellow plainsmen.
Then, in that hour of desperation, says Nerses, the
populace remembered one who would surely save
them, one who had been the Lion of Iraq, greatest
of generals.
Their shouting filled the streets below his palace
and he awoke from a long meditation and went to
the wall-parapet and looked down. At that the
shouts redoubled. ‘ Berkhu! Berkhu! The
Mongols—save us !y
And Nerses tells that they swarmed into the
palace, kneeling in desperation and entreating him,
and slowly, coming out of his dream, he listened
and understood.
‘ The Mongols at the gates ! God, why was I not
told ? Go back, you scum, go back and hold them.
I’ll follow ! ’
He drove them from the palace, all except a young
captain of Janissaries who stayed to guide him.
Then he turned and shouted for his attendants.
But the palace had emptied overnight. Men and
THE LOST CONSTITUENT 31
women, lovers, lackeys and favourites, they had
fled across the Tigris in the wake of the Worm-King.
All except one old woman, toothless and bent. She
heard his shouting and came, bringing him food
and clothes and armour. The Janissaries, captain
had vanished down a corridor to watch from a
window the swarming tumult by the Western Gate.
And as Berkhu buckled on his chain-mail with the
help of shrivelled hands his heart rose high and
singing within him. He glanced at the face of the
woman and dimly, hurriedly, tried to remember that
aged, rheumy face.
‘ I do not remember you,’ he said, snatching the
scimitar from her hand.
She raised her head and looked at him, and,
strangely halted, he stared back.
He remembered her then. He had thought her
long dead. She was a Caucasian slave, the first
woman he had ever possessed. . . . Years before
in the dawn of time. How she had hated him, how
loved ! That he recalled, and himself of those days,
and suddenly, says Nerses, some sealed and secret
chamber seemed to crumble within his heart.
‘ Do you remember those years, Saith ? I—’ he
heard himself, an unwonted liar, with amazement 
have forgotten them never, nor all the wonder
you gave me then ’
The Janissaries’ captain was at his elbow. ‘ My
lord, my lord, the defence is broken again ! ’
Half-blinded with a strange emotion, the old
General found himself with the young man at the
PERSIAN DAWNS
32
palace gate. There he had sudden thought and
gripped the Janissary’s arm. ‘ See to her—that old
woman who tended me.’
The Janissaries’ captain stared. ‘ What old
woman ? It was some young maid I
Then the tumult of the street-fighting came up
towards them, and Berkhu rode towards it, wonder¬
ing, and took command of the flying Janissaries,
and hurled the Mongols back. But behind, at three
different points, their horns were blowing and the
fires rising. Twice was the Western Gate cleared
only to glut again with the ingress of fresh hordes,
and Berkhu knew that he and the city were doomed.
He drew his cavalry together and charged once
more, still brooding, and then, says Nerses, in that
final melee some realisation seemed to come upon
him. He half-wheeled round, the old Lion of the
River, back towards his palace, as though some
secret amazing were revealed to him at long last.
He shouted incomprehensible words.
4 O God, the lost constituent! ’
And then the charge of the invaders swept over
him, and the Mongols slew him and planted his
head on the Western Gate. And they took Baghdad
and slaughtered therein for many days.
II
THE LOVERS
OF all the voluminous chronicles of Neesan
Nerses which lie still unedited and untran-
scnbed in the archives of the Monastery of Mevr
one caught my attention and held it so that I went
back to it again and again, savouring its flavour
puzz mg over it, this footnote to those fabulous
annals of a fabulous century. Through that recorded
clamour of war, controversy and wild adventure
with background unceasingly the arrow-hail of the
Mongol bowmen, it sings with the sweet, bitter
voice of the pipes of spring, unforgotten in a
haunted wilderness. As I think Bishop Nerses
himself could never forget, looking out at evening
from the palace windows of that long-vanished
diocese of his above the hills of Persia.
For his diocese of Alarlu is as vanished as his
century and Nestorian Mevr, kindly, indifferent,
stacks the records of the lost historian in crumbling
confusion with unread medicinal tracts, treatises
on mountain devils, horoscopes, monkish diaries
and the like. From the heights of Mevr you can
Tv u at daW,n the glint of the hills amidst
which Nerses ruled that pocket of Christian
Assyrians so long ago—those hills across which his
son came riding that afternoon in the year 1260
across which he watched that son ride out again
33
34 PERSIAN DA1VNS
and vanish for ever before the passing of another
nine months.
1259 : Twice that year the Bishop rode out at
the head of the Assyrians and beat off marauding
stragglers from Hulagu’s army. All one night he
lay and watched across the desert, from an eyrie
in the hills, the flames of Baghdad light the sky.
For men who were devils were ravening there, as
he knew, and with heavy heart he went back to his
fortress-palace in the dawn—to hold early Mass and
tend the sick and superintend the clipping of goats
and ache for news of his son.
And presently his daughter Amima—sixteen
years of age, with her mother’s flaming darkness of
hair and eyes—came treading through the byres,
seeking him out and storming at him because
he had neglected to change from his night-soaked
riding-gear. The Bishop smiled at her, guiltily.
‘ I forgot. I was thinking of the goats,’ he con¬
fessed.
Amima stamped a small foot.
c A goat never forgotten—yes. You were think¬
ing of Hormizd.’ And then softened, perhaps at
sight of the misery in Nerses’ eyes. ‘ There’s no
news of him ? What kept you out on the hills all
night ? ’
‘ The barbarians have fired Baghdad,’ said the
Bishop, ‘ and Hormizd was in the Caliph’s
guard.’
‘ Then Hormizd is safe,’ averred Amima, flip¬
pantly, 4 for he said before he went that the horses
THE LOVERS
35
chosen for their
He’ll be here to-
of the Caliph’s guard were
fleetness in running away. .
morrow.’
But to-morrow passed, weeks and months went
by, and no news came of Hormizd, the Christian
mercenary. And, as he tells, what had been a vivid
pain settled to a dull ache in the heart of Nerses
and more and more in spare hours he shut himself
up in his watch-room above the palace, penning
of the times from the varied information
that ebbed up to Alarlu with wandering mercenaries
starving pilgrims, Arab brigands, lost Moslem
mullahs—the flotsam and jetsam of a continent in
travail with history. He built up those records,
1 think, as a barrier against that ache, and Amima
rode the Assyrian boundaries and kept the peace
as he realised with a dull gratitude. And Hulagu
swept north again, he and the loot of Persia and
Iraq, and Paschal brought one white morning its
snow^—WS t0 tHe PerSian hillS’and through ^ose
Amima saw the coming of them, went out
accosted them, came racing back on her Arab
pony. Up the ringing stairs to Nerses’ tower she
^Bishop deep in his
^t laboured dissertation on the Latin
Kite which lies unread and unreadable to this
‘Father! ’ she panted, and sank at his feet and
shook him. Hormizd has returned ! ’
Hormizd ? ’ He stared at her, for a moment
PERSIAN DAWNS
36
unable to associate the name with anyone he had
ever known, as he tells. Then he got to his feet,
trembling. ‘ Hormizd ’
Hormizd and no other—tattered as a beggar,
minus his gay silver helmet, his chain-mail hanging
in ragged links from his shoulders, but his eyes as
restless and eager as ever. He was waiting in the
central courtyard, he and his companion, and
Nerses heard his laugh as he went down the stairs.
Then, at sight of his father, the laughter went from
the Christian mercenary’s face. He knelt for the
Bishop’s blessing and then was in Nerses’ arms
the while the great Balkh wolf-hounds clamoured
around the two of them, and Amima, booted,
spurred, the small warden of Alarlu’s. marches,
confronted Hormizd’s fellow-rider—a pallid-skinned
giant, bearded and moustached as were no southern
men, clad in leather, with a great horn bow slung
at his back.
‘ You are a Mongol ? ’ she demanded, staring
up at the tip of the bow above the immense
shoulders.
The giant glanced at her gravely, indifferently,
stroking his beard. ‘ I am a chief of the Outer
Hordes.’
* A heathen ? ’
‘ Leave be, Amima,’ said the Bishop, loosening
his arms from about his son, while Hormizd
scowled at his sister and turned to the giant, the
eager impatience passing from his face into such
look as made Nerses catch breath.
THE LOVERS
37
£ Father, this is my brother from the horse-tail
Hordes whom I have brought to the refuge of
Alarlu.’
ii
All that night the snowstorm raged, and the
Assyrian herdsmen drove the goats into the byres,
and kindled at Nerses’ orders a great flambeau of
pitch-soaked wood to flame on the palace roof, a
guide to the lost and perishing in the wastes beyond
Alarlu. But in the great guest-room, with the
brazier’s glow ruddy upon the whorling inscriptions
of the ancient walls, none thought of sleep for many
hours the while the story of Hormizd’s adventurings
in the plain was told, now by Hormizd himself,
now by his giant blood-brother.
In stumbling Persian, beard in hand, staring at
the brazier, the giant. ‘ I am Gezir Noyan, from
the Plains of the Outer Wastes. We dwell on the
edge of the world, far to the north. In the long
seasons there is no darkness in our nights, and up in
the great rivers at dawn the ice-islands clash as they
go north over the edge of the world. . . .’
One’s imagination touches in that scene in the
Alarlu guest-room, though Nerses’ record attempts
no such limnings : Hormizd, despoiled of his
battered armour, lying full-length on a goatskin
rug, his eyes on this pagan blood-brother of his;
the brazier’s light jerking from dour neutrality of
tint wide red-specked patches on the leather jerkin
PERSIAN DAWNS
38
of the giant himself; Amima kneeling with chin
hand-cupped. Nerses himself that brazier which
burned seven centuries ago probably showed robed
and bearded, ensconced in his high chair, his long,
curling black hair already streaked with grey, his
eyes wandering continually to the face of his
son. . . .
And the tale of Gezir Noyan :
* Now the spring came and with it messengers
from the Great Horde, the yellow men who had
brought us into alliance in the time of the Khakan
Genjis. The horse-tail banners were out and the
great khan going south to the conquest of the
followers of the Foul Prophet. So I gathered my
bowmen and rode to join them.
4 Beyond Kara Kum we marshalled and news
was brought that Persia lay undefended. So Hulagu
led us west and south, leaving a little force to vex
the Persian borders from the north. And one
morning the breath came pantingly in our throats
and men fell and died. For we had come to the
great poison desert of Kizil Kum.
* And this for eighteen days, with no taste of water
and drinking the milk and urine of mares, we
crossed, holding to the south-east and bursting at
length on the green plains. Merv Hulagu fell upon
and devoured and I plundered with the others, yet
was sickened with slaughter after the first two days.
So I withdrew my gurans from the city, and would
have marched north again, abandoning the horse¬
tails, but that Hulagu sent a cloud of spearmen to
THE LOVERS
39
stop the way, and for the time we surrendered and
consented to march with him again.
* -Amd we came to Baghdad, dragging with the
Hordes great bombards from Khita which hurled
rocks and levelled the walls. Of that tale you have
heard. On the third morning of the fighting I
reached the gates of the Citadel and there found
the horse-tail standards had already broken through,
despite the desperation of such of the Caliph’s’
guard as had not fled with their master across the
river.
And in a corner of the great courtyard, half-
choked with smoke, while Hulagu’s Mongols
smote off the heads of the dead and wounded guards
and flung them into carts to be taken to build the
great skull-pyramid without the city, I came on
five of the yellow men attacking this my brother
Hormizd. He was singing and laughing as he
struck down one Mongol after the other, and they
drew back, as they had reason to do, and shouted
for bowmen to shoot him from a distance. But in
that moment he staggered and fell and I saw that
he had a great leg-wound. The attackers shouted
and made at him again. But I put them aside.’
Why ? ’ It was Amima’s clear young voice in
the semi-darkness. ‘ How was Hormizd more to
you than any other stranger whom your barbarians
were murdering ? ’
Hormizd jerked to angry attention in the brazier-
glow . ‘ How can a woman understand ? ’
Nor can I understand.’ The giant’s face turned
40
PERSIAN DAJTNS
from one to the other of them. ‘ More ? I do not
know. But I knew him for my friend. So I ban¬
daged him and bore him out of the burning citadel,
and prevailed on a flying citizen with a mule to
carry him out of Baghdad to some place of safety
where he might recover ’
But it was Hormizd’s turn to interrupt, leaping
to his feet.
4 God, with what tongue of a colic-stricken camel
is he afflicted ! Heed not this tale, my father, else
in a moment will it appear that it was I who saved
bis life, not he mine. Now listen to the truth of
it *
And Hormizd’s truth was indeed a jewel with
different facets from Gezir Noyan’s. There had
been no casual, unhindered rescue of Hormizd
in the blazing courtyard of the Citadel. Instead,
Gezir had killed two of the attackers and held the
others at bay till some of his own men from the
Outer Wastes came to his aid. With their company
he had made his way out of the Citadel, carrying
the wounded man, fighting every inch of the path,
for the news of this attempted rescue of a guards¬
man had spread, and Hulagu’s orders were being
defied. And this casual tale of finding a citizen with
a mule—it had been done only after a long period
of desperate search, through streets swarming with
plunderers who not infrequently had heard rumours
of the rescue and sought to stop it. Then, finally,
on the outskirts of the city, Gezir had indeed
prevailed on a fleeing refugee to carry away the
THE LOVERS
4i
wounded guardsman, while he himself turned back
to face the wrath of Hulagu 
‘ And what happened then ? ’ questioned the
Bishop, while the whoom of the snowstorm came
to them from outside the palace of Alarlu.
4 Ask not of him, else will he say that the Khakan
embraced him and wept on his shoulder in admira¬
tion. This happened : He was overpowered by
the foul horse-tails, dragged to the great square
next morning where Hulagu sat sharing out the
plunder among the Hordes, and there accused of
saving the life of an enemy. And Hulagu ordered
that he should be impaled upon the walls, and he was
hurried away to the western gate, and there would
have been tortured and slain but that Hulagu heard
that the men of the Outer Wastes would revolt
again if this was done. So he sent a fresh order
that Gezir was merely to be stripped of his rank and
titles, enslaved, clad as a woman, and given in chains
and under stripes the foulest tasks of a camp-
follower/
Even Amima stirred a little at that. But Gezir
Noyan merely smiled into his beard, though his
face twitched a little.
‘ It was a just sentence. Indeed, a merciful one.
I had saved an enemy from the pyramid of skulls/
So, reviled, spat upon, avoided by his own
followers from the Outer Wastes, he had been set
to the vilest tasks in the great Mongol army which
still lingered amid the smoking ruins of Baghdad.
Till one day in the litter of the horse-lines, raising
42
PERSIAN DAWNS
his head he had seen a man limp past, and had
thought little of it, bending to his task again.
Then the limping leg had passed once more and a
little sack had been dropped into his hands. He had
concealed it without attracting notice and in the
moonlit squalor of the slaves’ quarters opened it
that night, discovering it to contain a small file
and a stabbing-knife.
For Hormizd, guided out to Baghdad’s suburb
of Baqubah—still intact, having fortunately made
no resistance to the invaders—had lain recovering
from his hurts and wondering as to the name and
fate of his rescuer. So soon as he could he had had
enquiries made through Assyrian merchants trading
in the Mongol camp. And at last he had learned
the full facts. The stranger who had befriended
him, whose memory and face haunted him, was a
man degraded and ruined, doomed to the foulest
tasks in the Mongol camp.
And, hearing the news, Hormizd had cursed his
wounded leg and lain making wild plannings.
Winter was coming on and the march of the Hordes
back to their plains about to begin. How to rescue
the giant ?
A plan came to the Christian mercenary. So
soon as he could walk again he had one of the
Assyrian merchants engage him as a camel-driver
in bearing provisions into the encampment of
Hulagu’s army. Once within the lines, stretching
mile on mile to the north of Baghdad’s ruins, he
had sought out the degraded chief of the Outer
THE LOVERS
43
Wastes and left with him that tool and weapon
which Gezir uncovered in the moonlight. Next
day the camel-driver had passed near the giant
again, dropping him a little bag of food, and the
giant had raised his eyes and recognised the other and
whispered a promise to have his irons filed through
in readiness for escape before another nightfall.
So he might have done, and Hormizd conveyed
him safely outside the Mongol lines. But next
morning Hulagu’s army had begun its long north¬
wards trek. On its flank, among a medley of other
followers, rode Hormizd on his stolen camel;
in its centre, his chains filed almost to breaking-
point, trudged Gezir Noyan. Under the shadow
of the Alarlu plateau they had passed, the Hordes,
and Hormizd had glanced up longingly at the far
heights where a band of rescuers might have been
gathered to make a sudden descent on the straggling
army with the horse-tail standards. But there were
other means of escape to hand.
The Horde of the Outer Wastes, sullen and
mutinous, still held to the great army, but many
of its members no longer avoided their disgraced
chief. But for the terrible vengeance Hulagu
would exact should he discover any of them
attempting to free Gezir they would have had little
hesitation in striking off his chains. And at length,
again obtaining direct contact with Gezir in a pass*
of the mountains, Hormizd had put their hesitations
to use.
Under the lee of the Kablurz Beg one stormy
44
PERSIAN DAWNS
night the giant succeeded in filing through his
chains and creeping to the limits of the camp.
There, at the point guarded by his own following,
he was given a horse and leather coat, a bow and the
vowed devotion of that following, and passed out
into the night. And in the night beyond the light
of the camp-fires was awaiting him that stranger for
whom he had suffered so much, the stranger who in
turn had sought to defeat an army for his sake.
‘ Where now, brother ?J Hormizd had asked,
when they had kissed. ‘Your followers say they
will still receive you as chief in your own land. Let
us ride there.’ And he had turned his mount round
towards the northern passes.
But Gezir had caught his arm. ‘ That journey is
one of months and you would ride with a wound
half-healed. It would be death. Also’—as Hor¬
mizd laughed at this prophecy—‘ there would be no
safety for me in the north. I would live in Persia
henceforth. Let us ride to your home in this Alarlu
of which you have told me. It is near ? ’
‘ Very near,’ said Hormizd. * Yet ’ Then he
had turned about slowly, with a last glance at the
stars above the northern mountains, and stretched
his hand to Gezir in the darkness, and guided him
back on the road to Alarlu.
in
That winter of 1259 lasted scarcely a month in the
Persian hills. Presently the spring was with them at
THE LOVERS
45
Alarlu, the grass green in pasturage for the great
herds of goats, the snows melting and waving their
feathery bands of vapour down over the deserts
of ruined Iraq. Bishop Nerses rode at the chase,
trying out the Mongol bow of horn, and once, far
up towards the Kablunz Beg, slaying a lion with it,
as he tells with some pride. He had a multitude of
duties in that dawning of the hot weather—mar¬
riages, baptisms, riding the marches and beyond
to find out what government, if any, he would have
to treat with in the interests of his Nestorians;
judging, meditating, escaping Amima’s candid eye
and tongue when he had forgotten to change from
a soiled robe; continuing his great work on the
Latin Rite. But he was not too busied to watch
the fortunes of his son Hormizd and the barbarian
chief Gezir, nor slow to apprehend that since their
coming to Alarlu each played a role for the benefit
of the other. Lovers at first sight they had been,
inseparable and passionate friends they had grown,'
yet both hid their inmost thoughts and desires with
such skill that neither suspected the other. But
Nerses, uninterfering, friendly to both, watched the
tragi-comedy played with a tightening of his heart¬
strings.
Hormizd Hormizd, still young, son of a way¬
ward peasant mother, brother of Amima whom the
Assyrian community regarded with mingled pride
and horror—he was a prisoner in Alarlu, feeding
on dreams that he might forget the horizon-beckon¬
ing realities. Stupendous dreams he would recite
PERSIAN DAWNS
46
to his father in that watch-tower above the Persian
hills—a mission to Rome; a league of Nestorian
bands throughout Kharismia to seize the land and
defy Mongol and Moslem alike; manufacture of
that fire-powder which the Mongols had brought
against Baghdad. . . . Nerses would sit and look
at him and listen to him, while the Latin Rite
went unconfounded, and remember his own youth.
There were wider lands than those beyond the
deserts to explore, as he tells he might have told
that son of his : the wonder countries of meditation
and contemplation, of knowledge and belief and
faith. But he kept the knowledge to himself because
the spring was crying out there on the hills and he
remembered his own youth.
And his dreamings, it was soon obvious, Hor-
mizd himself regarded as but dreamings, not to be
mentioned in the hearing of the grave Gezir. For
not only was Alarlu the only safe refuge for the latter
but it seemed he had settled contentedly enough in
that refuge. He was, indeed, a warrior and wanderer
only by necessity. He averred a grave interest in
all things Persian, in goats and olives and camels
and the cultivation of millet, a fondness for palm-
wine—that wine which had earned for the Nestor-
ians of Alarlu the worst of reputations among the
surrounding Moslems. He made proposals for the
breeding of other horses than hill-ponies, for manur¬
ing the fields with the dust of powdered bones in
that fashion of agriculture which the Mongols had
learnt in the conquest of Kin. Except in the matter
THE LOVERS
47
of Christian observances he played the part of the
Alarlu-born Nestorian to perfection.
And Hormizd, putting away his dreams with his
battered armour, tried to model himself in like
pattern, blindly unapprehensive that Gezir Noyan
in his secret soul loathed the life of the Persian hills
with such loathing as few exiles had ever brought
to those hills. &
He hated the endless rise and fall, heat-haze and
mirage-sway, glister of distant desert and undistant
^ndstorm which made up the scenic phenomena
or the land he had adopted for the sake of Hormizd
believing Hormizd would perish on the journey to’
the north, or in that north grow weary for his native
Alarm. He hated the braziers and scented woods,
the bell-ringing, the spiced dishes, the bright
fervid am and unending heat. Inside the palace’
walls he went with the air of a proud, trapped
animal. The wide and stream-flecked plains, bright
with tamarisks, the long, unending nights of the
northern summers haunted him night and dav
says Bishop Nerses, with a lover’s memory and a
lover s passion.
But he never talked of them except in moments
ot self-forgetfulness, and then to Nerses alone, in
the watch-room above the palace to which he would
sometimes climb to tell of the gods of his people,
of the great Northern trinity of Esege Malan,
Mandiu Hotogov Mailgan—gods from belief in
whom the tolerant Bishop made but little attempt to
convert him. Squatting in that tower of Nerses,
48 PERSIAN DAWNS
the giant, great beard in hand, would pass from
memories of the gods to memories of their wor¬
shippers, to tell of the land of freezing colds and
great herds, the winding tracks of tribal migration
across unending snows, the far roaring of the sea
northwards, in winter, at the world’s end, when the
banners of the Golden Roan waved in the midnight
sky. Sick with nostalgia, he would tell of those
things. . . . Until they would hear ringing steps
come up the stairs and Hormizd would burst in
upon them, seeking his brother, and the giant would
cease his tale the while those two looked at each
other like the fools and the lovers they were. . . .
Then they would go down the stairs together and
Amima, chance-met, would still her singing to
scornful silence at the sight of the detested pagan.
And the Bishop, with the threads of the tangled
skein ready to his hands to untangle, with vision of a
Hormizd lost to him for ever, would bury his face
in those hands in an agony of indecision.
iv
And then one of Hulagu’s lieutenants took a
hand in the matter.
In Baqubah he heard of Alarlu, as the Bishop tells,
and the odd little community of Assyrians that had
sheltered there from time immemorial, tolerated
as peaceful subjects by the Caliphs. But peaceful¬
ness in his subjects held no appeal for the Mongol.
So he sent an embassy up into the hills and they
encountered on the lower slopes a shepherd whom
THE LOVERS 49
they questioned. He answered them civilly and
turned, offering to guide them. Then, in sport, one
of them shot him through the back with a barbed
arrow, and they left him screaming in a pool of
blood and rode casually up the hill roads till they
came to Nerses’ palace.
The Bishop came down from his manuscripts
to receive them. There were some half-dozen in
the embassy, true Mongols, not such strangers as
Hezir Noyan, and their thin moustaches drooped
across flat, yellow faces. Their demands were brief
and casual, and their leader spoke them in a sing¬
song chatter, looking round the crowded courtyard
as he spoke. Half the Alarlu herds and fifty virgins
under the age of sixteen were to be driven down to
Baqubah at once. . . . The spokesman broke off
and, still with an expressionless face, reached out
gripped Amima by the shoulder, and swung her
into the hollow of his arm.
• ma^ can s^an(^ surety for the other forty-
~Ce toJt^e orders of the governor, slave.’
And he turned away, preparing to mount, while the
rest of the Mongols, after a hungry glance around
were already in their saddles.
For a moment the Bishop and his followers alike
were speechless. But only for a moment. A roar
of indignation arose, someone strode past the Bishop
and next moment Amima was reeling away, freed
while her captor still expressionless, dropped sense¬
less from his saddle and Gezir Noyan unclenched a
bruised fist. ...
5°
PERSIAN DAWNS
The other Mongols were dragged from their
horses and disarmed, and the Bishop held an anxious
conference with Gezir and the elders of the com¬
munity. Release those men they must, else the
Hordes would come up from Baqubah and destroy
them utterly.
But while they sat in debate they heard a wild
shouting and a sudden, piercing shriek of grief
from a courtyard. They rushed outside and found
confronting the Mongol embassy Hormizd Nerses
with the body of a dead Nestorian in his arms. It was
the shepherd whom the Mongols had shot and
whom Hormizd, out hunting, had come upon
just before he died. . . .
The cries of rage died down. All looked at the
Bishop, waiting for him to speak. Amima hid her
face. And Nerses, as he tells, braced himself to
pronounce the dreadful words.
‘ Let these men be taken outside the courtyard
and shot to death with arrows.’
It was done. Nerses heard the thudding of the
arrow-heads as he climbed uncertainly to his room.
And Alarlu cleaned its hunting spears and all
through two long nights the smithy furnaces flared
the while Gezir Noyan, a skilled maker of arrow¬
heads to fit the short bow, beat out bolts to arm the
Assyrian bowmen against the coming invasion.
Come it did, more quickly than they expected,
though not in such force. The news from Alarlu
appears to have reached Baghdad at the very
moment of the recall of Hulagu’s lieutenant. He
THE LOVERS 5i
had no time to send a strong expedition against the
Christians in the hills, but on the northwards march
detached a complete guran, eight hundred strong,
with orders to raze Alarlu to the ground, pile the
heads of the men in a pyramid, and drive the women
out in the wake of the Mongol army. With them,
dragging it across the desert, the guran took a bom¬
bard, one of the terrible engines brought from China.
Amima was the first of the Nestorians to take the
field. She was down in the plains, in the first
lightening of that morning, on a ride in search of
buzzard. Two Mongol scouts rode round a
shoulder of the foothills. One, failing to see in
Amima a woman and fit matter for other diversion,
hurled a javelin. Amima ducked, avoided it neatly’
and raced her pony up through the gorges to Alarlu!
There she turned round her panting mount a
moment and saw the Mongol guran a moving blotch
like the shadow of a sandstorm upon the desert—
a shadow that rapidly neared the foothills.
Now, Gezir Noyan, tells the Bishop, was that
early dawn engaged at the head of the gorge in
planting a new millet patch on which Alarlu was
to try-out the Kin notions of manuring. The
Bishop’s daughter came pelting across the patch
on her pony, glanced over her shoulder, glanced im¬
patiently at the giant and his two Nestorian helpers.
i ... ®ack to Alarlu ! The Mongols are in the foot¬
hills.
Gezir dropped his implement and ran to the edge
or the gorge instead. There he saw the Mongol
52
PERSIAN DAIFNS
guran, with the remembered horse-tail banner of
Chepe, already beginning the climb to Alarlu.
It would reach the plateau long before defenders
came from the palace. Gezir turned to the
Nestorians.
‘ We have hunting spears. We must hold them
until Hormizd brings your brothers.,
Two miles away, while Hormizd shouted and
mustered the Christian levies, while Amima rounded
up stragglers from outlying fields, while Bishop
Nerses, as he tells, struggled absentmindedly to
fit a coat of chain-mail over the robes in which he
had just celebrated Mass—they heard an appalling
sound. It was the Chinese bombard.
Halted half-way up the gorge the Mongol captain,
standing impatient witness of the fight waged on
the dawn skyline between his advance-guard and a
handful of Christians, had had the piece levelled and
fired. Spinning clumsily in its flight, the great stone
ball fell in the midst of the attacking Mongols,
rose again, killed one of the Nestorians, narrowly
missed the head of Gezir Noyan, and ricocheted
into the new millet-patch. With a roar of laughter
the attacking Mongols who had survived the de¬
scent of the bombard’s projectile flung themselves
upon the two surviving defenders of Alarlu’s
Thermopylae, and a moment later when the racing
Hormizd and his levies burst in view of the millet-
patch they found it already aswarm with yellow
plainsmen. . . .
Three times the Nestorians charged and three
THE LOVERS 53
times wete beaten back. Then suddenly a thun¬
derous explosion shook the hills. A bright light
rose and flared like a geyser. The Mongol guran
turned back on itself in wild confusion, and
Hormizd rallied his men and charged again.
Bishop Nerses, galloping across the plateau a
few minutes later at the head of reinforcements,
abruptly halted those reinforcements and pointed!
Like the battle-figures on a wind-shaken tapestry,
remote and unreal against the fervour of the sun¬
rise above the darkness of the Alarlu gorges, the
remnants of the Mongol guran were already stream-
ing down the hill-side in wild rout. The blowing
up of the bombard had both killed their captain and
shattered the morale of the attackers. Behind them,
slaughtering without mercy, went Hormizd and
his levies.
But at the foot of the gorge Hormizd abandoned
both the pursuit and his followers and rode back
at breathless speed to Alarlu, with sudden memory
upon him of Gezir Noyan. Beyond the lip of the
plateau, wending towards the palace, he came upon
a procession of Nestorian wounded. And in a
litter in the midst of that procession, unconscious,
hacked and bleeding from a dozen wounds, lay the
giant of the Outer Hordes.
v
For a little it seemed to the Bishop impossible
that the man could live. Nevertheless, he had
54
PERSIAN DAWNS
Gezir borne to his room in the palace and his
wounds cleansed and bandaged. Then he drove
out the stricken and helpless Hormizd and sum¬
moned a Nestorian woman to act as nurse.
But this order was unexpectedly countermanded.
Next morning, when Gezir regained consciousness,
he stared over the Bishop’s shoulder in surprise
at the Bishop’s assistant.
4 It is not seemly that your daughter should tend
me.’
‘ It is not seemly that a heathen should die in
Alarlu palace,’ said Amima, also addressing her
father. Nerses, as he tells, stared from one to the
other of them in some bewilderment.
Hormizd found himself as a pariah in the great
house. Only by stealth could he obtain converse
with Gezir alone, as he complained to his father.
‘ You are better, my brother ? Amima heeds to
you ?9
Gezir would groan and toss. ‘ As though I were
a sick calf. . . . And a heathen calf at that. God
of the Golden Roan, if I could but see the skies
again! ’
VI
Summer aflame over Alarlu, deepening into the
wild russets of autumn Persia, with the millet stand¬
ing dark brown and parched, ripe for harvest.
They set to gathering the olives—a great crop
that year, and one that sold at price in the famished
towns of Iraq. Gezir Noyan still lingered in his
THE LOVERS „
sick-room, progressing but slowly, all unaware the
remarkable result his illness was producing outside
the range of that room.
For Hormizd, robbed of his companionship, yet
tied by his presence to Alarlu and its lands, had
begun to discover in his blood something of which
he had been never before aware—that aching land-
love inherited from generations of hillmen-peasants,
that love which could lure Neesan Nerses from the
most absorbing of travellers’ tales, the most clamor¬
ous point of a theological treatise, out to the
wonder of burgeoning or corn-laden fields, of ripe
orchards of olives. Hormizd discovered it with
characteristic enthusiasm.
‘ The fool I have been, my father ! I who longed
to wander in far lands when I might have gathered
olives in Alarlu ! I’ll never take armour or bow
again unless other raiders come against us. Gezir
and I will make this the granary of Persia.’
. set to work as a peasant in the fields, stealing
indoors occasionally, much begrimed, and wary of
discovery by Amima who was as irreverent towards
his land-love as all his other passions, to talk
enthusiastically in Gezir’s room. And the black-
bearded giant would listen and assent, then turn
s/8 p^06 t0 t^e St0ne wa^> as though seeking
The olives had been gathered and the tiny
Hails were pounding the millet in Alarlu village
when Gezir’s relapse took place. All one night he
raved in delirium, crying out in his old passion of
PERSIAN DAWNS
56
home-sickness for the wind-swept plains of the north,
held down and tended by the scared Hormizd,
summoned to Amima’s assistance. . . . They did
not wake the Bishop and by morning the giant was
quiet again. Out on his usual early ride Nerses
came on his son staring northwards towards the
dim bulking of the Kablurz Beg. Only then did he
learn of the happenings of the night, and Hormizd
broke off abruptly, clenching his hands.
‘ Prisoner ! Why did he never tell me he so hated
Alarlu ? I thought him a contented guest. . . .
If he should die here, far from those lands he
loves ’
He laughed strangely. His hands were shaking.
And because this love of a man for a man was
something that the Bishop knew in the bitter silence
of his own experience, he looked at his son and
ached for him, saying nothing.
‘ Amima quietened him, at the last. He saw her
while he raved in the devil-fever and thought her
some woman of his Horded
The Bishop started a little at that. ‘ And what
did Amima do ? ’
* She kissed him and made pretence to be that
woman, and he fell asleep in her arms.’
vn
It seemed that night had been the turning-point.
Thereafter Gezir began to mend rapidly. Soon the
bandages about his great limbs could be dispensed
THE LOVERS 57
with, and, propped by servants, he could totter
out to the sunshine of the courtyard. Thereat the
Bishop, with a sigh of relief, closeted himself
with a wandering Buddhist monk from far Cam¬
bodia and for a week, as he tells, forgot Alarlu and
all its problems in debate of the life of Sakya Muni
and its likeness to the later incarnation of another
Master. Then, with the departure of his guest,
he descended from his tower one afternoon and
came on an unexpected idyll, and at the sight thereof
stood as surprised as many a father before and
after him. And the sight was his daughter Amima
in the arms of the pagan giant of the Outer Hordes,
standing together under the sun-awning of the
inner court.
For a moment he disbelieved his eyes and then,
as he tells with a touch of sad whimsy, he saw
that the two were not kissing each other, as would
surely have been seemly. They were deep in debate.
Amima in her giant’s arms had not ceased to be
Amima.
‘ But you are a heathen, a worshipper of devils,’
she was saying, and Gezir Noyan was frowning at
her perplexedly.
‘ I worship the same trinity as yourself, though
under different names. And your Isho—who is he
but Uha Soldong, the Golden Roan of heaven
though with us no helpless babe ? He rides the
skies in our northern lands, Amima. . . . What
thing have I done now ? ’
‘You have blasphemed,’ she said, and put his
5 8 PERSIAN DAITNS
hands away, and turned from him into the palace.
Yet, going, she glanced back at him, secretly,
anxiously, as the Bishop noted. Gezir stared after
her, smiling. ...
He started as he heard the footsteps of Nerses,
and for a moment they looked at each other. Then
Amima’s father also smiled.
‘ I think Alarlu will have none of those gods of
yours, unless you worship them under the names it
knows—though those names may be but names.’
At that invitation and acceptance of himself the
giant flushed a little, tugging at his beard. ‘ Of those
names you will teach me, father of Amima. He
turned and looked out over the Persian lands with
such contented glance as the Bishop of Alarlu had
never yet seen on his face. e For even home is
called by many names.’
vin
Bishop Nerses sat long in his tower in idle, happy
thought that evening, watching the sunset colours
turn to darkness and that darkness pale in the com¬
ing of the star-rise. So the skein had unravelled
itself, Gezir and Hormizd alike had found content
by ways unforeseen, and Alarlu would keep them.
... He turned to his scripts light-heartedly.
And, while he sat and wrote, his son Hormizd,
grown strangely self-absorbed of late, was riding
back through the starlight from a two-days expedi¬
tion into the plains. . . .
THE LOVERS'
59
Nerses heard the sound of his arrival, heard him
hand his pony to a palace servant. But he did not
ascend to the tower immediately. It was nearly an
hour later, as the Bishop noted by the notchings
of his candles, before footsteps came up the stairway
and Hormizd asked permission to enter. Behind
him bulked the giant.
‘ Father, I’ve come to pray that you give me leave
to go from Alarlu again—with my brother Gezir.’
‘ Go ? ’ The Bishop stared at him, and knew at
once what he meant, knew at once that this was no
planning of a casual expedition. ‘ Leave Alarlu ?
But youVe loved it of late.’
Hormizd laughed with a strange gaiety, avoiding
his father’s eyes. ‘ That was but a passing fancy—
and oh! there are other lands to see before a man
dies. There isn’t a Mongol guran on all the borders,
the road to the north is clear, and Gezir and I
would take it—back to his people in the Outer
Wastes.’
And then, his face as pale as death, Gezir Noyan
made a despairing gesture as Neesan Nerses’ eyes
turned on him.
4 This is no plotting of mine, Bishop Nerses.
I have told Hormizd he will die if he never again sees
Persia—for there will be no returning. And I—
I have no desire to go. I have grown to love—
Alarlu.’
Hormizd’s laughter rang out.
‘ Listen to him, my father! So he still dares
affirm to us, who know his hunger for the northern
6o
PERSIAN DAWNS
lands, whoVe heard him raving of them in dreams—
dreams wherein he mistook my sister Amima herself
for some lost love of his 1 ’ The giant started.
Hormizd turned from both of them, and Nerses
saw his hands shaking again. ‘ I die ? I’ve always
longed to cross the deserts to the wild lands. It is
I as well who would die here in the littleness of
Alarlu, as my father knows, who will give us leave
to go. . . . And then—the road to the skies where
rides your Golden Roan, my brother! ’
< Ah yes, the Golden Roan/ said Gezir, dully.
IX
The whole of Alarlu palace and village turned
out the evening of their departure, and Nerses saw
already on the trees the dark, bitter green of winter.
And, amazed and stricken, yet with pain stifled in
exhaustion, he watched the two young men. Amima
alone was absent from the throng of farewell-
makers.
Two baggage-mules, loaded with the provisions
and weapons the travellers were to use on their
thousand-miles journey into the darkness of Asia,
were brought out. Gezir Noyan, gigantic and alien
again in leather jerkin and hauberk, more pallid than
ever, knelt for the Bishop’s blessing, and stood up,
and looked round about him half-desperately.
‘ The Lady Amima ’ he began, and stopped,
with words stuck in his throat, looking down at her
father.
THE LOVERS Ci
And the Bishop tried again, knowing the useless-
lessness of his urgings. ‘ Then why leave her ?
Hormizd is doing this only to pleasure you. Tell
him you do not want to go.’
( The giant shook his head and turned away.
Already I have told him, but he laughs the louder
each time, believing me a liar for his sake. Were
that all, I could stay, but—do I not know this son
of yours ? There is joy and fever in his blood to
see far lands, and I go with him, for he is my
brother/ 1
The crowding Nestorians drew back. Then
Hormizd knelt also for blessing, and stood up, and
embraced his father, both knowing they would
never meet again. And Hormizd swung into his
saddle and bent from it his gaily helmeted head.
111 come back again—if ever the deserts and
years will give me passage, my father/ He laughed
with stricken face 4 Think of me sometimes in
those northern lands—here, when the olives ripen
in autumn/ r
But there s no need to go. Gesdr would stay.
He would marry Amima ’
Hormizd laughed again, turning his face from
his father’s. ‘ He is a prince of liars and a prince of
brothers. He would swear for my sake that the
burning pains of hell were pleasant and agreeable.
Amima ? He has pined this year with memory of
some woman of the north—her of whom he raved
m dreams/ His horse leapt forward under the
touch of sudden spurs. ‘ Ready, my brother ? *
62 PERSIAN DAWNS
And when next Bishop Nerses raised his head
he saw the darkness come raining from the east
over the deserted hills.
x
One pauses above the last crinkled leaves of the
ancient script to hear far across the centuries that
remote piping of resentment and bitter pain in
hearts long powder and nothing on the winds of
forgotten days; to watch those two who had
ridden into Alarlu nine months before ride out
again, following and misjudging each other in a
passionate obstinacy of love; to start in sudden,
puzzled wonder, as did Bishop Nerses himself
that night at the words spoken to him by Amima
when she climbed to him in his tower.
‘ Fools ? They were wise at last, each for the
other, as only lovers might be.’ She hid her face
and then looked out into the starred silence, her
breath coming in a sob. ‘ Oh, I knew, my father,
I who loved them both. Always I knew,, even
while I hoped. . . . Each sick at heart himself
and wise for the other—-for to the end it was Gesfr s
Hormi^d who was the real Hormi^d, Hormi^d’s Ge^ir
the real Gesfr.’
Ill
THE FLOODS OF SPRING
i
IN the library of the Monastery of Mevr one
turns the crinkled pages of the Chronicles of
JNeesan Nerses with careful fingers, lest presently
those pages crumble into so many handfuls of dust,
ney are bound with rotting sinews, there are
n uiStaijnS racross t^ie last ^ird of them, perhaps
the blood of some lost Nestorian priest; one corner
ot the bundle has been scorched with fire—a relic,
that, of the Turki invasion that depopulated Alarlu
long after Bishop Nerses had ceased to rule and
write there. And out of those ancient pages the
eye brings sudden phrases unexpectedly homely or
inexplicably alien, for the Bishop mingled in a
cheerful amalgam record of Alarlu’s life and Mongol
morals, Nestorian rites and denunciations of the
Roman Church, beggars’ tales and Persian legends.
All was grist to his mill, and he wrote with an omni¬
vorous disregard of plausibility and stylistic criteria
t at in happier times might have earned his writings
tame and fortune from many a groaning printing-
jp££SS«
But it was not until my second week in the Monas¬
tery library, bending in some weariness over the
Jong, looping scrawl of the Nestorian script, that
I came on this tale of Zeia and Romi which I have
ca led the Floods of Spring. It bears no title at all
in the Bishop s record. The sheets on which it is
63
64
PERSIAN DAWNS
written lie crumpled betwixt a treatise on goat¬
breeding and a dissertation on demonology—and
whether this is their appropriate placing by the
Bishop himself, or but the chance cataloguing ot
later ages, I found it impossible to guess. Ihe
story had been begun and left off several times.
On the margin of the first page, indeed, is scrawled,
as though in irritation : ‘ But surely this was only
a dream that came to us at Bushu. ...
One visions the Bishop hesitating above his
script, frowning at it in indecision the whie t e
daylight waned from the hills of Alarlu. Dream
or delusion-how else explain that double avatar
and immolation in the ruined lands of the Bushu
Nestorians ?
n
It was 1262. The Mongols had gone, leaving
Baghdad smoking and desolate, and its few s^vlv“
ing inhabitants free to creep starving from well and
cellar to gaze on that desolation. Gone also, never
to return, in the company of his Mongol friend an
lover, was the Bishop’s only son. Winter closed
in on the upland plateau of Alarlu, kept by its
Nestorian farmers, and Nerses retreated to his hig
tower and his writings the while the cold grew
more intense, though across the waste lands o
Iraq the sun heats burned fierce and vivid still.
Out of that burning desolation, penetrating up even
to the Bishop in his tower, came presently rumours
and tales of the mangled world the Mongols had
THE FLOODS OF SPRING
65
left behind. Amima Nerses came back one day
from buzzard-shooting in the foothills, her bow
slung across her back, on her pony a dying woman
who still clasped the skeleton of a child in her arms.
She had had no food, the woman, for many days ;
there was no food to be found in the plains, nor any
prospects of it, for not only had the Mongols
destroyed the crops—they had broken down the
ancient irrigation system, smashed in the dams and
flooded the cornlands. . . . The Bishop heard the
story, fed the woman, saw her die, and went back
to his tower to write that fierce pacifist diatribe
which reads as incongruous to his century as a
treatise on psychoanalysis. The plains and their
horrors—thank God for Alarlu and the safety of his
Nestorians!
But there were others of his creed remote in
those plains. They had heard of him, though he
not of them, and, journeying across a land of
famine and murder, they arrived at Alarlu late on a
raining night in January.
Amima, bursting into the Bishop’s room, brought
the news of them.
^ £ Six of them—marshmen from some place on the
Euphrates called Bushu. They have already eaten
three ducks and all to-day’s loaves.’
‘We must not be inhospitable,’ reproved the
Bishop, ‘ seeing especially that they are of our
Faith.’
‘ It was only with the eye of faith I could grasp
that my loaves had gone so quickly,’ said Amima,
66
PERSIAN DAJVNS
flippantly. ‘ Their leader, Kalaitha, is now mourn¬
ing over a marrow-bone and Mesopotamia. He
prays that you will see him.’
So the Bishop went down to the great room
where the brazier burned and the six Nestorian
tribesmen sat at meat. They were tall, gaunt men,
members of a Christian pocket in a kink of the
Moslem Euphrates country, and their leader, the
white-bearded Kalaitha, laying aside the marrow¬
bone reluctantly, rose and kissed Nerses’ hand and
explained his mission.
* The Mongols came, burning and killing and
breaking down the dams. So we fled to the marshes
and there hid until they had gone. But our priest
fled not, and him they killed. Now we have returned
to our homes, and are a people lost, being without
a priest.’
‘ Have you repaired your dams ? ’ asked the
Bishop.
‘ No,’ said Kalaitha, ‘ for a madness of sloth has
fallen upon our people, being without a priest.
So we six elders ’
The six, abandoning for the time a tribe mysteri¬
ously beyond their control, had journeyed to
Amarah, seeking to induce the Nestorian Bishop
there to send them a priest. But the Bishop was
fled. Scared and horrified at the sights of the
maddened country through which they passed,
Kalaitha and his companions had yet ascended the
Tigris to Baghdad, in quest of its Bishop. But the
Bishop was dead. Turning southwards again one
THE FLOODS OF SPRING 67
of them had halted and pointed to the far loom of
the Persian hills.
‘ There, it is said, a Christian Bishop rules in the
mountains. The Mongols may have spared him.
He will give us a priest.’
And now here in the mountains they were. Nerses
was unsympathetic.
‘ It is an engineer rather than a priest you want,’
he told them, disregarding Kalaitha’s shocked look,
‘ seeing you have not yet repaired your dams. . . .
And I have no priest to give you. There is none
other here but my chaplain.’ He thought for a
moment. ‘ Who rules now at Bushu in your
absence ? ’ he asked Kalaitha.
The delegation glanced one at the other with an
odd unease. Nor did Kalaitha seem more assured
than his followers.
4 It is the no-rule of Zeia.’
‘ No-rule ? Zeia ? ’
4 He is a stranger who came to us from the
marshes. He makes no claim to rule, yet the
people follow him, though he speaks of our customs
as folly. He laughed at this mission of ours in
search of a priest.’
4 Then he is a man of sense,’ said the Bishop.
4 See now to this. Return to Bushu and take to
Zeia my message that he himself is to journey up
here to me in Alarlu, where I myself will question
him and ordain him as the priest you lack.’
Two of the delegation grinned. Kalaitha stroked
his grey beard and shook his head.
68
PERSIAN DAWNS
* He will refuse.’
‘ Refuse ! ’ It was a century when Christians
did not balk at a Bishop’s commands.
4 So he will do. For it is he who has led the people
into the madness of sloth, preaching—he and his
woman Romi—that the earth is for the pleasure
of our lives, not our lives for the slavement of the
earth. Also, he says of priests that they must be
either children or fools, or more often both.’
This lunatic-sceptic of the marshes sounded not
uninteresting, thought the Bishop. He walked the
room, meditating the matter, watched by the marsh-
men. It was a difficult matter.
‘ To-morrow I will decide what to do for you.
Meantime, you shall stay here and eat.’
‘ We have been much anhungered crossing the
plains,’ agreed the grey-bearded Kalaitha, brighten¬
ing. ‘ Our stomachs being saddened by memory
of Bushu, whose people are without a priest.*
in
Half that night the Bishop walked the room of his
tower, listening to the late winter rain sweeping over
Alarlu. A mission of folly if he went on it, yet—
escape from these rooms haunted by remembrances
of his lost son. . . .
In the morning he called up Amima as she was
mounting her pony in the courtyard, preparatory
to riding out on her usual rounds of the plateau
boundaries.
THE FLOODS OF SPRING
69
‘ My child, almost you rule Alarlu as it is. Could
you and Eidon, the chaplain, heed to it between you
for a month ? ’
‘ For a year, if need be,’ said Amima, thought¬
lessly. And then was startled. ‘ But you ’
‘lam going down to the plains with Kalaitha and
his men to see to this madness in Bushu.’
IV
He has left but scanty record of that journey across
the ruined lands to the southern Euphrates. I
think they took the eastern road, skirting Baghdad.
At least, the Bishop comments on the plentitude of
game in the Persian foothills, and, later, of a man
who was reputed to rear serpents in a hidden farm
near Baqubah, and sell their eggs at profit. Almost,
one can believe, he felt inclined to abandon his
mission and turn aside to investigate the activities
of this unorthodox poultry-farmer. Near Eik a
band of robbers rode out and assailed the Nestorians,
and the Bishop shot two of them with arrows from
the Mongol bow his son had brought to Alarlu.
Kalaitha’s companions fought valiantly, putting
the attackers to flight, but Kalaitha vanished and
was later found hidden in a nullah, combing his
beard thoughtfully, peering from behind a tussock
of grass, and declaring that courage went from a
people that lacked a priest.
‘ It is better to lack a priest than to lack life,, said
Nerses dryly.
70
PERSIAN DAWNS
4 So declares Zeia/ said Kalaitha, shocked.
41 will have somewhat to say to this Zeia when
we come to Bushu,’ promised the Bishop, taking
the lead again.
And at length, after venturings bloody and fan¬
tastic enough from our view-point, but so common¬
place to the age and country that the Bishop but
notes them in passing, they forded the Tigris at a
spot somewhere below the modern Kut, crossed the
lands between the two rivers, and late one evening
reached the eastern banks of the Euphrates. Beyond
the River was a brown, dusk land, and even in that
dim light it was possible to see on the far bank the
heaped and crumbling ledges where once the dam
of Bushu had stored the River waters at time of
flood. Now the River ran shallow and muddy, too
low in its bed to reach the dam-points even had
they been operable. . . . Nerses’ party had been
sighted by the Nestorians of Bushu, and presently
a round, flat-bottomed bellum was being poled
across the River towards them. But the Bishop’s
attention was elsewhere, held by an unusual
phenomenon in that treeless land.
4 What is there ? ’ he asked, pointing beyond the
dam ruins and the brown cluster of huts huddling
beyond the dam. Against the evening’s encroach¬
ment on the remote marshes to which the Nestorians
had fled at the Mongol invasion a little gathering of
plumed titans watched the coming of darkness.
4 It is the Last Grove, my lord,’ said the grey-
bearded Kalaitha, indifferently. He rubbed his
THE FLOODS OF SPRING 71
stomach, and watched the languid approach of the
helium with impatience. 4 Surely it will be they
have prepared a kid to feast us/
4 Last Grove ? ’ queried the Bishop. 4 Of what ? ’
4 Of the Ancient Garden,’ said Kalaitha. 4 So
were we told in the days when we were a people
that lacked not a priest.’
v
Next morning the Bishop rose from his bed in
the guest-hut at the first coming of the light. Bushu
still slept. A little unplanned grouping of huts,
odoriferous and insanitary enough, one imagines,
even in the white wonder and stillness of the
morning. But the Bishop tells nothing of that:
he lived in an unfinicky age. Wearied no longer,
for he had taken no part in Kalaitha’s feast and
retired early to the guest-hut on the previous
evening, he walked to the verge of the village. A
marsh bird wheeled over his head. Around,
in the lush grass, fed straying goats and kids. Bushu
lay before him, with its flood-ruined lands. Behind,
in the sunrise, was the soft sweep of the Euphrates
waters.
Now the Bishop saw that there had been two
dams—the main-feed from the River and the long
storage-dam. Midway the latter, a half-submerged
islet, had stood the Last Grove. Then the Mongol
guran had descended on Bushu, smashed in the
river flood-gates and the gates of the feed-dam.
72
PERSIAN DAWNS
allowed their cumulated waters to pour into the
storage-trench, and seen the ancient banks of the
latter melt and crumble in an avalanche of mud.
So it must have been. Now, viewed from this
lower side, the bottom of the storage-dam was but
a wide swath of grass encircling the shining
tamarisks of the Last Grove—a swath of vivid
greenness in those landscape browns and greys that
were as yet unstirred by the black loam prickings
of re-cultivation.
All this the Bishop noted, and then he saw some¬
thing else—a woman coming towards him from
the direction of the tamarisks. She walked dream¬
ing, with unbound hair—a free, sweet walk, says
the Bishop. Presumably, unlikely though it seemed,
there was some bathing-place beyond the grove
which accounted for her lack of costume. He would
have retired discreetly enough, but that it was too
late. She had raised her head and seen him. She
came forward, embarrassed not at all. She stood
in front of him, smiling at him—smiling down at
him, as he realised with a little shock, from her great
height.
‘ You are the priest from the mountains ? ’
Her voice seemed to the Bishop as sweet and alien
to a Nestorian woman as her walk. He had thought
her young, but now he was uncertain—uncertain
as he was of the colour of her eyes and skin and hair
—a magnificent mane, this, garmenting her deep¬
breasted beauty not ineffectively. Young eyes,
gay eyes—and yet within them a heart-breaking
THE FLOODS OF SPRING
73
tiredness. . . . He tells how he shook himself to
sternness.
‘ I am the Bishop Nerses. Is it customary for the
women of Bushu to greet strangers—so ? ’
‘ Custom ? ’ The great eyes opened puzzledly.
Then lighted with the sun in them. The woman
laughed. 41 do not know/
He had an inspiration. ‘ You are the woman
Romi—the wife of Zeia ? ’
‘ I am Romi—for so was the child called who slept
and slept in my arms and would not wake/ There
was no gaiety at all in her eyes for a moment, but
only tiredness. 4 As for Zeia, he also sleeps/
She sighed and laughed in a breath. 4 He was always
a laggard/
She turned away from him lightly. Her action
had the discourtesy of a child’s. He stared after
her frowningly, and then for a moment suffered
from a brief hallucination. Almost he started
forward with a cry—
That walk of hers—it had been his wife’s. So
the mother of Amima had once walked, her, and
no other woman in the world.
VI
Three hours later, goes on the Bishop, a score or
so of the Bushu Nestorians, headed by the grey-
bearded Kalaitha, gathered on a riverward space
outside the village to listen to him. This was the
purpose of the gathering, Kalaitha told him, and
74
PERSIAN DAWNS
Nerses regarded the unauthentic venerableness of
the headman in some perplexity.
4 But what am I to tell them ? ’ he asked.
‘ That I do not know, my lord. For we are a
people without a priest.’
There was little help to be had from this bending
reed, the Bishop decided, and looked upon the
gathering without enthusiasm. Less than a score
out of a village population of over three hundred !
e Where are the others ? ’ he asked Kalaitha.
e They would not come,’ said the headman, ‘ being
busied eating or sleeping or lying in the sun.’
The sun-bathers were everywhere obvious. They
trooped in pairs towards the tamarisks of the Last
Grove, or lay, like beasts themselves, among the
somnolent goats of the herbage stretches ; reclining
in the shallows of the River, their voices came down
to the gathering. It was indeed madness that had
come upon Bushu.
Then, as the Bishop looked round him with dark
brows, two figures emerged from the huts and
approached him.
One was the woman Romi, clad now in an
incongruous brown cotton garment. The other
was a man, gigantic, bearded, with tousled hair
and garments that appeared to have been assumed
in the utmost absentmindedness. As he walked
he rubbed his eyes and yawned. In sight of the
gathering he stopped, regarded it surprisedly, and
then, followed by Romi, walked to the front of it,
inspected the Bishop with lighted curiosity, and sat
THE FLOODS OF SPRING
75
down. Romi sank beside him, deep-breasted mate
of a sleepy Titan. The Bishop stared at the two of
them, startled. For a moment he had seen flicker
in the giant’s face the likeness of his own son’s. . . .
Was this a fever that was coming upon him ?
He addressed the somnolent gathering.
‘ Your headman came to the hills, seeking me,
that I might provide you with a priest. I think he
did ill in the venture. Priests do not grow on the
Persian hills, even as they do not grow by Euphrates,
for the plucking. Moreover, it were better to have
seen to the rebuilding of the dams. How have you
managed to live since your return from the
marshes ? ’
> A sleepy voice said : ‘ We had stores of grain
hidden under the huts which the Mongols did not
find.’
‘ And when you have eaten this stored grain—
what then ? ’
There was silence—an undisturbed silence. The
Nestorians sat and stared with bovine eyes. Romi,
dreaming, looked into the bright sunlight. Zeia
appeared on the point of falling asleep again. And
Nerses tells that he felt anger stir within him.
‘ Have I come to address those bereft of their
senses ? ’ He pointed to the man beside Romi.
‘ You, Zeia, you have misled this people. Why ? ’
The giant started, yawned, stared, spoke drowsily.
‘ The spring comes again, O priestman. So we
two heard, and came also.’
‘ And is not the spring the time of labour ?
PERSIAN DAWNS
Is there not ploughing and planting to be done, lest
famine comes ? ’
‘ So we two also believed in the foolish dream
we dreamt. But there are better dreams. There is
sleeping and love and the sound of birds ; there is
noon and sun and cool grass wherein to lie when
the wind comes through the trees; there are stars
and the coming of the moon to watch.’ He raised
great grey eyes upon the Bishop. ‘ Ours is the
older dream.’
Then the Bishop knew it was a sorcerer with
whom he dealt, for under the stare of those eyes
strange dreamings arose in his own brain. He
crossed himself.
Romi laughed. And, laughing, Nerses saw that
she wept.
VII
It was February. The Bishop walked up to the
ruined dyke and considered the brown flow of the
Euphrates. In a month at most the floods would
come, would go roaring down to the Shatt el Arab,
leaving the River at its usual level, the dam empty,
Bushu doomed to starvation—if this madness still
persisted among the people.
Now Nerses was no stranger, in the readings of
his Church’s fortunes, to the vagaries of Abelites,
Abraham-men and the like. Every catastrophe
brought them wailing and naked across the face
of whatever land catastrophe fell upon. And, sooner
or later, time gathered and destroyed them, even
THE FLOODS OF SPRING 77
if their fellow-men gave them welcome and toler¬
ance. So it would be with this Zeia and Romi, the
bringers of madness to Bushu.
But when ? And whence had those bringers come ?
Kalaitha, questioned as to their origins, had told
a simple enough story. They had been encountered
in the marshes. They had come walking out of those
marshes, naked and yawning, one morning while
the refugees from Bushu were debating the safety
of returning to their ruined village. Then a woman
had recognised Zeia.
‘ He is my cousin whom I have not seen for years
—my cousin Zeia from Shim’un/
ShinTun was another Nestorian community, far
down the River. Undoubtedly Zeia and the woman
were fugitives, and still dazed, for Zeia had neither
denied nor admitted the relationship. Instead, he
had waved aside those crowding about him.
4 We return, for the way is open again.’
But Romi had knelt and fondled an abandoned
child, one whose mother was dead and itself close
to death from starvation. And Zeia, impatiently,
had waited while Romi lifted the child and bore
it with her. Together they had held eastward, and,
moved by a strange instinct, the Bushu tribesmen
had followed.
Nor had the instinct been at fault. Bushu they
had found deserted and the Mongols gone. . . .
And soon it was like to lie deserted again, the
Bishop reflected. Here before another spring would
be famine and death, here, where a sorcerer lunatic
PERSIAN DAWNS
78
of the marshes had outfaced and outfought a
Christian priest. Unless 
Nerses turned from the River dyke and went
down to the village. And that evening he com¬
menced his campaign.
From hut to hut he went, taking with him
Kalaitha as secular authority. To each individual
he gave the command that on the morrow he was
to join the others, with spade and mattock, by the
verge of the ruined feed-dam an hour after sunrise.
The Bishop, as he tells, had expected resistance,
if not point-blank denial of his authority. But
opposition was of the feeblest. Toil was engrained
in the natures of these peasants, and, sun-weary
of their lunacy, they had but required the voice of
decision to rate them out of it. By midnight of that
February day in the year 1262 the cowed Nestorians
of Bushu were pledged, one and all, to attend the
dam-construction of the morning.
But for two exceptions. The hut of Romi and
Zeia had been found empty.
‘ They walk often in the night hours/ explained
Kalaitha, and would have ended with his unvarying
formula but that Nerses interrupted him hastily.
‘ And ye have been unable to prevent them, being
a people without a priest. Let be. The mad go
unconscripted, even in such times of stress.’
But, falling asleep an hour later in the village
guest-hut, the Bishop heard a sound that made him
rise and look through the hide-shielded cavity that
was the window. It was the time of the moonrise,
THE FLOODS OF SPRING 79
a still hour of fleeting shadows and the dance of
pale ghosts on that Euphrates land. And the sound
drew nearer, and the Bishop saw the cause of it.
It was Zeia and Romi returning from their mys¬
terious midnight excursion. Naked, crowned with
flowers, their voices lifted in a low song that had
neither words nor melody, yet it seemed to Nerses
that he had heard it often, that so the winds sang
round Alarlu, that he had heard it in the laughter
and agony of many men. And with that song and
the singers was a companying terror that made the
Bishop reach back into the darkness by his bed, in
quest of the Mongol bow.
Behind the singers stalked a lion—a great, black¬
maned brute of the swamps. The eyes in its sway¬
ing head glowed in the moonlight. And, as it
walked, a slobbering chant came from its hanging
Then, on the verge of the village, Romi turned
about and spoke to the beast. And it lifted its head
as though listening to her, then turned about and
padded away into the dimness.
So they came and passed, the two sorcerers and
the beast, and the Bishop closed his eyes and crossed
himself—and then looked again on the pallid moon¬
light and wondered if he had but dreamt.
VIII
Dawn—a spring dawn, fervid and eager, as
though it were the soul of Iraq herself in swift
8o PERSIAN DAWNS
expectation of seed-time and the coming of the tiller.
But all over the land where there was already famine
the dams stood as heaps of rubble and charred
beams, the soil lay waste and untouched, for there
was no grain for food, far less for seed. Except,
the Bishop noted grimly, at Bushu.
Seed here in plenty—but was there time now in
which to plant it and ensure its fructification by the
River ?
The main-feed dam was a jumble as though a
great Titan had trodden down all its landward
bank. The locks which had connected it with the
Euphrates lay buried under some fifty tons of
shale and sand. The deep channels of the main
distributaries had been smeared into faint traceries
by the flood unloosed by the wrecking Mongols
five months before. . . . And the spring floods
were not more than a fortnight distant.
4 If only I were an engineer ! ’ the Bishop groaned,
and for the first time in his life regretted many
hours spent in poring over the esoteric cults of the
ages. Better he had kept to Archimedes. 4 Who
tended the dams before the Mongols came ? ’ he
questioned Kalaitha.
The headman brought forward two men—stolid,
unenterprising labourers. They had indeed done
no more than tend the old-time irrigation system.
They had shored and delved and repaired with
diligence enough, perhaps, but theoretic question¬
ings of pressure and resistance had vexed their lives
but little. The dams had functioned from time
THE FLOODS OF SPRING
immemorial—or rather, from the time of that
first Sargon to whom the Bishop, in another text
refers^ with unintentional humour as an ‘ ancient
devil. But Sargon’s engineers were long dead
and in their place a Nestorian Bishop who was an
authority on the Latin Rite and the Buddhist pene¬
tration of Fusang had to grope out method and
formulas for himself.
A third of the Bushu tribesmen he set to planting
a third to re-digging the distributaries. The re¬
mainder was impounded for the heart-breaking
task of clearing the feed-dam.
All that day they laboured, and Nerses, surveying
their work in the evening, saw that they had made
little or no impression upon the ruins. His heart
sank as he thought of the short time they had
before the floods came.
Next morning he withdrew half of the workers
rom the distributaries and joined them to the squads
labouring in the dam. It blazed a red heat that day.
bar oft, as the afternoon drew on, Romi and Zeia
were seen to stroll from the village towards the
green coolness of the Last Grove. A little growl of
anger went up, but the Bishop stayed it.
‘Do ye grudge the demented their diversions ? ’
There was laughter at that—a shout of laughter
that foj some reason fell to a shamed silence as
they watched that unhasting twain against the trees
in the bright weather. Reasonlessly, Nerses felt
the shame no less his. He doffed his robe then to
the wonder of Kalaitha, and joined in the task of
82 PERSIAN DAJFNS
filling with earth the great skin sacks which toiling
ant-trains of women and children bore upwards
to the rim of the dam. Unhasting as Romi or Zeia
the sun passed across the heavens. But at nightfall
half the rubbish had been cleared from the floor of
the dam.
They toiled until after sunset. Then, setting a
guard upon the place, the Bishop went to bed, and
in the early hours of next dawn was back at the
excavations. There the guard greeted him with
unlooked-for news. A boat going down the
Euphrates in the night hours had hailed the Nes-
torians with the news that the floods were earlier
this year, owing to the intense heat of those spring
days. The snows were already melting in the
Armenian mountains.
‘ How long does that give us ? ’ the guard had
called to the River sailors.
‘ Two days, O unbelievers.’
IX
Two days—and still half the dam to clear and the
River lock to unearth.
They began work in search of that lock. The
massive gates lay smashed and buried, as has been
said, under many tons of sand. At length, and with
care, they were unearthed and brought to the
surface—they, together with an ancient implement
of copper and the skeleton of a girl. Some time in
the ancient days a blood-sacrifice had taken place
THE FLOODS OF SPRING 83
here. But the Bishop, for once, was in no mood
for archaeological enthusings.
‘ We must have timber for new lock-gates/
‘ There is no timber to be found in this land ’
said Kalaitha.
Nerses pointed to the shining standards of the
Ancient Grove. ‘ Is there not wood there ? ’
Kalaitha blanched. ‘ The Ancient Grove stood
untrodden for generations until the Mongols burst
the dam. Nor would we harm it now. For it is
the last of the ancient Holy Places, as we were
told in days when we lacked not a priest/
‘ Then ye were told lies/ said the Bishop shortly.
‘ Call the village carpenters/
So they were called and assembled and the Bishop
put himself at their head and descended on the
Grove. It was but the tiniest plantation, as he
discovered, unremarkable but for its lack of rotting
timber. Counting the tree-rings as each tree was
hewn down, Nerses was confirmed in his belief
that the grove’s antiquity was but a fable. Less than
a hundred years had elapsed since the trees were
planted. ... He counted again, and a little chill of
fear came upon him. Less than two score years had
passed, yet Kalaitha and others spoke of the Grove as
unaltered since their childhood.
x
Late afternoon. The Ancient Grove was a tree¬
less desolation. Looking down from the banks
PERSIAN DAWNS
84
of the main dam the Bishop could see the heaped
tangle of splinters and boughs he and the carpenters
had left behind. The axes, gripped in terror-taut
hands, had ceased to ring there. Ceased also was
that demented wailing—like the crying of lost and
tortured children—which had burst on their ears
in the early hours after noon.
But memory of it, as they worked to bind the
tree-trunks together in the form of a new lock-gate,
was with Nerses and the others still. They had
paused and listened to it with blanched faces, seen
in the blaze of sunlight the running figures of Romi
and Zeia disappear in the tangle of the Ancient
Grove, heard the wailing die to a moaning whimper
that yet seemed to go on and on, far down the
Euphrates country. . . . Silence since then. And
now another sunset was near.
Suddenly the Bishop became aware of Kalaitha and
thecarpenters,haltedintheirtasks,staringattheRiver.
‘ What ails you ? ’ he asked the headman, and
then saw himself.
The Euphrates mid-channel stream was flowing
brown with silt. Far up the ruined cornlands of
the River a giant beast with crested head roared and
quested southwards. This was the signal of his
coming, and, unused to such signal, the Bishop
stared a moment appalled.
‘ The flood—it is coming ? ’ he demanded, and
then, as Kalaitha and the others bent guiltily to work,
realised that they had but seized an opportunity to
rest their aching muscles.
THE FLOODS OF SPRING 85
4 Always is there a day’s warning/ said Kalaitha.
4 It will not come until noon to-morrow.’
XI
Two hours later exhausted Bushu went to bed in
the darkness. Before them, in the Bishop’s calcula¬
tion, was some three hours’ toil next morning ere
they clove a way through the Euphrates’ bank and
laid a new channel to the new lock-gates. Little
time to spare, but time enough.
A sickle moon came out and rode the sky that
night, and in the air, says Nerses, there was a
moistness he had never met before in the ancient
lowlands. Despite the ache of all his bones from
days of unaccustomed toil, he could not sleep, and
lay wakeful for long in the dimness, in uneased
tiredness. Near the time of the moonset he fell
into an uneasy doze and was startled out of that by
the murmur of voices near the guest-hut. As once
before he raised the hide-curtain of that window,
and, as once before, saw Romi and Zeia alone
together in the night.
4 It will be here before the dawn—quicker than
they have ever known it come.’ It was Zeia’s voice.
4 This ancient folly it will sweep away—it and the
priestman. We did not dream this spring.’
So the Bishop heard, then a lower murmur of
voices, then, amazed, he saw that the woman Romi
was weeping.
4 O my children, my children ! Toil and war and
86
PERSIAN DAWNS
death, toil and death and famine—and how may
our coming end them ? We are no more than a
dream they dare not dream. . . . The priest is
right. They would starve and die if they followed
us. We must rouse the sleepers.’
‘ Rouse them ? It would not help. In a moment
it will be darkness.’
And Romi’s voice : ‘ That is no bar to us.’
Zeia’s laughter belled across the moonlight.
Then the Bishop saw Romi’s hands upon his
shoulders.
‘ So once before you laughed, at the dream of
another spring which passed. . . . And some
time—oh, some time our dream will come
again, no dream, for us and all the world. But
now ’
They stood and looked at each other in the
waning moonlight. Then Zeia laughed his drowsy
laugh again, and nodded, and hand in hand they
turned about and passed out of sight, hastening. Of
what had they talked ?
And then, suddenly, in the dawn darkness,
realisation burst upon the Bishop. The spring
floods!
XII
He dragged on his robe, tore open the door of
the guest-hut, ran up the village street and began
to beat upon the door of Kalaitha’s house.. But
already the watchers of the dam, standing in the
dim radiance of the time between moonset and
THE FLOODS OF SPRING 87
sunfise, had heard afar off a low murmur that
grew to a throaty baying, that grew to the roar of
a thousand wolves in pack-cry. They knew the
sound for what it was, and cried their fear, and fled
undecidedly towards the village. And, running, they
met—or dreamt they met—two figures, naked,
gigantic, racing from Bushu towards the abandoned
dam.
They crossed themselves, the dam’s guardians,
and yelled, bursting into the village and adding
fresh confusion to that already created by Nerses’
eviction of Kalaitha from his bed, and Kalaitha’s
voiced conviction that he was being assaulted by
robbers. Then, disentangling recognitions, the
awakened Nestorians of Bushu heard the news
brought thus pantingly. A groan of despair arose.
‘ Too late ! ’
Another cry followed : ( The sorcerers bewitched
us from our work. Where are they ? ’
4 Zeia! ’
‘ The harlot Romi! ’
‘ Kill them ! ’
They broke down the doors of the alien hut.
It was empty. In the eastern sky a pallid, tentative
hand touched the blinds of darkness. The Bishop
at length made his voice heard above the uproar.
‘ Who will come with me to the dam ? ’
‘ Too late ! ’
Now from Bushu itself they could hear the sound
of the coming flood, and, slowly, the hand poised
in the heavens drew wider the curtain of the day.
88
PERSIAN DAWNS
With that filtering of light a strayed dam-guardian
came stumbling into the village street.
‘ The sorcerers—the dam ! ’
The cry brought silence. The Nestorians wheeled
River-wards and looked.
Against the promise of the sunrise, in the dim¬
ness that was almost dawn, two Titans laboured
upon the ridges of the dam. Under their hands the
black wall to the River melted away to right and
left in showering curtains of sand-spume even as
the Bishop watched. And the howl of the nearing
flood rose and rose.
They saw it then. The dark Euphrates banks
glowed grey in a reeling tide of suds, and in that
moment the dam-channel miraculously cleared
clove through to the River ! A boiling yellow tor¬
rent of water poised, hesitated, whelmed leftwards,
burst through the new lock-gates, flooded and spun
and mounted till it brimmed the dam.
Then the gates closed and the surplus of water
swirled outwards to the Euphrates.
XIII
‘ The sorcerers. . . .’
The words rose in a long sigh. The boiling
flood had come and gone. Now dam and channel
alike glimmered lifeless in the light of dawn.
A man near the Bishop gripped his arm and
pointed.
The morning had hesitated still in the sky,
THE FLOODS OF SPRING 89
strangely. Then, slowly out of darkness, that grey
shape like a clenched hand grew to clarity again.
From its midst a long red beam of sunlight traversed
the sky, quivered, hesitated, acquired hilt and
guard, became a sword, and twice, gigantic, arc’ed
across the sky.
Nerses crossed himself and prayed, his mind a
tumult. And when he raised his head again day
had come upon the land.
IV
THE LAST OGRE
i
SPRING in the uplands of Alarlu in the year
1263 of the Old Calendar. Un-dreaming a
new one. Bishop Nerses, all the long winter days
and nights, had so busied himself with that stupen¬
dous Contemporary Chronicle that the contemporary
life of his diocese had almost escaped his notice.
The snows of winter shivered and silted against
the horn panes of his tower window as he sat and
wrote far into each night, perched high above the
Persian foothills and the lightless deserts of Meso¬
potamia. Eidon, his chaplain, young and vigorous
and confident, saw to the spiritual needs of the
Nestorian farmers of the Alarlu plateau; Amima
Nerses, confident, vigorous, young, saw to the
physical needs and necessities of the same com¬
munity, organising the winter-time hunting and
meat-curing, gathering and staffing the great annual
caravan which descended on the southern lands
to dispose of Alarlu’s surplus products, tending the
sick, brow-beating the bullying, carrying out a
multitude of duties as the warden of the
plateau. . . .
Sometimes of a winter morning, his window
opened to the frosty fall of sunlight, himself apace
in search of the ideal word or phrase, the Bishop
would glance out and see Amima, young face grave
and composed, a Mongol bow slung at her back,
90
THE LAST OGRE 91
ride forth on this or that expedition amid the sleep¬
ing fields. ... An ideal daughter—if she had but
been a son, as the Bishop records he thought,
wryly unhumorous.
And, almost abruptly, the Bishop was aware of
the coming of the Spring. Sleet no longer pelted
his tower. Of a night it would be either a moon¬
lighted, soundless world without, or the dark
alive with the soft, fresh hiss of rain. Sometimes,
writing far into the dawn, and rising in weariness
and opening those windows, a smell of greenness
and growth would flood his tower chamber,
moistly, confusingly, so that Neesan Nerses would
stand and dream and forget his Chronicle and the
urgencies of history the while the Persian uplands
wheeled eastwards into the sunrise and the cocks
began to crow in Alarlu village. . . .
And across that beginning of Spring seven cen¬
turies ago, green and ablow with new leafage and
pasturage, Amima comes riding young and restless
and rebellious, so that one stares at her in the
dusty pages of Nerses’ Chronicle with a sudden ache
of wonder and recognition. So, indeed, the Bishop
himself seems to have stared. The Spring and a
maid. . . .
Restless and strange and wayward, no longer the
plateau’s grave, competent guardian. She quarrelled
with Eidon over a detail of Mass, egged on the
peasants of Alarlu to absent themselves
from early devotions, and might well have created a
fresh Nestorian schism but for the intervention of
92
PERSIAN D AIT NS
the Bishop. Her singing was heard no longer;
slim and dark and bored, clad in that male attire
of boots and jerkin and bonnet that still occasionally
shocked the Bishop’s notions of propriety, she
lounged in the halls of Alarlu palace, eating sweet¬
meats she was wont to scorn, teasing the great
Balkh hunting hounds, intractable and impossible.
Or she would climb to the Bishop’s own room with
unwarrantable frequency and prowl amid his
manuscripts, and peer whistling from his window,
and prowl again, softly, slim shoulders a-droop,
padding like a restless panther.
‘ Amima.’
4 My father ? ’
* Come here.’
Standing in front of him, warily, restlessly even
while standing, the Bishop would see in her,
startled, with a wild pang of pain for forgotten
Springs, himself of other years and all the quests
he had once sworn to lead and all the questionings
to answer . . . before his life had been snared
by a room in a tower and the scripts of ancient un¬
wisdom.
But Amima was a woman. There need be
neither quests nor questionings for her if the plain
and obvious need could be supplied. The Bishop
sighed. That need was a husband—and where
might such be found in these wild lands and
times ?
I think he fell into a puzzled day-dreaming then,
the while she stood and faced him. But his mind
THE LAST OGRE
93
leapt to startled attention on realisation that she
was speaking to him, and realisation of the purport
of her speech.
‘ Father, I wish to go hunting in the Kablurz
Beg/
‘Eh?’
She nodded, holding his eyes steadfastly, her hand
knotting and unknotting in the leathern horse-
thong she had brought up to the tower. Nerses
stared at her astounded, as he tells, and then himself
looked through the open window, across the after¬
noon sunlight peace of Alarlu, at that dank, craggy
toweringness on the north-eastern sky—the bastions
and ramparts of the desolate mountain-jumble
that crept upon Persia from out the wild wastes
of Baluchistan. Perhaps twenty miles away—
though, lagging behind the times, Nerses still
thought of distances in parsangs—those mountains
rose to his gaze. They seemed nearer in the sun-
haze, shining blue and immediate on the upper
summits with unmelted and unmeltable snows.
Save for the scarce and wary trapper unchancily
snaring and hunting its fringes it was land un¬
explored and unknown, the great range of the
Kablurz Beg. Land once demon-haunted and of
ill repute, as legend had told to the sceptical Bishop.
. . . Demons there were, but their hunting-grounds
the canyons and dark corridors of the human
heart, not of any mountain range, as the Chronicles
record his own heretical convictions. . . . But
for Amima to hunt there . . .
94
PERSIAN DAWNS
‘You may hunt the plains—as you do—-for
buzzard, our uplands for deer. What more do
you seek ? ’
‘ I wish to hunt in the Kablurz Beg. Oh, my
father, I am so weary of the little life of this little
place ! I want to see other lands if but for a day,
if but at a distance of twenty miles from Alarlu. . . .
You will let me go ? ’
She had dropped on one knee then, her hands on
his knees, the rebellious restlessness for a moment
transmuted into something else, and her eyes, dark
and deep, smiling up at him. He stared at her
troubledly. A maid and the Spring.
He said, slowly, ‘ To-morrow I will ask Eidon
the Chaplain to gather a hunting-party for the waste
lands of the north. Will that content you ? There
are lion there. But the Kablurz Beg ’—and he
looked away from that stark gaze of hers to repeat
with due gravity what he himself believed to be but
the fuddled imaginings of work-weary peasants—
‘ it is said that a great grey monster, as in ancient
times, haunts the passes near to Alarlu.’
‘ I also have heard of the Grey Beast. I do not
believe it is a devil. Only some bear/ She had
stood up. Her eyes were defiant now. ‘ My
father, I wish to go hunting in the mountains/
* And that I forbid—or any thought or intention
of such hunting. You understand ? ’
She nodded. She knelt and kissed his hand,
formally. She turned and left him, and the Bishop,
with a sigh of relief and impatience, went back to
THE LAST OGRE 95
his scripts, hearing as the night came on the moan
of the Spring wind sweeping Alarlu from its icy
birthplace on the mountain ledges of the Kablurz
Beg.
ii
And next morning Amima was missing, and all
that day, and all the night that followed, and there
was a ringing of alarm bells in Alarlu heard far down
in the deserts, and a wild drift of rumour and
surmise from peasant hut to hut.
Youthfully and very coolly and unexcitedly
Amima had calculated the consequences of her act:
twelve hours of anxiety for her father and then a
rating and punishment for herself when she returned
at dusk. These could be borne. But not the
challenge and wonder of the unexplored mountains.
So at dawn she crept out from Alarlu palace,
taking the Mongol bow that had been her brother’s
—a bow of overlapping plates of horn, a magical
instrument with a flat trajectory and a mighty
twang in the loosening—and a bag of dried fruits
and a hunting-knife. These she bound to the saddle
of her pony and led him softly from the courtyard.
It was but barely dawn. She mounted on a path
that ran betwixt the little millet-fields of the Nes-
torians, and glanced back once and blessed her
father, gravely, for she loved him, and turned her
eyes to that shadow against the morning that was
her planned hunting-ground ; and set her pony at a
sharp trot to the brink of Alarlu plateau.
96
PERSIAN DAWNS
On that brink, at the edge of the pass that led
down to the plain, almost she halted and turned
back for a cloak, for the wind was bitter. But
down through the morning mists she saw the desert-
lands already gleaming cobalt in the sunshine. . . .
And she would be back in Alarlu before the night
fell.
Two miles away, round the far shoulder of the
plateau, she turned her pony’s head towards that
far glistering splendour that a few moments before
had been a dark matutinal indecision. Now, sun-
kissed, pinnacle after pinnacle betook to itself an
icy corona. The pony trotted forward into the
tundra country, and Amima unslung the horn
bow in readiness and at length was out on that
expedition that had haunted her imagination all
through the dark winter months.
in
It was a desolate land, neither desert nor herbage,
but a treeless waste of thin bushes, ungreen, un¬
rustling in the morning heat. Nothing lived or
moved, it seemed to the Nestorian girl, but the
pony and herself. The air, not yet the usual dank
stagnation of the plains, tasted like warmed moun¬
tain ale. Amima shook her pony into a trot, into a
gallop that was presently, her mount entering into
the spirit of the hour, a wild flight across the waste
lands, their centaur shadow in pursuit. When at
last she pulled in the pony and glanced back
THE LAST OGRE
97
towards Alarlu she gave a little gasp of surprise.
The plateau had dwindled to a dot on the
horizon. . . .
The sun climbed; the bushes acquired shadows
jet as ink-nut juice ; the pony trotted perspiringly,
once stopping gladly and with heaving flanks to
plunge his muzzle in a little spring that rose in the
tundra in one spot and dwindled to a seeping extinc¬
tion a few yards away. It was while she bent over
her mount, allowing him to drink sparingly, that
Amima heard a rustling in some bushes in front.
She raised her head and simultaneously was aware
that her pony had raised his, had ceased to drink,
and was trembling as with grass-ague.
A great, black-maned lion had risen and stopped
to sniff the air and cast an incurious glance at pony
and rider before turning about and padding off,
at an unhurried lope, towards the two-miles distant
spurs of the Kablurz Beg.
For a moment, one guesses, Amima’s heart stood
still. But the moment passed. Not without result
had she been reared in a time of wild alarums and
wilder essays ; and the Spring was with her; and
never before had she hunted lion alone. . . .
She strung the Mongol bow, bending the shining
plates of horn to thigh and knee, and fitted a
steel-tipped arrow, and lashed the pony into
pursuit.
The lion heard the beat of their coming, and
faced round and growled, amazedly, warningly.
The shivering pony slowed down to a canter;
PERSIAN DAWNS
98
halted. Amima rose in her short stirrups, and
levelled the arrow of the flat trajectory sweep, and
felt her mount quiver beneath her as the bow-
cord twanged like the plucked string of a Titan
lyre. . . .
Thrice she succeeded in dragging her pony
beyond reach of the lion’s squattering charge.
The third time, charging, it broke its bound in
mid-air and squatted on the ground, tearing at the
arrow in its chest. Amima strove to loose another
arrow, and at length succeeded. But the quiverings
of her mount flung the projectile wide of its mark,
singing over the head of the clawing, spitting beast
she hunted. But at that sound and arrow-impact
in the ground so near at hand, the lion crept to its
feet, turned tail, and fled. Amima thrust the pony
again on its track, and raised her eyes, and saw with
amazement the walls of the Kablurz Beg, long
desired, attained at last, towering almost overhead.
IV
They rise cragged and bushless now, treeless, a
wildered jumble of naked escarpments serrating
the far sky-line from the roof of that Monastery
which houses unread and forgotten the Chronicles
of Neesan Nerses. But seven centuries of suns and
winds and the rains of denudation have played
on those mountain masses since Amima Nerses,
hot on the trail of the wounded lion, entered
the range through a bush-choked gulley and found
THE LAST OGRE
99
herself in a maze of canyons and corridors patterned
and choked in the surge of a cold, jungle life.
Conifers dropped lianas across the pathless path;
ferns, rank and gigantic, scraped the sides of her
mount. Torrents droned in unseen caverns of the
rock. High above this green, tenebrous world the
sun played on the frozen points that crowned
the scarred cliff-walls.
The lion seemed to have vanished. Then she
saw him again, going very slowly far up a bush-
strewn slope She urged the pony in pursuit and
for a little, because the quarry went draggingly,
gained on him, crossing the slope briskly. But its
farther side shelved more steeply than the portion
she had ascended. The pony hesitated, then floun¬
dered downwards, snorting and unsure of foot.
It was deeper there, the cliff-walls curving over¬
head.
And at that moment the lion sprang.
It had crouched behind a lichened boulder.
Leaping, arrow in chest, it screamed a fraction too
soon for fruition of its purpose. The pony, over-
nervous already, swerved and dipped, dragging the
bow from Amima’s hand with the saddle-peak,
flinging Amima herself far among the boulders!
Rolling, she flung her arms across her throat and
face, as she had been warned to do if ever she lay
at the mercy of the great carnivores. She heard the
lion roar again, heard a wild clatter of hooves, and
then ceased from hearing anything.
IOO
PERSIAN DAWNS
v
When she awoke the sun stood overhead. But
for the unceasing shrill of mountain streams the
jumbled, lost valleys of the Kablurz Beg drowsed
undisturbed in the seep of sunshine. It was very
warm. The rocks against which she lay seemed
to perspire moistly. She dragged herself, achingly,
to her feet.
Near at hand lay the lion, dead. There was no
sign of the pony. Alone and weaponless she was
left in the heart of the haunted mountains.
But that strange, insolent courage that is of youth
and no historical epoch did not wane from her at all.
Very thirsty, she sought out a pool and drank there
and laved her face, and loosened her hair about her
shoulders for comfort, and wept a little, not from
fear but vexation for that lost pony and bow. Then
she went and stood in the rill-haunted silence of
the canyon and looked in some pride at the lion.
If she could but carry him back to Alarlu !
But that was impossible. She would have task
enough in transporting herself thither. She set
out.
At first the way was clear enough—the slope
over which she had galloped, the gulley she had
descended. At the top of the latter a black panther
slipped past her, cat-like, with suave grace. She
sprang aside with a startled cry ; but the beast paid
no heed. A little shaken, she turned again to resume
her journey out through the mountain bastions to
THE LAST OGRE
ioi
the tundra-land. Strange that the way showed no
mark of the pony’s passage.
VI
The sun was low in the sky. Heat had departed
from the dark inlands of the Kablurz Beg, and a
grey fog crept and frothed and poured in soft,
soundless billows through the boulder-strewn
canyons. And through those canyons, stumbling
now and then, Amima, hopelessly lost, still sought
an exit to the world beyond.
She sat down and thought. In less than an hour
it would be sunset and darkness. Unless she
found some shelter from the night, from beasts
and . . .
She sat, very tired, watching the light die from
the blue peaks overhead. At her feet a little stag¬
nant lake shimmered and rippled in the half-twilight.
Beyond and around, crystalline, gigantic, the
canyon cliffs pierced upwards to peer in the face of
the dying day.
Day that was yet upon Alarlu, kindly and secure,
sleeping in the loveliness of a springtime after¬
noon. . . .
But of that she would not think—of neither that
nor the horrific tales of the peasant huts: of the
beasts and worse that ravened here at night.
She raised her head. It had grown darker even
while she sat. She stood up and looked round her
bewilderedly. And then, across the little lake and
102
PERSIAN DAWNS
far down a narrow corridor in the cliffs, she saw
a light pringle to being against the coming of the
night.
VII
It was no cave from which the light emanated,
but the merest fault in the rock-surface that left a
triangular cleft there, some twenty feet deep. And
midway this cleft burned, unattended, the fire.
Amima crept into the cleft and warmed herself
at the blaze. Outside : the night-fretted silences
of the Kablurz Beg and its winding mazes. Inside :
nothing but the crackle and hiss of the dried bush-
branches, no mark or indication of him who had
kindled them.
But the light grew, and at the far end of the cleft
she saw a thing that seemed not of natural formation.
She went towards it, cautiously. It was a kind of
nest, built of twigs and long grass, and, bending
over it, Amima Nerses started back with a cry that
echoed far out the cleft and was caught and rever¬
berated away and away and back again, rock-
impelled, unendingly.
For in the nest lay dead a thing that might have
been a human child but that it was a Grey Demon
of the mountains : No lie, no old wives’ tale as
her father had taught her to believe, but a loath¬
some reality.
She would have turned and fled then. The echoes
of her startled cry had died away. But now she
heard them replaced by another sound. It drew
THE LAST OGRE
103
steadily neater and neater, a horrid, baying cry,
the weary cry of a tortured animal, a snarling,
moaning gibberish. Nearer it came and, looking
out, for a time the girl could see no cause of it.
And then she saw.
By the mere of the lake the Thing came bounding
into the fire-radiance. Neither upright nor on all
fours it came. Its skin gleamed a hideous, dead
grey. It dragged a great club behind it, snuffling
up the slope to the cleft. Its head and face came in
view then and as she saw them, Amima, lost far
from Alarlu and its shelters, heard wrung from her
lips such cry of horror and disgust as would surely
echo to the plateau itself.
VIII
Many parsangs away in the sunset at that moment
Bishop Nerses and Eidon the Chaplain were camp-
ing the main body of the search-party under the
outer walls of the Kablurz Beg.
‘It may be my daughter has found shelter in
some cave of the mountains. We can do no more
for her until the light comes again/
Eidon the Chaplain shook his head. ‘By the
claw-marks on the pony’s saddle it seems that some
wild beast sebzed her/ He glanced fearfully towards
the dark, sky-towering walls. ‘ Or some devil of the
mountains/
But even at that moment he found his Bishop as
heretical as ever. ‘ Demons there are—but in our
104
PERSIAN DAWNS
hearts, Eidon. Pride and Fear and Hopelessness
are the devils that cry in the night. All else are
phantasies.’
‘ From antiquity our Church has believed in the
existence of demons.’
c From antiquity our Church has suffered from
the existence of fools. Heed to the men, Eidon.
I would be alone.’
It was dreadful in those night hours. What from
cold and fear the shivering Nestorian search-party
slept but fitfully about its camp-fire. Nerses him¬
self sat unsleeping, head in hands, listening to that
far, attenuated twitter and rustle in the darkness-
shrouded mazes of the mountains. One of Amima’s
hounds crept up to him and thrust a cold nose
against his cheek, and sat with him listening. A
pony stamped and whinnied, smelling the prowlings
of some great cat. The stars came out and glittered
and wheeled down into the west. And at last the
Bishop saw the fires dying, and that it was dawn.
Blue-tinted and cold, sharp-edged, the near
peaks stood out as the details of a slip-painting
against the copper bowl of the dawn. Remote on
the tundra-fringe the jackals were baying. But, as
the little expedition from Alarlu rose and shook
itself and mounted, one of the great Balkh hunting
hounds broke loose from its lead. It capered for
a moment, stood hesitant, then, nose to the
ground, headed up the nearest passage into the
mountains.
Nerses stared after it, glanced at the ground near
THE LAST OGRE
105
the canyon entrance, and turned to Eidon. 4 Loose
the other hounds. We will follow them.’
Loosed they were and went baying up the rugged
track^that still, in its soft parts, bore marks of a
pony’s hoof-prints. They were on the trail of
Amima Nerses.
IX
That trail had long been lost on the banks of a
stream that at length ceased from being and vanished
roaring into a cliff-side vault. They were many
parsangs deep in the mountains’ heart. Overhead,
the morning that had been a promise was now a
skyey fulfilment. The hounds squatted panting.
And then, while they stood by that stream at a
loss, and the Bishop, as he tells, at last gave up hope,
Eidon the Chaplain called to him, and called the
Alarlu men to silence, and all of them listened.
It was the sound of a voice lifted, singing. Far
away,, eerily, wonderfully, the singer sang in the
morning hush, and Neesan Nerses felt an icy hand
grip at his heart. The Chaplain Eidon crossed him¬
self and the pallid peasants of the search party
shivered, clutching their bows.
4 It is the lost and wandering ghost of the lady
Amima,’ Eidon whispered by Nerses’ shoulder.
4 Look.’
The hounds had ceased to squat, tongues lolling
out, in lazy enjoyment of the halt. Now they
cowered under the feet of the ponies as though seek-
ing protection from a nameless, bodiless terror:
io6 PERSIAN DAWNS
and as that far singing ceased the beasts lifted their
muzzles, whimpering. At that, says the Bishop,
his own frozen fear went from him. He remembered
only that vivid presence defying him in the palace
tower of Alarlu. . . .
‘ Drive the hounds across the stream.’
So it was done, and, with some urging, the beasts
again picked up the trail and followed it subduedly,
halting every now and then to whimper and cringe.
Behind, splashing through the dark waters, went
Neesan Nerses and his company.
Penetrating from the south, they were in a wilder¬
ness of closed valleys. Ahead gleamed a dark lake.
But minute by minute it brightened with the diffu¬
sion of light from those sun-warmed upper reaches
of the air. And suddenly the singing, the singing
of a Nestorian hymn, in a voice sobbing on the verge
of exhaustion, burst forth again, very near at hand.
The Balkh hounds stopped and backed away, and
no urging would compel them forward again. But
the Bishop had ceased to heed them. He drove his
mount forward betwixt cliff and mere and burst in
view of that cleft where Amima Nerses had sighted
the fire in the sunset dusk of the previous day.
x
The fire a smoke-spiralling heap of embers in the
grey of that mountain morning ; Amima Nerses
in the arms of her father; Eidon, bow bent and
taut, glaring towards the mouth of the cleft;
THE LAST OGRE 107
the peasants of Alarlu staring with protruding eyes ;
the devil . . .
He had crouched and snarled and backed away
at the clatter of their coming; he had caught up
from behind the fire the hideous miniature replica
of himself, and, shielding that, splayed himself back
against the rock, moaning and snarling. And the
scepticism of Neesan Nerses wavered and sank,
looking over the bowed head and hysterical weeping
of Amima at that frightsome caricature of men.
Great and squat and naked, browless and chinless,
with an arching neck and massive, down-thrust
head, it crouched blinking, facing them; it was
matted in a growth of red-grey hair; it stared
forth at them wildly, glazedly, trying, the Bishop
realised, to raise in challenge the great malformed
head overarched by the brutish neck. . . .
The peasants, a Bishop to lead them, the Church
to defend, were half-recovering from their fright.
Nerses was aware of a bending of bows under the
direction of Eidon. So aware also was Amima. She
broke from her father’s arms.
‘ Do not loose, do not kill! It has not harmed
me. ... It has but grieved above its dead while all
night I have sung ’
And. then, says the Bishop, an unpremeditated
resolution came on him. He waved Amima to
silence, waved aside the threatening bows, and, his
hand aloft, walked forward towards the Thing.
It snarled, blood-curdlingly, with a tightening of
pendulous lips. For answer the Bishop made the
io8
PERSIAN DAWNS
sign of the cross and halted not three feet away from
its threatening presence.
XI
... A race of demons, forgotten by God,
abandoned by nature, lost in forgotten mountains
of the world; retreating and fading to the waste
lands of the earth, leaving behind a rumour and
memory of ogre and devil to startle and bemuse the
human cohorts out on their mission of conquering
the earth. . . . Dim age on age, with the closing in
of that alien, hostile world about their last retreats,
the demons staring their wonder and fear of it from
mountain-eyries and darkened forests as the fires of
humankind lit up the nights. . . . Uncomprehend¬
ing, forgotten, discarded in God’s vast purposes as
yet might be their own conquerors in the deeps of
unborn days. . . . Dwindling to a score, to a last
prowling hunter of the twilights, the last of his
young clasped dead in his arms.
So, tells Neesan Nerses, he dreamt or visioned or
read in a last flame and flow of broken images in
those glazed, brutish eyes of the Thing that fronted
him that morning in a cul-de-sac of the Kablurz
Beg. No noice came from it, but in the hideous
eyes dawned a look that spoke and wrung his heart.
He raised his hand and again made that sign of an
Agony he believed would yet salve and transmute
all agonies, human, demoniac, bestial, the world
had ever known. And the eyes of the Grey Monster,
THE LAST OGRE
109
it seemed to him, lighted for a moment. It half-
uncrouched and rose towards him.
High in the morning air rose the twang of the
bowstring of Eidon the Chaplain.
XII
And the Bishop mounted his daughter behind
him, and drove the white-faced Nestorians from that
place, and without a backward glance rode behind
them out through the maze-like gulleys of the
Kablurz Beg for many parsangs ; and behind them
the dank jungles closed and left no trace ; and they
came at last to the plains and the Spring sunshine
again. Strangely silent, unfrightened, wide-eyed,
with meaning at last in her Spring, in the blowing
of its every bud, went Amima. And they rode out
from the mountains into the sunlight, all of them,
into the sunlight and brightness of their days and
years, and the darkness that closed on them long
centuries ere we were born.
In front of me, transcribing to our alien script
and speech this tale of Neesan Nerses, lies portrayed
by the hand and imagination of a modern artist the
probable appearance of that strange precursor of
Man, the inhuman monster who left his bones and
fire-sites and clumsy weapons in Spy and Gibraltar
and the caves of Palestine, who perished from the
no
PERSIAN DAW'NS
earth in the fourth of the glacial ages—all, it may be,
but stray packs of his descendants who hid and fled
and dwindlingly survived in the mountain chains
that branch from the Roof of the World. A raving
thing of lust and blood and brutishness he glares
from the artist’s page, this Neanderthal Man.
But I remember that last monster that wept its
dead in a cavern of the Persian hills, and with Nerses
grope through pity to a clearer understanding—
even, it may be, as the charitable of some alien
species will do to our last descendants if we weary
God and He put us aside.
V
CARTAPHILUS
i
THOUSANDS of words have mouldered into
illegibility on the fringes of that manuscript
record which Neesan Nerses of Alarlu penned seven
centuries ago. He called it his Polychronzcon, and
here and there even yet are colours that shine un¬
dimmed from phrase and phantasy. But the years
have done more than dim the record : they have
rendered long stretches of it unreadable. One
turns page on dusty page of the crabbed Nestorian
script, dull, alien, incomprehensible, beyond the
enthusings of such mere raider in history as myself.
They go back to the shelves of Mevr’s Monastery,
there to await the coming of that inevitable German,
bespectacled, perspiring, who will read them and
love them for themselves and print them all at
Stuttgart in ten fat folios with footnotes. . . .
It was towards the end of my stay in the Monas¬
tery, and I sat reshuffling the pages hurriedly when
a word glanced up at me from the scuffle of the
yellowed sheets. It glanced again. Cartaphilus.
I remembered that section—such of it as I had
persevered to read. I had halted midway the first
three thousand words, resolute that M^atthew
Paris s Latin had told the tale better than ever
Nerses Persian. And how many the variants of the
tale that had drifted east and west in that century of
theirs ! It had blown up suddenly, a great smoke-
cloud of tenebrous legend out of the past when
111
112
PERSIAN DAWNS
Rome ruled the world. It was a story that haunted
the thirteenth century, till everywhere men talked
of it and debated it and looked on each straying
tramp and Jewish pedlar with a wild surmise.
Impostors innumerable had risen with claims that
doctors disputed in council. Singers had sung
that story, in Europe, in Syria, in the Crusaders’
camps, in the Christian-manned galleys of Baber—
half-fearful, half-desirous, singers and hearers,
that a step would sound and Cartaphilus himself
come shuffling in out of the night.
And then I found I was deep in the later half of
the record I had passed by in such impatience.
Sis—Evid—Lur’s olive groves in autumn—the
Figure at Mailapur—a Christian refugee with a
tale from the slave-pits of Baghdad ; what had
these to do with that tale that haunted the world ?
ii
This, tells Nerses: On a winter morning of the
year 1250 King Haithon of Lower Armenia had a
message despatched to every guard-house in and
around the city of Sis. The knight Baisan Evid,
wherever found, was to be apprehended and
brought to the palace in chains.
Baisan Evid ! The news sped beyond the guard¬
houses to the quarters of the women, the kennels
of the lackeys, the Templars’ barracks. Evid the
young, Evid the cruel, Evid of the shining sword
and graceless speech—Evid the palace favourite !
CARTAPHILUS II3
That buzz of thirteenth-century gossip and surmise
rises fresh and vivid enough from the Bishop’s
pages. Presently that buzz was one of delight.
It had been discovered that the favourite’s paramour
was -in another sense—the king’s favourite !
Grinning messengers whispered it and licked their
lips. For the tragedy to the actor was the comedy
to the spectator in bloody Sis—and indeed in all
that world where a madness of new-learnt cruelty
moaned and whimpered in the footsteps of new-
learnt knowledge. Evid and Miriam—they had
vanished into the mountains for a day. And when
they returned 
That they did at nightfall, carelessly enough,
pleasantly wearied from their riding the mountain
bridle-paths. High up at one point, late in the after¬
noon, Sis gleaming below them like a garnet in a
crystalline cup, Evid had drawn rein and laughed,
breathing the air greatly into a young, strong
Ugh! Good to smell clean air after weeks in
that rat-run. . . . Could not we stay all night ? ’
. Miriam shook her head. * dhe rat would scamper
in our tracks.’
He laughed again. The breath rose in a little
cloud from their halted horses. He put his arm
about her, carelessly, haughtily, as were all his
actions. ‘ The knight who robbed King Rat! ’
She sat very silent in the afternoon sunlight, still
and silent, as he was afterwards to remember:
Haithon s mistress, the king’s paramour whom he
H
114 PERSIAN DAWNS
had stolen. But presently, not looking at him, she
spoke.
‘ “ King Rat ”—cruel and mean and dull. But
still a king. And, in'his foolish way, he has loved
both of us.’
He raised fair eyebrows at her, pale Greek face—
for he came, says Nerses, of the family of Baz,
claiming Byzantine descent with better warrant
than many another claimant—amused and indifferent
above the green samite cloak he wore. ‘ Are we
to waste the day brooding on the virtues of
Haithon ? ’
‘ Evid, have you never in your life pitied any¬
thing or anyone ? ’
* Pity ? ’ Spurring his horse down the path he
stared back at her puzzledly, haughtily. ‘ Pity ?
What need have I of pity ? ’
in
And at the gates of Sis they took him and chained
and tore the green samite cloak from his shoulders.
Miriam vanished from his sight. He was urged
on foot through the mired streets to the palace
gates, thrust roughly within them, and led to the
presence of the ancient king. Wizened and
wrinkled and old, his hands yet shaking with rage,
Haithon peered up from his cushions at that
haughty Greek face fronting him.
‘ Now you will tell of that which has passed
between you and Miriam,’ the King whispered.
CAKTAPHILUS n5
And Evid said nothing. Then the King raised his
hand, smiting with a wire whip that lacerated the
haughty Greek face. And Evid said nothing.
And the King whispered again: ‘ Now you will
tell.’
But Evid neither spoke nor moved, chill and
contemptuous. It was evening by then. The
shadow of the old King flung from the wall-cressets
was like that of a gigantic toad as he levered himself
to his feet.
‘ Bring the prisoner.’
So they took him from out those gay and painted
halls, golden and blue, hung with ancient tapestries
from the times of the Sassanids. They took him
down a little stairway that wound and wound far in
the heart of the living rock. To Evid, fearless yet,
yet strung and quivering with expectation, a curious
illusion came : it was as though he were being led
into the deeps of his own heart.
Never such darkness. And as they went lower
and lower the chained knight heard on either side
lethargic scufflings and the slow clank of fetters
trailed in the night-blinded gropings of chained and
hidden men. Now, says Nerses, they came at last
to a chamber of torment.
Here you will speak,’ the old King whispered,
iv
He had spoken. Remembering that, he lay and
raged with shame in the darkness. So, it seemed
PERSIAN DAWNS
116
to him, he had lain for week on week of shame and
bodily agony. At first he had believed himself
blinded, but as the days passed he had come to see
the charcoal blackness of his cell faintly sprayed as
with a ghostly snow of light. Ghost: ghost of that
world above, where the sunshine raced on the long
Armenian roads to the still beauties of sunset, where
mountain-shepherds drowsed at noon, where the
hot lists clanged in the wheeling practice of the
Templar knights. Sunshine and day that he would
never see again 
And then he would move, and his body seem as
if afire, and he would bite his lips and groan—-but
silently, lest some spy of Haithon’s listened still.
If he were but whole and free again ! If Haithon
were in his hands, that shrivelled throat in his
hands 
And then he became aware of another, one who
seemed hardly to breathe or move, who shared
that darkness-shrouded dungeon with him. A
faint clank of a chain, a deeper blackness, a shadow
in darkness would sometimes move at the far end
of the cell. He called to it between his teeth.
‘ Haithon’s spy !—or are you also a prisoner ? ’
There was no answer. But it seemed to Evid
he heard a sigh. He cursed the sigher, and ground
his teeth again because of the pain of his tormented
body, and fell and fell into abysses of sleep from
which fresh onslaughts of pain uptore him. Awake,
he found a hand upon his brow, soothing him—a
hand rough-fingered but strangely gentle. And
CARTAPHILUS n7
for the first time since childhood, says Nerses, he
wept.
‘ Who are you ? ’ he asked.
But he was answered again only by that sigh.
The other prisoner had moved away. It seemed
that his chain reached far. Could it be that he was
dumb—some mutilated palace victim ? Evid called
that question, but heard no answer. And a strange
tide of angry compassion flooded his haughty
heart.
‘ Hear me, friend : If I win free but an hour—
terribly will I avenge both of us! ’
But neither was that answered. Evid fell back on
elbow, and then, says Nerses, was suddenly vouch¬
safed a terrible vision.
For he saw all the prisons of the earth, and the
maimed, forsaken multitudes prisoned therein—
longing as he longed for star and sun and the kiss
of the wind, guiltily guiltless as himself, men who
had loved and feared, laughed and wept and known
surcease of sorrow, men who had dreamt their
shining dreams. And all his own years of easy
life and facile lust and unthinking cruelty men
in the dungeons of Sis had lain unpitied by him in
such agonies as his own body knew at last. And,
like a great beast squatting against the sun, he saw
that unthinking cruelty for the monster that ruled
his world, terrible, implacable, unsated. . . .
Why then did the Christ delay that Second Com¬
ing of His that was to crumble away prison and
palace alike like the wrack of a dream ?
118
PERSIAN DAWNS
v
They are ablow with flowers this time of year,
the mounds that mark the city of Sis, where Baisan
Evid lay and questioned the darkness with despair
seven centuries ago. But that question of his,
old in his age, has echoed fresh in agony down to
this. Nor need we, with Nerses, presuppose miracle
for that vision that came to the young knight in the
cells below the palace of Haithon. Youth, edged
steel-keen with pride itself, it was that had smitten
through to searing vision of that horror he had
gone unheeding. . . .
In an agony he called aloud to the silent other
who shared his cell:
* O friend, I am fearful and forsaken. Tell me
your name.’
And then at last that other answered him, in a
low, still voice, sweet and full, burdened with a
sadness that yet seemed undespairing :
‘ Men call me Cartaphilus.’
vi
Cartaphilus ! Baisan Evid shrank and quivered
in the darkness. Pity and compassion at last his
heart had reached through its own pain. But now
came fear.
Cartaphilus, the Jew who had mocked the Passion
of Christ, and because of that mocking still wandered
the world unresting and undying ; Cartaphilus the
CARTAPHILUS
ll9
Denier; Cartaphilus the forsaken of God and
men. . . .
Not for a moment, it seems, did he doubt the
identity of the other. For who but the accursed
himself would claim to be that Cartaphilus on whose
name even the paynim Muslim spat ? And all
Armenia was filled with rumours of his sojourn
in the land, though it was said the horror of that
unaging body and face went cloaked and hooded
perpetually from the eyes of men. . . . Evid heard
a question quaver again on his own lips :
‘ How came it that Haithon prisoned you ? ’
There was no reply. Himself shrinking from
speech, shuddering at memory of the contact of
that hand, Evid lay and brooded in the darkness.
And presently neither sleeping nor waking, solution
of the world’s salvation burst and flowered in his
mind as a lambent flame. That vision of the world
of evil and the Christ Who delayed His Coming
inexplicably  Yet inexplicable no longer. For
still the Wandering Jew denied his Master.
Still, century on century, that Master awaited
acknowledgment from him He had set to wander
the earth. Still, in the dust and din of the rushing
years. He waited for that cry of belief that would
rise to Him as the trumpet-call for His return 
VII
He started awake with a light flashed in his eyes
and a rough foot touching him. He started up,
120
PERSIAN DAWNS
his fetters clanking, memory of the dream that was
no dream vivid upon him. The two gaolers who
had come for him stared stolidly, but he cared
nothing for their starings, himself peering into the
far corner of the cell. And then a cry burst from
his lips:
‘ Cartaphilus ! Where have you taken Carta-
philus ? ’
He struggled and fought with them, a madman,
as they dragged him from the cell, and they were
men astounded, for none before had ever shown
reluctance to leave the dungeons of Sis. But he
was weak and impotent enough in their hands as
they took him to the upper air again, bathed him
and clothed him and told him his fate. It was
banishment.
‘ And a fate you’ve to thank the Caliph’s wines
for,’ grunted the head gaoler. ‘ They softened
Haithon. He sent back the slut Miriam in payment
and ordered your release. Well, have you no
message of gratitude ? ’
But they saw then that he had gone mad in the
torment and darkness. For he heeded nothing to
their talk, only babbled unendingly of that other
who had shared his cell with him, babbled still as
they thrust him out of the prison gates.
‘ What have you done with him ? In the name of
God tell me what you have done ? ’
The head gaoler banged the gates. ‘ No prisoner
but your idiot self has been released. Stay—one
stout clown there was, sold as slave to a merchant
CARTAPHILUS
m
from Kin or Ind.’ The man grinned. ‘ So get
you after him thither if you will! ’
VIII
It was spring. The roads were alive with a motley
processioning—those roads that bestrode ’twixt
sunrise and sunset the mountains of Armenia.
Camel-trains with grain and fodder, trains of asses
with wines and spices, trains of young ponies,
half-wild, laden with hides and furs, driven by the
yellow plainsmen of the north—they passed and
counter-passed through the rugged defiles that
guarded Sis. And amid them, tramping with staff
and wallet into the east, went the mad knight Baisan
Evid.
A merchant from Kin or Ind with a new slave in
his train ? Some laughed ; some cursed him and
rode on ; some picked up staves to beat him away
from the gates of their encampments and then
dropped the staves and grew quiet at sight of that
look on his face. Merchants ? Merchants innumer¬
able. But stay : one such as he named had taken
the roads to Baghdad. . . .
Questioning no more, hirpling long leagues till
his body recovered its strength again, the prisoner
from the dungeons of Sis followed the merchant’s
tracks. Storms of rain and sleet raged up from the
plains ; he tramped them unaware. To left and
right towered the mountains, poising above him
each freezing nightfall as if to fall and crush him
122
PERSIAN DAWNS
while he slept; but his sleepings were few.
Mountains ? They would dissolve away as a mist
and a spume, they and all the world of cruelty and
shame, when once he had knelt beside Cartaphilus,
pleaded with him, heard rise to the lips of the For¬
saken that Name that would bring in splendour and
flame the Second Advent.
Wolves in packs ravened on the slopes beyond
Lake Van. A terrified caravan of Basrah traders,
barricaded from the beasts, saw the long figure,
white-faced, black-wrapped, hatless, of one who
came striding down a mountain path at sunset
with score on score of wolves at his heels, snarling
and whining. Heedless of either men or beasts,
encampment or coming darkness, the man went by
and vanished into the eastern night, as one trader
long afterwards told to Nerses of Alarlu. ‘ Some
thought him a mountain devil, but I saw his face,
young and white and sealed with the madness of
God, and knew he had come unharmed through
the wolf valley because he walked both unfearing
and unseeing.’
So, through that hasting spring of shining days
and aurulent nights, set with stars that he might
not stumble, Baisan Evid crossed the wild lands,
unharmed, unquestioned, up through Erzerum,
into the country of the Comani where league on
league lay the cobalt deserts, overhung by blood-
red suns, haunted by the foul avigi-birds. Still the
merchant eluded his pursuit; still, where others
failed or perished he pressed forward, crowned and
CARTAPHILUS
123
guarded in the garment of his purpose. Bandits
besieged the city of Mosul; he walked through
their ambushments unharmed and undetected,
the first stranger from the outside world since
the siege had begun. ... So they told him, the
Mosul innkeepers, staring at him askance. But he
found they lied or had been misinformed—one
other had come from the west, a prison-exile who
had gone on towards Baghdad. A little Christian
trader told him this, two days after his coming to
Mosul, peering fearfully to left and right the
while.
‘ I myself was told of him but an hour ago. They
say—but I do not know—they say it was the Wan¬
dering Jew himself! ’
Cartaphilus again ! How had he freed himself
from slavery? But that question could abide
Baghdad. Ragged, shoeless, unlingering, Evid
took the southern road to the city of the Caliphs,
and a little Christian crowd gathered at the southern
gate and stared and gestured after him.
IX
The Golden City of the River rose before his
eyes, its minarets blinding blue, mosaic’d with
Koranic texts, dazzling in the hot sunshine. High
in air, as though hung from the fabled gardens of
that mythic Babylon that mouldered in dust and
legend beyond the river, uprose palace and tower
and citadel. And Evid stood and looked at the city,
124
PERSIAN DAWNS
says Nerses, with wonder for its fairness and foul¬
ness. For at the great gate men hung dripping from
brazen hooks set in the walls, crying in day-old
torments. So were the city’s malefactors executed..
And something rose hot and stinging in the heart
of the lost, mad knight. For a moment, in the
hearing of those agonised moans, his quest blurred
and shrivelled like a mirage-picture, his lips opened
to cry the people of the earth themselves to end this
shame and horror. And then his head drooped,
he went by with hasting step and averted face.
God’s messenger to the Forsaken—how dared he
delay fulfilment of that search that would end all
misery for ever?
In a little Nestorian church, half-hidden in the
stews of the slave-quarters, he questioned a sleepy,
heat-lazy priest.
‘ An escaped Armenian slave ? And why come
here ? Is he the Wandering Jew himself? ’ added
the priest, in jest.
And then, observing better the white, haggard
face and mien of his questioner, something of the
lazy indifference left the priest’s eyes. He quailed
and shivered strangely.
‘ You have followed this brother of yours from
far ? ’ he asked.
‘ I follow him to the ends of Ind if need be,’
answered Evid, and turned and left that place and
spent a day in swift searchings from bazaar to
bazaar, in the slave-crowds that jostled with the
coming of evening, in the camel-trains that swung.
CARTAPHILUS
125
bell-ringing, across the bridges to the deserts of
Arabia. And suddenly he heard a voice cry his
name:
‘ Evid ! O Evid ! ’
It came from a passing litter, negro-guarded. A
hand had thrust aside the curtains. Evid raised his
head and looked into the eyes of Miriam.
Haunted eyes of fear lighted by an impossible
hope she bent upon him, and he understood. She,
the slave-gift of Haithon, was being carried to the
Caliph’s palace at last. . . . Miriam, once closer
to him than breathing, Miriam of the shining body
and sad-glad soul 
He sprang forward with upraised hand, and a
black eunuch cowered aside. Then the hand
dropped. What part had he with love or hate ?
—he, whose Message to the Wanderer would bring
the Christ in the flame and thunder of his Second
Coming.
Unheeding the cry that followed him he plunged
with averted head into the evening throngs. That
night he slept in a hut on Tigris’ bank, and at dawn
resumed his searchings. . . . And, as once before,
creeping up like a little wind mysteriously born,
mysteriously ablow, he was aware of a drift and
tangle of rumour of the one he sought. One—it
was whispered Cartaphilus, the Wandering Jew
himself—had passed through Baghdad, vanishing
eastwards in flight to the haunted lands of
Ind.
126
PERSIAN DAWNS
x
And eastwards on that trackless pursuit followed
Baisan Evid. Through an east that writhed in the
travail of history, and writhing, shed great gouts of
blood, he passed. Through Lur he passed as the
olives ripened and smoke blackened all the north¬
wards sky from burning homesteads. The Yellow
Raiders were there. And, wrapped in his quest,
his spirit-eyes on the far lands of India to which
the Wanderer had fled, Evid passed unharmed of
beasts and men. For the wind came over his foot¬
prints, blotting out his tracks that none might
pursue, and in desert wastes the birds brushed him
with their wings, leading him to hidden wells. In
Hyrcania it was summer and they dressed the vines,
and up the long hill-slopes he saw the dark groves
of olives stir in a restless beauty each nightfall as
though spreading their cloaks for sleep. And he
cut himself a fresh staff there, and passed, with
winter and a cloud of rumour and surmise gathering
and following behind. . . .
So across the land that was not yet Baluchistan
and into the Hindu Kush he passed, and in Nerses*
record vanishes from recognisable geography into a
mythic mist of fabulous cities and races. Yet even
in those faery lands the story of Cartaphilus drifted
and whispered. And ever he fled the footsteps of
the white dreamer who followed unfaltering.
Autumn with a storm of rains, hot and steaming,
swept over the paynim, jungle lands. The hills
CARTAPHILUS 127
towered white and green, crowned with devil
images, at night uplighted with strange fires.
But they stayed him, neither fires nor devils, the
deserts of Golconda or the haunted vales of Argania
where dog-like men snarled from their mountain
caves. And at length, in Serendib, with its golden
clangour of bells, he met with one whose tale
ended his questionings and blazed a straight path
before his feet. For this man, a wandering trader,
a convert of some lost Nestorian mission, told how,
far to the south in Mailapur, lay the tomb of St.
Thomas, sleeping the coming of his Redeemer.
And wild certainty blazed in the heart of Evid.
To the refuge of that tomb had fled Cartaphilus.
XI
It was nightfall, says Nerses, when he came to
that mount in Mailapur and climbed through jungle
paths. At the top the ruined mausoleum flashed
its red granite walls in the dying light. Troops of
little grey monkeys swung and called and were
plaintively uncomforted amid the trees. Far below,
on the roads between the villages, the humped
cattle went to and fro and stopped to graze; and
the still smoke rose from distant hearths. And
Eyid climbed and knelt at last in the shadow of the
ruined structure whereneath awaited the coming of
his Master that Doubter whom the Kshatriya slew
at prayer.
A crumbling ruin in the dying light, deserted, a
128
PERSIAN DAWNS
tenebrous place. The upward paths, long lost to
human feet, were choked and faint. Here, centuries
before, the Message had sprouted from an alien
seed, waxed and flowered in the blood of the mar¬
tyred Doubter, scenting the wilderness. And time
and the green Paynim gods had strangled and
smothered that flower, oiling its memory away
below a green canopy of jungle.
So yet, the world over, might pass and vanish
the Message. The years and birth and death and
savagery : Reality. Cartaphilus ?—who was this
pitiful dream he had sought ? Who the Christ
Himself but a madman’s dream ?
And then, in that moment of frozen doubt under
the ruined mausoleum of the great Doubter, some
impulse upraised for him his head. And he leapt
to his feet, staring across the brow of the mount.
For not he alone had stood in the shadow of the
ruin. Across the slopes, cloaked, bent of head, went
a Figure, northwards. And as Evid stared, heart-
wrung, unmoving, the night gathered and blinded
the still land with darkness.
XII
He lay all that night in a stupor of mingled despair
and hope under the mastaba of the doubting saint.
Beasts crept snuffling up the slopes in the moon¬
light, one coming so close that its hot breath blew
upon him. But there were other beasts that he lay
and fought the while the night went on and the
CARTAPHILUS i29
stars grew white, and far in the villages of Mailapur
the cocks began to crow.
Not to him had been given the glory of winning
that wandering Figure from his age-old denial
How indeed might a man become God’s Huntsman
of the W anderer but that he himself was Christ-like ?
The Christ—and Baisan Evid !
. Yet at dawn, with a strange serenity come upon
him at last, he arose, slowly, and went north in the
footsteps of that shadowy Figure. But no longer
did he pass across the Hindu lands as the Baisan
Evid of the southwards journey. As through the
eyes of a wondering child he saw the coming of
winter in the wild Golconda country. As a child,
wide-eyed and questioning, he climbed the hills
and entered the paynim temples he had shunned
with horror. And he tarried long hours in
the brown hut-villages of the Deccan, helping the
peasants at their toil in the fields, comforting the
old, stumbling with slow and bleeding steps in that
Path of Life that a greater than the Buddha had
shown.
Nearly twelve months after his first crossing the
white-capped Roof of the World he saw it tower
in the sky again. Spring was there again and the
snows flooding in thaw the desert lands below.
He joined with a caravan of yellow folk from the far
land of Kin, traders in silk and porcelain, going
homewards with laden oxen. And with them he
fought and toiled up the narrow mountain corridors
gasping in the thin, dry air. By ledge and ravine, by
130
PERSIAN DAWNS
razor-edged escarpment dizzily poised above the
pleasant lowlands, they passed. The beasts laired ;
Evid helped to drag them from tarn and snowdrift.
The yellow men would have turned back ; but they
looked in the face of the serene, white saint who
companioned them and pressed on. Till at last,
beyond the ultimate pass, where a great monastery
crowned the unmelting snows, Evid turned and left
them. They wept at parting with him, and the
beasts of the oxen-team gazed up with troubled
eyes and nuzzled at the hand that caressed them in
farewell.
He sought a night’s shelter at the gates of the
great paynim monastery. The abbot, shrivelled
and bird-like and ancient, peered at him with quick,
appraising eyes.
‘ The ways are many,’ he droned in an old, thin
voice. ‘ And the Christ’s is one. But what road is
yours—you, his Denier ? ’
Evid looked at him in gentle wonder. ‘ What
road ? Who then am I, old man ? ’
‘ Have we not heard of your journeyings in Ind ?
Who has not heard of you, that Joseph of Armenia,
Cartaphilus, whom the Christians call the Wander¬
ing Jew?’
XIII
Himself the Wanderer ! He had smiled at that
surmise of the old abbot’s, Nerses tells, and be¬
taken himself to the cell allotted him and next
morning to the trackless ways into the sunset.
CARTAPHILUS I3I
HimBelf the Wanderer!—he, God’s Huntsman,
Christ’s follower 
And then, for the second time, he fell into an
agony of doubt. But now there was terror in that
doubt as well as despair, mo was the Wanderer ?
The screaming eagles cried the question from
their eyries above the dark granitic gorges. The
rainstorms whispered it, sheeting westwards in his
tracks. ^ Who was the Wanderer P—Cartaphilus
Through Luristan, with the coming of that
summer, passed a wild figure, bearded to the waist
hatless, shoeless, a preacher, a dervish Yet'
when the multitudes gathered round him he voiced
no hope or fear and preached no creed but that
men must seek out the Wanderer. . . . And in
desert camp and Persian town, throughout the
length and breadth of that land so long the home of
Muslim heresy, the whisper of his message went to
and fro, his words acquiring a mystic significance
and power. For it was believed that he spoke of
himself. ... r
In Yezd the governor, urged to the act by the
alarmed mullahs, sent to arrest him. But the
dervish without following or farewell, had again
vanished westwards, into the deserts of Meso
potamia.
xiv
The Golden City of the River rose before his eyes
its minarets blinding blue, mosaic’ed with Koranic
PERSIAN DA1VNS
132
texts, dazzling in the hot sunshine. High in air,
as though hung from the fabled gardens of that
mythic Babylon that mouldered in dust and legend
beyond the river, uprose palace and tower and
citadel. And Evid stood and looked once more
at the city, says Nerses, with wonder for its fairness
and foulness. For at the great gate men hung
dripping from brazen hooks set in the walls, crying
in day-old torments. So were the city’s malefactors
executed.
Now, two of those criminals hung in a torment of
which Nerses may not tell. And Evid saw that they
were a man and a woman. Even as he looked the
woman stretched out her arms to the man, and
then fell back dead. Her hair fell aside from her
face.
And it was the face of Miriam, the lost love of
Baisan Evid in far-off Sis.
And something rose hot and stinging in the
heart of the lost, mad knight. His quest blurred
and shrivelled like a mirage-picture. Wrath white
and terrible poured from his lips as he stood under
the great gate, his arms outstretched in denunciation
of the Golden City, crying the people of that city
themselves to end this shame and horror. Crowds
gathered about him, deeper and deeper, a multitude
of men whose cry was presently added to his, till
the sound of it echoed across the city, a threatening
roar, to the walls of the Citadel.
CARTAPHILUS
133
xy
They brought out the Janissaries to end the riot
that threatened an uprising. Again and again the
soldiers rode against the defiant throngs, till at last
these broke and scattered and fled. But the gate
guard lay dead ; from hook and beam and pointed
stake the criminals hung silent and at peace, justice
baulked of their torments—slain or saved as the
white dervish in his criminal mercy had directed.
He himself at last was beaten to the ground,
discovered living, and dragged at a horse’s tail to
the prison pits below the Citadel. . . .
He woke there long hours afterwards. The
dungeon inmates near at hand heard him wake,
heard the moan of involuntary agony that issued
from his lips. Then a long silence fell. But in
that stifling darkness memories stirred and flared
and flashed through the mind of Baisan Evid, and
he bowed a shamed, bloody head. The Wanderer
whose quest he had undertaken and foregone—
never for him now to achieve that salvation of
earth’s agonies he had dreamt, never for him to see
face to face that Forsaken whose footsteps he had
followed half across the earth and returning
again 
What was that ?
A mere sigh in the darkness. But he knew it
again. He knew it! He started upright, swaying,
dying, praying to live—if but a moment. His
stiffening lips strove into speech.
134
PERSIAN DAWNS
‘ It is you, it is you ! Leave me not again ! I
have followed you so long ’
And then it seemed to Evid as he tottered and
fell that a voice, distant as the stars, closer than his
own faltering heart-beats, sweet as the cry of bugles,
spoke to him, and, as once before, a hand was laid
upon his forehead.
‘ I will not leave you.’
And then light fell on Baisan Evid. Clear and
wondering and awed his voice rang through the
Citadel cells of Baghdad in that last cry that another
prisoner and priest heard and remembered and
heard cry, undying still, through all the years of his
life.
‘. . . Oh, blind that I have been ! Cartaphilus
he who wanders the earth unresting ? Ah, no !
. . . Master, it is Thou ! ’
VI
DAWN IN ALARLU
i
IT was summer of the year 1266.
Rustling their dusty carpetings of grass each
morning the Persian lands swung eastward into the
sun ; behind, clouded and glistening with globose
mirages, rose the deserts of Iraq. Thick and
tremulous on burdened trees that oozed a sun-
weary sap clustered the fruits of the second date-
harvest. In moments of the noontime hours the
world quivered and reeled as if poised on the rim
of a flaming furnace. And up towards Sar-i-Mil
the millet harvest, betaking to itself the likeness of
a mirror, flung high each afternoon a great green
radiance against the red copper sky 
So, tinted in sudden colours, opens the last
fragment of that record penned by the priestly
historian of Alarlu. One knows it the Bishop’s
last, unrelated, unnumbered though it lies amid the
leaves of that great Chronicle he wrote and loved
and left to moulder through seven long centuries
in the Monastery of Mevr. Here wide, blank spaces
intersect the yellowed pages. Here that fine angular
penmanship grows weaker. Groupings of notes
erupt and stray and cease, for, listening to the long,
wild song of that summer it seems that the pen of
the Bishop fell idle often enough as the fierceness
faded from the daylight, and night in its glistening
sables came striding down from the peaks of the
Kablurz Beg.
135
PERSIAN DAWNS
136
But high in his palace tower above the plateau—
sleeping through nights that were presently silvered
with the coming of a moon that seemed unsetting
—no peace came to him, as he tells. Instead, an
aching unease. He would sit long hours at his table,
watching the winking lights across the Persian
uplands, hearing the soft sounds of the night—
the cry of a bird, the far baying of a watchdog in
some corridor of the plateau, even, were it very still,
the cough of some distant lion aprowl in the foot¬
hills of the Kablurz Beg. And under his hand and
the gleam of the single taper that lighted his tower-
chamber the pages of his golden Chronicle would
rustle forgotten and put by. . . . Summer! He
who had seen so many to watch in agony the passing
of this last!
Realisation of himself as that watcher—it had
come on him in a day and a night. Yet forewarn¬
ings enough there had been. For that spring the
sharp, keen air had torn at his throat as he rode
Alarlu’s boundaries, seeing to the keeping of the
little Nestorian diocese poised as a storm-beaten
eyrie above the pagan lands of Persia. That strange,
cold hand at his throat! Nor that alone. There
had come in a single hour, as it seemed, a dimming
of eye and a faltering of hand with bow and bridle
and hunting-spear. And in dark, quiet hours he
would wake breathless, coughing, with uncertain
heart-beatings, and see above his bed the pictured
Crucified gleam agonised in the moonlight.
Old. But he kept to himself the secret of that
DAWN IN ALARLU
i37
red coughing in the night-time hours, the while he
sought to think and plan for the little community
that was his care. . . . Think! And with an
aching contempt he found he could think of nothing
more than that he would never see another summer,
red-ochred in dawn and sunset, lighten the hills and
harvests of Alarlu.
Not see—the multitude of things he would never
see again ! In an age and a century that walked all
unaware of sky and sea and sun, all the miracles of
birth and death and the white of the apple-blossom,
there rise from Nerses’ pages, fore-dreaming the
Renaissance, a passion and a pathos that is almost
Tuscan. . . . And the fervid summer nights would
fade while he looked with eyes of memory at the
glint of winter beacons’ rise across the deserts
from Baghdad, heard the drum of winter rain on the
palace roofs, smelt the keen iron tang of an autumn
morning so that his lungs ached like those of an
unquiet ghost. The joy of the chase and the whirl
and call of the wind ! Never to know them again.
The music of words in a strange, wild tale ! Never
to heed to them again on the lips of a strayed wan¬
derer—as to so many he had heeded. Never to slip
for a day from his age and its cares into the dim,
musk worlds of the scripts that half-filled his tower
—scripts in vellum from besieged Byzantium, in
silk and scented tree-leaf from Ind and Kin, their
characters still but puzzles half-deciphered ; scripts
in fine sheepskin, lambskin, the first of paper—
even, if his evidence reads aright (for the thing itself
PERSIAN DAWNS
138
has long crumbled to dust), an agave-leaf parch¬
ment strayed by some miracle of tide and trade
from the faery Toltec lands beyond the Utmost
Seas. . . .
A little wind came that midnight he wrote. It
tapped a tendril against the window-ledge of his
tower and he sat and listened, he who has left no
portrait or portraying of himself, though one
thinks of him tall and thin, wrapped in his dark
priest gown, with the high forehead of his
Persian blood and the great grey eyes he tells
of in his daughter Amima. The tendril tapped
again. A stranger awaited him there in the
darkness.
Stranger ? For him, a priest, a bishop ? Nerses
sighed and covered his face with his hands. Even
were that Stranger a Friend, as he believed yet—
yet out there in the night, as at last he must go, he
would turn back, if he might, to the lights and
scents of that world from which the Hand guided
his footsteps !
11
Cockcrow aroused him and the feet of his
daughter Amima running up the stone stairway
to the door of his tower-chamber. In male
hunting-gear, young and dark and vivid
and unstill, she stood in the doorway, making
a despairing gesture at sight of the seated
Bishop.
DslW'Isf IN slLslRLU 139
* O father ! This again ! ’ She came and dropped
to her knees beside him, and with tired, amused
eyes he watched the impatient look she cast on the
scrolls half-unwound from their cylinders, the pen
yet upright in its stand. 4 How may you ever
regain the strength you lost this spring if you
never sleep ? ’
‘ It may be I steal upon that lost strength while //
sleeps.’ He took her face in his hands, looking
down into her eyes, the humour fading from his
own, one guesses, so that Amima suddenly stiffened
and gazed at him in frightened question. . . .
Amima ! What lot would fall to her when he had
gone, what fate of blood or terror or shame in this
country that cowered still from the impress of the
Mongol’s feet ? How long in peace abide the
Nestorians in their little plateau above the dust and
din ? How—things beyond his foreseeing or
deciding.
Yet—and ah! now so quickly—decide he
must!
His hands fell away from that caress that had
grown a passionate clasp. Morning in the trees of
Alarlu, morning in the eyes of Amima, the flow of
dawn on the mountain bastions, on the hair of a
known head 
Father ! What ails you ? What is feared by
you ? ’
4 Eh ? ’ Slowly he came out of that dreaming into
which he now fell so readily. Amima : the future :
winter: decide. . . . ‘Fear? What fear?’ He
140
PERSIAN DAIENS
touched the short Mongol bow slung on her back.
‘ And why the bow ? ’
‘ I go riding the marches with three from the
village. Wolves or a bear, they say, come up
from the eastern foothills each night and each
night steal a kid. But it may be they lie, for they
speak of stolen millet also, which sounds unwolfly.’
She was on her feet again, glancing vexedly from
the window. 4 And I am late. It is almost full
light. Father ’
But they heard now other footsteps ascending
the tower stairway. They knew those footsteps.
Cut short in that brief scolding the Bishop guessed
she had been about to administer him, Amima
grimaced.
‘ Eidon, the chaplain, doubtlessly filled with
account of his night-time visions—for he ate
greatly of plums at supper ! ’
in
One has met him before in Nerses’ pages, the old-
young chaplain of Alarlu, pale and plump, with the
lowered head and unwinking eyes and the passionate
piety that was—in him, astoundingly—no pose.
He had never loved Eidon greatly, the Bishop
tells, but the amused tolerance of early years had
merged at last in a wondering respect. To the
simple all roads were plain—albeit their simplicity
and stupidity might be indistinguishable I
DAIFN IN ALARLU
141
Eidon knelt for blessing in the morning-lit room
—a little gaspingly he knelt, because of that un¬
ascetic plumpness, and kissed the Bishop’s hand.
Then, even before the hasting clatter of Amima’s
footsteps had died in the lower distance, he had
raised his head and was speaking astonishing
words, his narrow, unswerving eyes fixed on
Nerses.
‘ My lord, I desire to retire to the Monastery of
Mevr.’
‘ Retire ? ’ Nerses stared at him. This was
unexpected enough. ‘ Retire ? Become a monk ? ’
The chaplain bowed his head. The Bishop,
puzzled and amazed, sat erect, surveying
him.
‘But this . is surely a hasty decision, my
Eidon ? Retire ? Your labours here are of
moment, your place firm in the hearts of Alarlu’s
folk ’
‘ And my soul enchained by these snares of hell.
O my lord, at last I have seen it! Last night the
revelation came to me ’ (the bishop started and
turned away his head)—‘that I am denying my
God and denying my soul in these tasks and loves
I have cherished.’ Suddenly he seemed no longer
ridiculous, kneeling ungraceful there. His eyes
on the Bishop burned with belief. ‘ I have filled
myself with conceit and worldly pride and only in
the silences of the cell may I expiate that pride 
and escape the hell of the lost.’
The Bishop rose to his feet. ‘ You are unstrung.
i42 PERSIAN DAWNS
What sin is yours ? What denial of God have you
made ? ’
‘ I have blinded my eyes to that one enduring
task set for us here—each to save his own soul from
hell. Mine I have overlaid with prides and hopes
that stifle it. . . . Lord Bishop, I pray that you will
let me go.’
IV
‘ What shall it profit a man ’
Eidon had gone, his plea still unanswered. The
Bishop sat and stared into the opal distances of
Alarlu, in his heart a sudden guest whose name was
surely terror.
4 What shall it profit a man ’
Was not the case his own ? His soul forgotten,
secreted, hid away below love of the colours and
smells and voices of this world he feared to leave !
Eidon, fantastic and foolish, overwhelmed in a
night by a glutton’s supper to self-awareness of the
little sinnings and the little regrettings of complacent
stupidity—yet he sounded the trumpet-call of
God. World and soul—the conflict eternal—and
what part did he play in it now but that of
renegade ?
Conflict—was it indeed unescapable? Day at
spring and the morning flaunting vermeil up from
Mesopotamia, the calling of young goats in little
fields, the touch of vellum under his hand—
must his soul hate these to reach to God and
peace ?
DAWN IN ALARLU Hi
How else ? So, not his alone, but every Faith
since the world’s beginning had affirmed. How
else reach to that serenity when these things would
crumble to dust in his sight and the Stranger come
welcome and bidden ? Instead—instead as now
these things that tore at his heart like loved children
lost in a forest at night. . . .
‘ What shall it profit a man though he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul ? ’
He groaned and laid his face in his hands again,
and the crumbling centuries leave uncrumbling
question and naked agony alike in that morning
seven hundred years put by. Below : the morning he
might not look at, lest he cower from answering
himself. Below 
Below rose the ringing clatter of a halted horse.
A moment later the tower stairway rang yet again
under hasting feet. Then the door was flung open
and Amima stood fronting him, impatient, flushed,
exultant.
‘Father—we have caught the thief! No bear,
but a man. Father, it is the escaped monk Petros
Ishay! ’
v
He was waiting, bound, in the courtyard, the three
Nestorian villagers warily at hand. They sought as
little contamination as seemed needful. Petros
Ishay—the rebel monk of Mevr, who had assaulted
its venerable abbot, resisted and almost slain three of
its lay brothers who had sought to arrest him, and
i44 PERSIAN DAWNS
then broken from the monastery walls and disap¬
peared into the hills. . . . News of him had
travelled far and wide from Mevr, and with a stern
curiosity the Bishop looked on this wolf of God.
The wolf, bound, yet upright, returned his gaze
with a nonchalant insolence—the nonchalant
insolence of a boy.
He was little more, as Nerses realised in wonder ;
tall and young, with a clearer eye and a broader
brow than was wont to companion criminality,
with the pale face of privation and the rags of much
mountain-wandering. He stood with uncovered
head and after a moment, unfrightened, un¬
interested, looked away from the Bishop’s face
across the changing fields in sunshine to the far
mountains shining their unmelted snows.
‘ You are the monk Petros ? ’
‘ I am Eskandar Eremie.’
The Bishop was patient. ‘ You are a Nestorian,
who entered the Monastery of Mevr as a novice
and there received the name of Petros ? ’
4 Some such clownish rechristening I underwent.’
‘ You broke the rules of your order and assaulted
your abbot to the danger of his life ? ’
‘ To no such danger—he is a corpse already.
Always, I should think, he has been a corpse ’
He ceased abruptly, turning his head. It was at
the sound of a blackbird whistling in the greenery
of a terebinth. The anger of the old priest-historian
of Alarlu kindled a little, as he confesses, at that
fresh defiance.
T45
DAWN IN ALARLU
In a land which is under no law there is no
secular power. That we of the Church take now
upon ourselves. To-morrow a party will take you
across the hills to the monastery. There are cells
there where they may curb your insolence.’
‘ I doubt it.’
The Bishop made an impatient gesture to the
peasants to lead the boy away. And then that
happened which he was afterwards to remember in
detail. The prisoner, turning, halted, looking over
his shoulder. The Bishop himself turned then,
with the slowness of the years that had come so
swiftly upon him dragging at his feet. He looked
where the prisoner looked.
Amima stood in the palace doorway, whip in
hand, the black hair blown in little tendrils across
her cheek, still in her unseemly hunting-garb, her
young, grey eyes on the renegade monk. Contempt
and curiosity her eyes had held, but now, slowly,
that look changed, as one gazing on a face lost and
forgotten and remembered. A strange pallor came
on brow and cheek. Nerses glanced back at the
prisoner.
Insolent ? Bent on Amima his was again that
strange, dreaming gaze that had come on him when
the blackbird whistled in the terebinth.
VI
The Bishop shrugged aside monk and insolence
and the whole irrelevant episode. That afternoon
K
146 PERSIAN DAWNS
he went out and paced the paths amid the dyked
millet fields, where his Nestorians toiled in long,
back-bent rows and the smell of the tended earth
rose ammoniac in his nostrils. So slowly now he
walked—he who had been wont to cross and re¬
cross the plateau in hasting meditation on a single
phrase or curlicue of his Chronicle I Children ran
and tumbled in the paths, smiling up at him shyly
as he blessed them, absently, with extended fingers
and gaze remote. Not alone his child, but these
children—all the folk of Alarlu—how would they
fare when he had gone ?
Was it his concern ? His soul his concern, the
orders Religious cried, for him the humbling peni¬
tence of self. So Eidon would have said—Eidon
intent on refuge in that monastery from which
the monk Petros had fled. . . .
If he himself went with Eidon ? Out across the
hills to Mevr, behind the shelter of its stem walls
to await that end that now came so swiftly ? Fear
and love and hope and the smell of the earth—-
these to brush aside as evil phantasmata the while
in darkness and prayer he climbed with faltering
steps and naked soul up the stairway of everlasting
salvation——
How heavy hung the dates this harvest! . . .
He found Amima awaiting him on his return.
‘ Father, we have locked Eskandar Eremie in
the cellar ’
‘ Whom ? . . . Ah, the monk Petros.’
‘ But he is no longer a monk. And he sent for
DAWN IN ALARLU
HI
me as you had gone to the fields. He asks that he
may be chained all night in the courtyard, in the
open air, not under the ground.’
Nerses paused to consider this. ‘ Now what is
in the mind of the renegade ? ’
‘ Renegade ? ’ He was aware, surprised, of a
doubting disbelief in Amima’s face. She flushed
and looked away from him, impatiently. ‘ We do
not know. We had heard only the story of the
abbot.’
‘ And you have heard the other story ? ’
His query, one guesses, was too gentle for her to
find in it the oflence she was prone, in youth and
quick temper, to imagine and challenge so readily.
She turned back to him.
‘ O father, we do not know ! He was a prisoner,
there in Mevr. He was a boy when the monastery
took him ; he did not know what it would be—
prison and silence and his life ended ’
c So to avenge his own inconstancy he sought to
end the life of the abbot ? ’
‘ That was a lie. The abbot beats the monks ’
‘ So would he beat me were I a monk. Could
not this Petros submit to the common discipline ? ’
‘ The abbot was beating another monk—an old
man whose screams were ringing through the
monastery. And Eskandar but took the whip from
the abbot.’
It rang with a certain truth. But the Bishop was
weary. So readily he wearied these days !
‘ Let be, let be ! Had you no other tgsk that\
PERSIAN DAJVNS
148
listen to the tales of a monastery criminal ? Send
to me Eidon, Amima. Now it is too late to return
the renegade to Mevr to-morrow. But the day
after ’
VII
Looking out from his evening meal, eaten alone
as the shadows fell, the Bishop saw in the court¬
yard the figure of a man who stood looking sky¬
wards with such intensity that Nerses raised his own
eyes. On the red roofs of Alarlu grew and changed
a garden of unearthly blooms : Flowers of gold and
flowers of fire sprang and blossomed and died and
merged at last in one great blossoming western
glow as the night rose impatient in the east. ... In
the courtyard was a muffled clink of metal. Nerses
lowered his eyes and saw that the sky-gazer had
moved. Reaching out to his bell, a little Buddhist
bell, worn and far-travelled and clear-toned, the
Bishop rang it and sent for Amima.
‘ By whose authority was the monk Petros
chained in the courtyard ? ’
‘ By mine, father. Surely he was long enough
robbed of air and starshine in Mevr ? He says there
are no trees there in the monastery—no trees !—
and the walls so thick *
* What he says is no matter. You will not speak
with him again. You understand ? ’
She stood half in darkness, for the room was now
flooded with shadows. He heard her breathing
quicken, and sighed for the loveliness of that sound
DAWN IN ALARLU
149
in a body that was young and passionate and
rebellious. The loveliness of youth, its sleep and
wakenings, its world that was there so fresh to
mould beneath its impatient fingers! He said
again, albeit wearily and half-idly, ‘ You under¬
stand ? ’
She said, low-voiced, but with an unwonted
intensity in her voice :
‘ I understand. ... Yes, I think—at last I
understand.’
VIII
He sat thinking of her then when she had slipped
away like a shadow from the room that the shadows
had now made their own. What should he do with
her?—he could not leave her in Alarlu when he
had passed from it. Better some nunnery—if one
unsacked were still to be found—that would quench
her pride and impatience and mould her soul to God
than leave her to the wild chances of these years and
lands. A nunnery—that was the solution when he
himself went into Mevr, behind those walls where
the light of day never penetrated, where renegades
dreamt of the starshine and the whistling of black¬
birds in a terebinth 
Eidon came to him then, returned from the far
end of the plateau.
‘ You sent for me, Lord Bishop ? Shall I bring
a lamp ? ’
A faint waft of irony from other years tinged the
Bishop’s speech. ‘ You bring one in yourself, my
15 o PERSIAN DA WNS
Eidon. Sit with me. Now, this is what I plan to
do : You may retire to Mevr in a fortnight’s time.
. . . And I retire to it also.’
‘ Thou ? ’ The intimate address was startled to
Eidon’s lips. The Bishop nodded, trying not to
look from the window at the night that came, soft-
footed, to listen.
‘ I also—and with better need than you, Eidon.
To-night and to-morrow I will write letters to the
Patriarch, and the day after to-morrow they must
be despatched with the company which carries the
monk Petros back to Mevr. See you to it. Within
two weeks at least our successors should be in
Alarlu/
The chaplain flung himself on his knees, podgily,
to kiss his Bishop’s hand. His face glowed with
approbation.
‘ My lord, this retiral of yours, honouring mine—
it will be a call and a challenge to every Christian
man ! ’
The old historian moved uneasily, his eyes drawn
unescapably at last to the night-stilled fields beyond
the palace windows. Harvest so close. How better
might the grain be stacked this winter against the
storms that had half-destroyed the last ? ... * Eh ?
I fear I was dreaming, my Eidon, and did not hear.
And now I would be alone. Yet, stay ’
The chaplain had risen to his feet. He stood
waiting on that last word, unaware of the impulse
that had brought it to the lips of Nerses. Alone ?
So soon he would be alone for ever that surely
DAWN IN ALARLU
151
he might snatch for a little while at speech and hear¬
ing and the nearness of another. . . . The impulse
died away. Eidon ! This careful soul so husband¬
ing his soul! What comfort was in him ?
‘ You may go.’
IX
And through that night, prisoned and sleepless,
two watched the circling stars from the palace of
Alarlu. In the courtyard Nerses would hear the
chink of chain-links as the monk Petros moved
and rose to his feet and prowled softly the length
of his chains. Once, rising from penning a note
on the nunneries to which he might send Amima,
the Bishop went to the window and looked out and
saw the prisoner, his white, boy’s face upturned in
the white radiance of the moon, standing rigid while
far down the plateau-ravines some night-bird called
in the darkness. . . . Sleepless as himself, the
renegade, and with better cause. For was not his
own future of prayer and silence and unlingering
death assured enough—while punishment and
stripes and long, grey years of expiation awaited
the boy ?
But spite those assured to-morrows of his and the
weariness that lay heavily upon him, sleep came
hardly at all to the Bishop even when he had retired
to another courtyard chamber. Dozing uneasily,
he fell into a dream that soft footsteps passed and
repassed his door in the darkness, that out in the
night voices whispered and wept and were glad •
152
PERSIAN DAWNS
Love and the Stranger kissing one the other in the
darkness that he had feared ! . . . He coughed
redly, wakening from that, and far off hearing some
startled pony neigh in the stables of Alarlu.
Near morning, gasping for breath in the darkness
that precedes the dawn, he found himself at the
window again. The courtyard lay pitch-black
below; Alarlu slept under the white kindling of
the morning star. In the air was the soft sighing of
the dawn-wind—that sound he had known in so
many mornings, known and loved while he raised
his eyes, surprised, from crowded pages, and
planned a mind-clearing gallop with his bow in the
reaches of the foothills !
And now, as the light grew, his eyes went down
to the courtyard again, idly, tiredly. But the idleness
presently kindled to keenness. He leaned and
peered closely from the window into that pit of
shadows now faintly suffused with the morning’s
fore-radiance. It was a plain and open space,
lacking in alcove or shadowing balcony. There
was no concealment possible there.
The Bishop caught up the Buddhist bell and sent
its clangour through the sleeping episcopal palace
of Alarlu. Petros, the renegade monk who called
himself Eskandar Eremie, had disappeared.
x
Eidon the chaplain it was who roused the palace.
Nor it only. In a few moments the village itself
DAWN IN ALARLU
i53
echoed with the calling of tidings and commands-
Parties of the Nestorians set out, running swiftly
to the confines of the plateau to intercept the
fugitive. Nerses went back to his couch and
there waited for the news of the renegade’s
recapture.
So might he have remained, but that a servant
burst in upon him excitedly.
‘ The Lady Amima—her room is empty ! It is
feared that the monk ’
The same fear gripped the old Bishop, white¬
faced, struggling to his feet. He called for his pony
and with Eidon and half a dozen others galloped
to the crest of the main ravine that led down to
the plain. There one of the Nestorian peasants, on
the scene a moment before, gestured to him eagerly.
‘ See there, my lord ! ’
The Bishop saw. The fugitive and his hostage,
both mounted, were but half-way down the gorge,
evidently unsuspecting of pursuit thus early. Two
of Nerses’ party had bows. At a sign from the
Bishop they strung them, then the pursuit clattered
down the pass.
The renegade and his prisoner heard and turned
their heads. Eskandar beat his pony into action;
uncomprehending, the Bishop saw Amima do the
same. But Eidon’s thin cry echoed down the
morning in warning menace.
‘ Stay ! You are within bow-shot! ’
They reined in at that, and half-wheeled round.
It was scarcely yet full light, but the Bishop saw
154
PERSIAN DAWNS
on the face of the boy the sudden ferocity of a
trapped animal. He reached down to the stolen
scimitar at his saddle-bow, but Amima’s hand fore¬
stalled him—gently and easily enough, it seemed.
She leant towards him, seeming to whisper some¬
thing, her hand still in his. So, in that strange
attitude, they fronted the Bishop’s party. Eidon
gestured forward the ready bowmen.
‘ So you would have added abduction to your
other crimes, renegade ? ’
Amima rises clearly enough then through the
mists of the years, young and scornful as she faced
her rescuers, trembling like a plucked bowstring,
her hand yet clasped in that of the renegade
monk.
4 Abduction ? Fool, it was I who freed him and
go with him willingly.’
‘ Amima! ’
She blanched a little at her father’s voice, at
sight of the horror on his face. Then the quick
blood flooded her cheeks.
* So it is, my father. Eskandar is mine though
you kill him now or send him back to Mevr to be
done to death. He’s mine for ever, though you
prison me also among the unliving of a nunnery—
as you have planned to do.’
Nerses started, remembering those notes that
had lain all night in his tower-chamber, remember¬
ing a dream of hovering footsteps in the darkness.
The bowmen closed in about Eskandar and one
of them drew a knife. The renegade smiled at
DAirN IN ALARLU 155
them, at Nerses, at the plump white righteousness
of Eidon.
So now you kill me, priests, and carry the story
to the aching abbot of Mevr ? May it soothe his
unquiet hide ! And tell him I sent a message :
that I lost the monastery ’ his eyes went to the
plateau heights, tinted with amethyst, to the face of
Amima, ‘ —and gained the world/
Eidon thrust forward a blazing, fanatic face,
the phrase that had haunted Nerses on his lips.
What shall it profit a man, O renegade, though
he gain the whole world and lose his own
soul ? ’
4 O eunuch who has never known the world !J
The boy’s dreaming face could blaze with another
faith. ‘ What shall it profit a man if he gain his own
soul and lose the whole world? Have I not known ?
Soul—-the world’s essence and fragrance as each
man distils it! ... I went into Mevr with a living,
troubled soul; I lost it there, a blinded beast. I
came out and sheltered in holes like a fox and stood
chained in a courtyard—and found my soul again.
. . . Kill me now, then. Amima, turn you
away.’
But Amima, sitting white-faced while the rene¬
gade spoke, had seen the strangest changings in
the face of Nerses. She spurred forward her
pony and dismounted and knelt by the Bishop’s
stirrup.
‘ Father ! You know, jwz understand Eskandar’s
truth. . . . Father, I know ! And I love him—
PERSIAN DAWNS
156
and oh, we are out to see strange lands together !
You will let us go ? ’
XI
Before the Bishop’s eyes, surgent, unfaltering, the
dawn. Light in a flow of foam swept up from the
dun deserts of Iraq. Tern cried above them in lost
mountain pools, and the morning wind went out
from Alarlu into places as yet untouched by
the sunrise. Eidon made an impatient motion to the
bowmen.
‘ Bind the renegade.’
‘ Stay.’
All waited. The boy’s face turned towards
the Bishop, wonder in the dreaming, defiant
eyes. Amima gazed at him with trembling lips.
Serene of soul at last in the wild heresy heard
on the lips of a renegade monk, the Bishop
motioned to the desert track where the sunlight
flowed.
‘ Your road.*
‘ Father 1 ’
Gladness and tears in the cry. But he did not
look at her, for strength had come with serenity.
Peace was his, as yet in the world’s strife that shaped
their souls it would be theirs. Love whom he had
known, the Stranger whose face he had scarcely
glimpsed—they rode out of his life together. But
they would return. Might his heart weep its fare¬
wells when not a thing that passed from the earth
DAWN IN ALARLU
i57
but knew again, far off, some day, some season,
a morning that again cried ‘ Ave! ’
He pointed again to the desert road, and turned
away his eyes, and heard them depart. And far
above the plateau of Alarlu the banners of the sun¬
rise marched their undying quest across the sky.
FELICITER
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
I
U Allegro
AMBER IN COLD SEA
i
SiAIRO. Outside the cafe aivning the noon-hla^e
°f the in the Place of the Green Step was almost
liquid. A sakkah, his dripping goatskin slung on his
hack, slouched through the dust. Then a string of donkeys.
A Fold car. A gendarme, with carbine and tarhouche,
came loitering along the middle of the street. The trees
of the Eshekieh Gardens lifted their branches to peer
over the roof-tops towards us, or to ga^e in vegetal
surprise at the windows of Sednaoui’s great clothing
emporium opposite, where flaunted great notices of the
delectable mise-en-vente within. My eyes blinked in
the sunlight shimmer.
A car hooted in the distance. Sergei Lubow,
grinning with up-curling moustaches, fluttered the*
last leaf of my latest story, and chuckled.
And this is life to the modern wise ? A love-
story this drabness ! Ah God, I prefer your out¬
moded Swinburne. “ The Leper.” You have read
it ? It goes so ’
‘ My nurse used to sing me to sleep with it.’
‘ So ? And sleeping you dreamt such nightmare
as this—realism ? ’
Sergei paused. The car heard in distance had
drawn up opposite Sednaoui’s with a scattering of
liquid sunshine and powdered sand. A man got
L 161
162 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
out, helping a veiled woman to alight. He did it
ceremoniously, as might an old-time bridegroom
his bride, and then turned to give some order to the
driver. As he did so he caught Sergei’s eye. So
did the veiled woman. Both of them nodded,
hesitated, glancing at me, and then turned and
passed in through the swinging doors of Sednaoui s.
I interrogated Sergei.
‘ Clients ? Newly married tourists ? ’
He disregarded the question. He chuckled again.
His eyes came back from the car and rested on me.
My magazine on the table crumpled under the
sudden impact of his elbow.
4 A story.’
‘ Eh ? ’
4 A story for you. A fairy-tale.’ Still seeming
obscurely amused, he consulted his wrist-watch.
4 A quarter of an hour of a story. The story of a
romantic. The story of Gavril Dan.’
ii
It is ten years (said Sergei) since I met the little
Dan on the Krimea side of the Sivash Boloto.
The Reds had driven the last White army into the
Peninsula. Snow fell, it was very dark and cold
that night. Because our men were weary and
mutinous Andrei Bal’mont and I walked sentry,
growing hungrier and hungrier with the passing
hours, and chill with sleet and sadness. Over
beyond the northern marshes we could see Perekop ;
AMBER IN COLD SEA 163
all the northern horizon was specked with the lights
of the Red Army besieging Perekop. The little
thin autumn wind, the veter, screamed overhead,
and sometimes died away for a moment so that the
sound of the bombardment would deafen the
marshes. Once that sound seemed drawing nearer.
BaPmont went into the night to investigate. I never
saw him again.
Towards midnight I went back to the White
lines and discovered that my troop had deserted
en masse. I turned about at that discovery and set
out to cross the Sivash to Perekop. But before
I regained even the track of my sentry-beat a man
staggered out of the snow-whirl and the front¬
ward darkness, mad and singing and waving a
knife.
‘ Comrade, I will cut your throat! *
He waved the knife foolishly and then fell at my
feet. I peered down at him, seeking for light
enough to shoot him, when suddenly the guns
pounding the life out of Perekop rose into such
clamour as threatened to crack the night. I raised
my head and saw the threat fulfilled. The night
cracked. It split apart, it and the horizon there in
the north, in two great red-specked segments.
The tovarishi had blown up the French-built
fortress. . . .
in
I knew it was the end. Being a little dazed, and
Still seeking a good light in which to shoot him, I
164 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
picked up the foolish man and walked away south¬
wards towards DzhonkaL Presently behind us arose
a great screaming and shouting and the sound of
galloping horses. It was the Red cavalry crossing
the marshes on the track of fugitives. But they
missed us and passed unseen. None sought to
stay our going except one straggler on foot, who
suddenly appeared on the path, obtruding out of
the darkness a bulging stomach, a cloth helmet, and
a querulous revolver. Without questioning his
purpose or political creed I kicked him hard in the
stomach, into the night, and out of this story.
Then we went on.
All that night it snowed. Our leader fled like a
hare to Sebastopol and took ship to Stamboul.
Our army followed at the excellent pace. I myself
would have run as fast as any, but that the foolish
man with the knife was weak and exhausted. For
a fortnight, abandoning thoughts of Dzhonkai,
we crept towards Kerch, hiding in hay-ricks, and
barns in the day-time, holding by the frost-rimed
stars at night. Kerch illumined the southern
darkness one night, and we reached the quays.
There a fishing sloop of eclectic opinions still
lingered, sniped at from the shore and sniping
in reply. I asserted in the loud voice that I was.a
Sovyet kommissar going to Stamboul. The captain
took me on board, and instantly became a secret
White. Still he waited outside Kerch, taking
aboard other refugees, hoping that these would kill
me.
AMBER IN COLD SEA 165
While we waited there in alternate storms of
sleet and snow, with the heaving of the Black
Sea tides greening the faces of exhausted refugees,
the foolish man with the knife, being by then a
little less mad, babbled many things. He was
Gavril Dan, an engineer of Melitopol, who had
hated Reds and Whites, and manufactured motor¬
cars and loved his wife. When Budenni’s cavalry
came to Melitopol he was absent at Bero ; when he
returned the tovarishi were abolishing God, parcel¬
ling out the motor-cars and women, and firing the
town. The little Dan found his house in ruins
and its doorstep much bemessed with blood
and the rags of a dress which had once been his
wife’s.
So he had gone mad, and borrowing a revolver
and a knife from a fellow-citizen who had for ever
ceased to impassion himself in defence of private
property—his head being permanently jammed in a
drain-pipe—he had shot quite a number of the tovar¬
ishi and been chased out of the town by a company
of enthusiastic, but fortunately inebriated, riflemen.
These on his heels, he had strayed southward,
raving of his lost Irina, whose soul was either in
heaven or her body in hell. Being dark he had
missed the besieging lines, wandered across the
frozen Sivash Boloto ahead of the Reds, mistaken
me for a tovarish, and 
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
166
IV
This was the tale the mad little Dan told me while
we waited for the fishing sloop to leave Kerch. All
this while White refugees—soldiers and sailors,
merchants and peasants, beggars and boyars—
crowded on board. Towards the end of the second
day the good people of Kerch, suddenly converted
to Communism with the appearance of a troop of
Red cavalry on the skyline, turned a machine-gun
on us from the shore.
The captain, very angry, pulled at the sails. The
little Dan and I flung ourselves flat on the deck.
The sloop began to move out into the pounding
rollers of the Black Sea. Just then a last boat put
out from the shore.
In it sat a man with clothes much travel-stained,
and head and face be-bandaged. Rowing the boat
was a girl, who ducked now and then to escape
the bullets of the Marxian converts. Our ship moved
so fast that it seemed they could hardly make it in
time. But we waved to the girl, urging her on, and
she caught a rope I flung to her, and we drew them
on board with the last of the light, and faced to the
darkness for Stamboul.
There was no food on board, but the girl who
had come with the bandaged man—her name was
Darya Martov—and I boiled much water, which
everyone drank. It was an unmirthful voyage in
bitter winter hours. Even the White generals on
board ceased to dispute how they would divide our
AMBER IN COLD SEA 167
little Russia when all the Reds were dead or repent¬
ant. The little Dan would sit on the deck, staring
at the black coast-line, sick at heart with memory
of that Melitopol doorstep. Beside him Vasil
Ferapont, the bandaged man whom Darya had
brought, would lie and whisper like a hoarse ghost,
for the roof of his mouth was gone. He had been
through the Perekop explosion, this Ferapont,
Darya told me while we boiled the water; he had
strayed, maimed and bleeding, into her house in
mid-Krimea while she herself was preparing to hide
before the Reds came. So she had bandaged him
and loved him and fled with him. . . .
She did not tell me she loved him, but at night,
when the Black Sea sleet smote the crowded ship,
they would lie on deck in each other’s arms, and
Ferapont would whisper and mumble in his sleep,
and Darya rouse to soothe him and tuck their
ragged blanket more tightly about him. Pitiful
to see. Hateful to see. Beside them the little Dan,
who from the first had liked Ferapont as much as I
detested him, would sit and stare at them and brood
on the night and sea and his lost Irina. But I,
because I might not bear to look on them, would go
and boil more water.
After weary days—four of them, I think, though
I lost count because of the drifting we had in a storm,
and a time when a Sovyet gunboat chased us through
hours of driving mist—we came past Therapia to
the Corne d’Or, and by the landing-stage the little
Darya, with the sea-rain in her hair, held up her
i68
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
face for me to kiss her farewell, the while Ferapont,
blind and bandaged, stood near, whispering to Dan.
It is only our custom, this kiss, but I thought of
the lips of Ferapont, and turned away, like the fool
I was. Her eyes grew troubled.
‘ What is the matter, Sergei Nikitich ? ’
‘ Nothing,’ I said. And then : 4 Where will you
go now ? ’
4 To Cairo. There are many Russians in Egypt,
and Vasil and I have only enough money to take
us so far.’
Now, having some French money, I had given
half of it to Dan on the boat, and we had agreed
to go together to Cairo. Darya’s words sent a
sad-glad ache through me.
4 Then we do not part. The little Gavril and I go
there also.’
She seemed but little surprised, yet looked at
me with such gladness that I felt foolishly happy
until I heard behind us the ghost-whispering of
Ferapont. I nodded back towards him.
4 You love Ferapont ? You will marry
him ? ’
Her face grew so tender and sad as no face of
woman had ever grown for me. ‘Love him—
yes. But we may not marry. He—he is married
already.’
So, after many delays and the unpadded journey-
ings on cheap coasting steamers, we came to Cairo.
At Manchiet el Sadr, in the Street of the Five Black
Cats, Darya and Ferapont rented a room, and the
AMBER IN COLD SEA 169
little Dan and I another on the opposite side of the
street. Then, all our francs being gone, we looked
for work.
v
Within a week the little Dan, who, though mad,
knew much of motor-cars, had employment in the
workshops of a great French garage, and Darya
was sewing white sun-dresses at the slave-rate of
three a piastre. Only Ferapont and I were idle—he
because it seemed he could do no work, I because
I could not find it.
Ah, God, it is a city of languages, this. Babel
Tower, I thought in despair those first days, must
here have been builded and the builders never
departed. And languages had been my only trade
in the days before the Revolution—the days when
I had taught in the Gymnasium of Kazan. No
school—and I tramped the miles of them between
Shoubra and Heliopolis—hungered to hear me
impart the French or English colloquialisms with
an authentic Russian accent. Almost I had des¬
paired, and would have bought the tray of postcards
and ribbons and paraded the Esbekieh Garden as a
hawker, when an old-time colleague of mine, one
Anton Saloney, by then a dragoman, came to my
aid and inducted me as the neophyte to his new
profession.
So I, Sergei Lubow, sometime Grand Prix of
Leipzig, became what I have been ever since—a
dragoman, guiding parties of sun-hatted tourists
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
170
to the Sphinx, of which I knew nothing, and to the
Pyramids, of which I knew less, and to Citadel, of
which I desired to know nothing. I spent my days
chartering donkeys and arranging time-tables, hiring
arabiyehs and holding sunshades. Within three
weeks I had wandered as far afield as Memphis and
Heluan, expounding at each locality incidents of
such history as it seemed to me seemly for the
ancient Egyptians to have possessed. I became a
favourite because I knew so much.
February then. At the Manchiet the little Dan
and I still lived in our one room. Though with
better cause, seeing it had been his original work,
he was proving as satisfactory a motor-maker as I a
dragoman. Yet still he remained the man obsessed
by that awful memory of the blood-specked doorway
in Melitopol. It might have passed in time but
for the new belief that grew in him—the belief that
Irina was still alive; that, lost as himself, she was
wandering and seeking him. . . .
Spectator there, on the fringe of his life, I watched
this common and commonplace little man transform
into monomaniac. The type common enough he
had been, I guessed—the commonplace man who
had possessed a beautiful wife, whose pride in that
wife’s beauty had been a property instinct, though
he had believed it love. Something of her character
also it seemed to me I glimpsed—one who had
loved him, but a little aloofly, perhaps always with a
little of heartache because of the shallow depths from
which his eyes had looked their pride at her. . . .
AMBER IN COLD SEA
VI
The little Dan ! The common man whom not
I alone had viewed with the gaze of the purblind
realist! A sleepy gaze often enough those days and
nights. For under pressure of the fantastic belief
that his Irina still lived and sought him he had
turned again to his early faith. Hour-long at night
he would kneel before a Coptic ikon; often in
a morning I would find him stretched cramped and
asleep in front of that ikon. Wearied with long
trampings across the Ghizeh sands, I would fall
asleep in the midst of his devotions and be bitten
awake by mosquitoes, hours later, and find him still
kneeling.
It palled in time. There is no pool of sympathy
but dries in the parch-glare of unceasing pain. This
wife of his—if not dead, she must be praying to be.
‘ I know she is alive,’ he would aver. ‘ I can’t lie
down to sleep but I know it—terribly, in the still¬
ness. I can’t talk with our Russian friends here in
Cairo, but it seems, in a moment, if they grew silent,
I’d hear her speak. . . . And once, one night on
that Black Sea boat ’
He would stare at me, white-faced. * I heard her
weeping in the darkness.’
I would yawn with sleep. ‘ How did you know
it was she who wept ? ’
‘ Know ? Have I not heard her weep before ? . ..
Long before, the moment of shame to me. Wept—
as though God had died—once ’
172
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
I would turn to the wall and try to sleep. Love¬
to be remembered by its tears ! Love, with its
servitude to pain 
For I had grown to hate the bandaged, whispering
Ferapont those days. We went to see him and Darya
each evening, the little Dan and I, and the maimed
man would sit on the bed and whisper while Darya
crouched by the window and sewed and sewed till
her bright eyes grew red and strained in the failing
light. Her lips had taken to droop sadly .at each
corner, and one night, seeing that strained tiredness
of her face, I turned on Ferapont in anger, asking
him how long he required a slave as well as a
mistress.
At that the little Gavril cried out at me and there
was the unpleasant scene, and Ferapont stared
through his bandages and whispered, whispered.
Only Darya said nothing, but sewed on in the dim
light with dim eyes. She looked up at me with
quivering lips as I rose to go, and down at the foot
of the railless stone stairs, standing there hesitating
in the swift Cairene twilight, I heard her come
behind me. She was weeping openly then, but I
looked at her with a dead heart.
‘ You are cruel—cruel, and you’ve lied, Sergei
Nikitich.’
4 Lied ? When all the Manchiet knows ! Is it
not true that you slave for this bandaged fool, that
you are his mistress ? ’
She ceased to weep and began to laugh, weeping
and laughing in the same moment, so that I thought
AMBER IN COLD SEA
173
it hysteria. Then she ceased from that, sobering
to determination. She laid her hands on my
shoulders.
‘ Look at me, Sergei. You believe—that? ’
Believe it ? I knew it. And I looked down into
the laughing misery of her eyes, and felt sick at
heart, and kissed her hands, and lied to her.
‘ No, I do not believe it/ I said.
And, ah ! I hated Ferapont!
That same night—it was the eve of Easter Day—
the little Dan awoke me, crying out in nightmare
and getting up from his bed. Irina, his Irina, she
was alive—calling for him, out there in the night.
He would go to her.
He made for the door. But I caught him and
held him and put him back in bed, bored and
wearied of this lunacy. Then I waited until he
seemed to sleep again. But it was only the seeming.
At intervals all through the night he started up with
mad eyes, raving the name of his wife in such voice
that I doubted if ever the usual morning sanity would
come on him again. In the street below, as I noted
with sleep-heavy eyes, the moonlight lay white like
ghost-snow, and across, in the room of Darya and
Ferapont, a light still burned, and a shadow some¬
times moved swiftly or stood blackly against that
light. I knew it for Darya tending her sick
lover, and my night was the longer for the
knowledge.
^74
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
YII
Easter Day. But the spring’s trumpets blow not
in Cairo, and by noon it was eighty-five in the shade.
The little Dan, by then a foreman and favourite at
his workshop, had planned to drive the four of us
down to Memphis and its sights and the coolness of
the Nile that afternoon, in a car lent him by his
company. In spite his night of sleepless raving, he
went off to his workshop, and by two o’clock I
heard the horn of his car sound in the street below
our room. I went down and looked at him—the
cool and efficient driver, the haggard-faced mono¬
maniac.
‘ You had better go to bed,’ I told him.
He shook his head, staring beyond me. ‘It is so
strange. Last Easter Irina ’
But I had had enough of Irina. I ran up the
stairs to the room of Ferapont and Darya, and
entered, to find Darya weeping again, very silently,
while Ferapont stood with his back to her, fumbling
with the loosened bandages about his head. Fera¬
pont again ...
Darya tried to stop me, but I put her aside.
I caught him by the shoulder and swung him
round, and then stopped in my half-intention, and
stared at him. . . . What wounds indeed could
have required all those months to heal ?
‘ You cheat,’ I said.
He moaned and staggered, as though my light
grip on his shoulder was a hurtful thing. I dropped
AMBER IN COLD SEA
i75
him on the bed, and then, in a revulsion from
anger to wondering contempt, heard myself
apologise to him. I would have retied his bandages
for him, but he pushed me away, pettishly, and
Darya came to his help, and I turned and left
them.
Gavril had sounded his klaxon more than once
before they descended to the street. They got into
the car and I took the wheel and drove. Presently
we were clear of Cairo, the rushing air tempering
the heat, and I saw that the little Dan had fallen
asleep. Once I glanced back into the seat behind
me. Darya had her arm round Ferapont, and he had
leant his head against her, and was fast asleep as
Dan.
At Memphis I parked the car and we got out and
tramped amidst the stones the while I acted the
dragoman, and Ferapont whispered his wonder,
and Dan stared about him dully, and Darya’s tired
eyes brightened with interest. But it was very hot.
I turned my party about.
‘ We will go to the Whispering Cave,’ I said.
VIII
The old sheykh of the cave knew me, and let us
enter alone with a candle. It was hardly yet the
show place it now is, and quite deserted, the ancient
tomb that Arab grave-robbers had broken into and
villagers spoiled for stones with which to line their
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
176
dykes. The wind-currents played with our candle
flame the while I upraised my arm to show the wall-
paintings on either side the entrance, and the petri¬
fied boastings of the ancient dead further within
the corridors. Dan wandered away a little in the
region of shadows, while Ferapont lagged behind.
At the entrance to the Whispering Corridor itself
Dan, a little ahead of us, stopped and called to
me.
‘ There are other people here. Listen.’
The place was filled with innumerable faint
patterings and whisperings. I had shown it to
many a tourist, and in the moment was droning
my dragoman jargon.
‘ The sounds are caused by wind-currents playing
through cracks in the cave-wall. But the natives
call it the Corridor of Lost Voices. If you listen
long enough you will hear your dead speaking here,
they say ’
I stopped, and to myself cursed myself as a fool.
‘ We had better go back, I think. The draughts
will blow out the candle in a moment ’
The candle went out.
I felt in my pocket for matches, calling to Dan
and Ferapont to stand still until there was light
again. But in that moment in the darkness I
touched Darya, who was standing near me, and I
forgot them.
I took her in my arms. She did not resist me,
but put her own arms round my neck, and kissed
me. So for a moment we stood, kissing, till a
AMBER IN COLD SEA i77
strange sound made us stop and listen. And then
with memory of the little Dan’s babblings, the
blood grew cold about my heart.
Far off it sounded, at first, then came nearer,
awful, unmistakable in the darkness—the sound of
a woman sobbing, drearily, heart-brokenly. I
gripped Darya and shuddered, heard Gavril cry
out, heard him rush past us, heard the sound of
someone fall. . . . Then, after a long silence, the
noise of stumblings towards the entrance.
I took Darya’s hand and tried to run also. But
she held me back, speaking urgently, wildly. I
thought her more frightened than myself, and put
my arms about her again.
‘Listen, Sergei. No, I’m not mad. ... We
followed you to Egypt when we heard you and
Gavril on the Black Sea boat plan to come here.
We tried to be near you, yet she would not tell him
because. . . . Oh, if he does not love her still!
She fled to Perekop from the tovarishi in Melitopol,
and was maimed when the Reds blew up the French
fortress, and I dressed her in a man’s clothes when
she came to me, because she could not bear ever to
seem a woman again—after Melitopol. . . . How
much can a man understand, how much can he
love ? ’
‘ Sh ! ’ I held her very close. My brain whirled.
Ferapont! ’ I called through the blackness.
Nothing but echoes. Darya shook me in
impatience.
‘Don’t you understand? Now Gavril does.
M
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
178
He caught her when she fell—he knew her sobbing.
. . . Don’t you understand ? Vasil is Irina, his
wife.’
IX
‘ And that was that, my friend.’
Sergei had finished. I nodded. ‘ There was an
almost similar case in China lately. A Kwangsi
woman missionary and her husband. ... I’d
guessed about Ferapont. And it leaves me more
of a realist than ever.’
‘Eh?’
‘ Romantics, all of you, and with romantics’
luck. Gavril Dan put Melitopol out of his mind,
no doubt—as a man can. But if Ferapont’s ban¬
dages had covered something real and hideous, if
they hadn’t been just a disguise ’
‘ You think ? ’ He was scarcely listening to
me. He was scrawling idle pencil-words across
the top of my realist magazine-story. I shrugged,
and glanced across at Sednaoui’s. So did Sergei.
‘ Watch.’
The little man and the veiled woman had come
out. As she stepped into the shelter of the car the
woman drew aside her heavy veil 
I shuddered and turned away my eyes. Sergei,
one hand on my shoulder, got to his feet. He pushed
my magazine in front of me.
‘ The out-moded Swinburne—remember him ?
And now ’
AMBER IN COLD SEA 179
He strode across the street towards Sednaoui’s.
I looked after him, then turned to the looping
pencil-scrawl obliterating my realist story-title :
Nothing is better, I well know.
Than love ; no amber in cold sea
Or gathered berries under snow :
This was well seen of her and me.
II
7/ Penseroso
REVOLT
BOOM!
Hardly had the distant reverberations ceased
before the sunset wind blew in the greenery of the
city palms. It was as if Cairo sighed audibly. Day
was officially dead. Crowned in red, squatting in
the colours of the west, the Moqattam Hills peered
down, perhaps to glimpse a miraculous moment on
the surface of the Nile.
The Nile flowed red like a river of blood.
Rejeb ibn Saud, squatting in the Bulaq hut by the
Nile bank, looked at his wrist-watch, at the face of
the unconscious boy on the string-bed, at the fall
of light on Gezireh across the river. But for one
insistent whisper, the startling sunset was now a
thing woven of silence.
‘ The sea / The sea ! 9
It was the whisper of the homing Nile. Gather¬
ing, hastening to fulfilment and freedom, joining
its thousand voices, all the yearnings of its leagues
of desert wandering, in that passionately whispered
under-cry : ‘ The sea !9
All that afternoon the cry had haunted him.
Now, as the boy on the bed tossed and moaned,
ibn Saud shook himself, stood up, and bent over
the bed.
180
REVOLT
181
‘ Oh, Hassan . .
The hut door opened of a sudden. Out of the
sunset glare, into the dimness of the hut, Sayyiya,
ibn Saud’s sister-in-law, entered. She was a Sudan¬
ese, young, full-faced, thick-lipped. At the tall
figure of ibn Saud she glanced enquiringly, then also
went to the bed and bent over it. The boy Hassan
seemed scarce to breathe.
‘ In an hour we shall know, master/
‘ In an hour I shall not be here.’ The man looked
away from the string-bed. The chill on his heart
had chilled his voice. Even at that moment, only
by an effort could he keep from listening to the
insistent whisper of the river.
‘ You go to the Khan Khalil to lead the Jihad ?
It is to-night ? y
Ibn Saud nodded. It was to-night. An hour
after the fall of darkness the Warren hordes, poured
into the Khan il Khalil, were to be mustered and
armed. Police and gendarmes, half of them active
adherents of the insurrection, would have with¬
drawn from all western and central Cairo. The two
native regiments had been seduced from allegiance
to the puppet Nationalist Government: were
enthusiastically for the rising : themselves awaited
only the signal from the Khan il Khalil, the lighting
of the torch.
And it would be lit. That was to be Rejeb ibn
Saud’s part. Golden-tongued, first in popularity
of the rising’s masters, he was to be the last to
address the brown battalions in the Khan. For
iBz
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
them he was to strike fire to the torch that would,
ere another morning, light the flames of vengeance
and revolution across the European city from
Bulaq to Heliopolis.
The song of the Nile—such the cry—of fulfil¬
ment, of freedom attained—that would to-night
rise on the welling tide of the Black Warrens, from
thousands of throats, from all the pitiful Cohorts
of the Lost, the Cheated of the Sunlight . . .
‘ Master, if you come not back ’
Ibn Saud started. In his cold ecstasy he had
forgotten the hut, Sayyiya, even Hassan.
‘ That is with God. But if Hassan  Listen,
woman. You will come to me at the Khan. When
the change, one way or another, has passed upon
my son, come to the Shoemakers’ Bazaar, by the
south side of the Khan, and send word to me. You
will find your way ? ’
‘ I will come.’
Something in her glance touched him, stirred
him from his abstraction.
‘ The time has been weary for you since Edei
died, Sayyiya. If I live through this night——’
Suddenly the woman was crouching at his feet
on the mud floor. Passionately, scaredly, she
caught at the long cloak he had wrapped about
him.
‘ Master—Rejeb. . . . Those English whom you
lead against to-night—they are ever strong, ever
cunning. If you die, what will happen to Hassan
and to me ? Master ’
REVOLT
183
Ibn Sand’s cold eyes blazed. He flung the woman
from him, flung open the hut door. Beyond, seen
from the elevation of the Bulaq bank, the Cairene
roofs lay chequered in shadows.
c And what of the folk—our brothers, our
sisters—who die out there in their hovels and
hunger ? Thousands every year.’ He blazed with
the sudden, white-hot anger of the fanatic. ‘ What
matters your miserable life—Hassan’s—mine—if we
can show the sun to those who rot their lives away
in the kennels of the Warrens ? We miserable
“ natives ”—unclean things with unclean souls—
to-night we shall light such a candle in Egypt as no
man ’
He halted abruptly. The fire fell from him.
Speaking in Arabic, he had yet thought in a famous
alien phrase. Under his dark skin there spread a
slow flush. Without further speech he bent and
kissed his son, and then walked out of the hut into
the wine-red gloaming.
Sayyiya crouched dazed upon the floor. Then a
sound disturbed her. From the throat of the boy
Hassan came a strange, strangled moan.
The small, fevered body tossed for a little, then
lay very still.
11
Darkness was still an hour distant. European
Cairo thronged her streets, cried her wares, wore her
gayest frocks, set forth on evening excursions to
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
184
Saqqafa and the Sphinx. John Caldon, seated on
the terrace of the Continental, awoke from a sunset
dream and turned towards his brother-in-law,
Robert Sidgwick.
‘Eh?’
‘. the edge of a volcano.’
‘ Where ? ’
‘ There.’ Sidgwick waved his hand to the
brown driftage in the street below them. ‘ The
political situation’s the worst it has been for
months. The Cairenes have been propaganda’ed
for months by Nationalist extremists. Trade
and employment are bad. The native quarters are
seething.’
‘ Very proper of them.’
Caldon smiled into the lighting of a cigarette.
An artist, he was making a westward world-tour
from England. Together with his wife and
daughter, he had arrived from India, via Suez, only
the day before. Sidgwick’s statement left him
unimpressed. He had never yet encountered a
white man, settled amongst brown, who was not
living on the edge of a volcano. It was the
correct place to live, just as it was the correct
thing for a volcano to seethe pleasingly upon
occasion.
Sidgwick had the monologue habit. Through
the quiet air and the blue cloud from his own cigar¬
ette Caldon caught at a number of phrases.
‘ This damn self-government foolishness began
it all. . . . Treat a native as a native.’
REVOLT
185
‘ Why not as a human being ? ’
‘ That’s what we’ve done here. Look at the
result.’
Caldon was boredly ironical. ‘ Self-government
—-with an army of occupation ! An alarum-clock
with the alarum taken away! ’
‘ It’s advisable—if you give it to a native. . . .
Take it my sister’s never told you about young
Thomas O’Donnell ? ’
Caldon shook his head. Sidgwick nodded, with¬
out pleasantness.
‘ Well, the telling won’t hurt you. He was a
half-caste—an Irish-Sudanese, of all grotesque
mixtures. His father had had him sent to a school
in Alexandria ; some kind of irrigation engineer out
here the father was, and pious to boot. He died
when his son was seventeen, leaving instructions
for the latter to be sent to a theological college in
England to train as a missionary. All very right
and proper. To England young Thomas O’Donnell
came. To Bleckingham.’
Caldon, with some little show of interest, nodded.
Sidgwick resumed.
‘ You know—though your people didn’t settle
in Bleckingham till about a year after the time of
O’Donnell—the lost tribes the Theological College
spates over the country-side to tea and tennis on
spare afternoons ? One of these tennis-do’s I met
O’Donnell. He was a tall, personable nigger—
not black, of course. Cream-colour. But it
wouldn’t have worried me in those days if
i86
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
charcoal had made a white mark on him. He was
interesting. I liked him, invited him to tea.
Clare was young also, in those days, you’ll have to
remember.’
‘ Why ? ’ A tinge of red had come on the artist’s
cheekbones.
4 Oh, Caesar’s wife is stainless enough. But a
young girl hardly knows herself—or the stuff
she handles. Had it been a white man, of
course ...
4 Yes, Clare became fairly intimate with O’Don¬
nell. Flirted with him, no doubt. Mother was
then the same invalid as you knew ; I was supposed
to be my sister’s protector. But I suffered from
attempting the assimilation of indigestible theories
on the brotherhood of man. I admired O’Donnell.
Oh, he fascinated.’
The light all down the Sharia Kamil had
softened. Caldon sat rigid. It was Sidgwick who
dreamt now.
4 The outcome of it all was what I’d expect now.
O’Donnell and Clare went picnicking on Bewlay
Tor. . . . The nigger attempted to act according
to his nature. Clare’s screams saved her—attracted
some students mountaineering. O’Donnell went
berserk amongst them. You see, he wasn’t a white
man.’
4 What happened to him ? ’
4 God knows. He didn’t wait to be kicked out
of the College. They traced him as far as South¬
ampton, where it was supposed he’d managed
REVOLT 187
to get a job on board some ship. . . . Hallo, here’s
Clare. Good Lord, what’s the ’
A woman was running up the steps from the
taxi which had stopped below the terrace—a
woman with a white, scared face. Behind her,
weeping, came trailingly the ayah of Caldon’s
daughter.
‘ Jack, Jack! . . . Little Clare—we lost her
down in the bazaars, in the horrible Warrens. Jack
—they stoned us when we tried to find her. . . .’
in
Never had it all seemed so secure.
But Rejeb ibn Saud, far out of the direct route
from Bulaq to the Khan il Khalil, and striding down
the Maghrabi with his 'aba pulled close about his
face, saw signs enough that were not of the olden
times. Few native vendors were about; no desert
folk, sightseers of the sightseers from foreign lands,
lingered by the hotels. Here and there, making
way for the strolling foreigner, some dark Arab
face would grow the darker.
Ibn Saud had sudden vision: Fire in the
Maghrabi, massacre and loot; the screamings of
rape, crackle of revolver fire, knives in brown
hands . . .
In three hours—at the most.
Ibn Saud half stopped in his stride ; the Maghrabi
blurred before his eyes. Slave of the faith which
i88
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
had bound him these many years, he was yet
compounded of so many warring hopes and pities
that his imagination could suddenly sway him, to
gladness or to despair, from a long mapped-out
path. . . . The Green Republic of Islam—attained
by those means—was it justified ?
A stout Frenchman and his wife moved off the
sidewalk in order to pass the crazed native who
had suddenly stopped in their path, muttering.
Looking curiously back at him, they saw him move
on slowly, dully, with bent head.
So, with none of his former pace and purpose¬
fulness, he went, in a little turning northwards into
the deeper dusk of the Sharia Kamil. The whimsical
intent that had originally led him to diverge through
the European quarter still drew him on, but he
followed it in a brooding daze. At the entrance
to the bookshop of Zarkeilo he was jarred with
realisation of his quest.
Nevertheless, he entered, and, disregarding the
assistant’s question, passed down into the interior
of the shop to the section that housed Continental
editions of English fiction and verse. With an
almost feverish eagerness he began to scan the
titles. About, the walls were here and there
decorated with sham antiques—bronzes, paintings
of Coptic Virgins, and the like. To a small red
volume ibn Saud at length outreached an unsteady
hand.
Rememberingly he turned the leaves. Ten years
since this book had lain in his hands, but he had
REVOLT
189
remembered it—remembered because of those lines
which haunted him, which had inspired him since,
a homeless vagrant, he had landed at Suez to his*
dream of Egyptian Renaissance, to the years of toil
and persecution in which he had built up this night’s
insurrection. ... With their music and their magic,
haunting as ever, the words leapt at him from the
printed page:
‘ One man with a dream, at pleasure
Shall go forth and conquer a crown ;
And three with a new song’s measure
Shall trample a kingdom down.*
Rejeb ibn Saud replaced the book, straightened,
stood upright with shining eyes. Doubts fell from
him. Outside, in the night, his dream went forth
to conquer . . .
His eyes fell musingly on a sham antique crucifix.
Last of the gloaming light upon it, the tortured
Christ fell forward from the cross. Upon his head,
each carven point a-glitter, shone the crown of
thorns.
iv
‘ Stone her ! Stone her ! ’
Nightfall; in the fastnesses of the native
quarter—the maze of the streets that radiate
around the eastern sector of the Sharia el
Muski; a girl running—a child of nine, English,
with a flushed, scared face; behind, peltingly.
I90 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
laughingly, dirt and stone hurling, a horde of
native children.
Such adults as were about turned amused glances
to follow the chase. The hunt was up !
Ibn Saud halted and watched. Nearer drew the
child, casting terrified glances to right and left.
Then she caught his eye. Straight as an arrow
towards him she came, clutched his cloak, and clung
to him, panting.
The pursuing children surrounded them. Une,
a ragged hunchback, caught at the girl’s dress. Ibn
Saud spoke.
‘Let be.’ , ^ „
‘ ’Why p She is English. We are to kill them all
to-night., . , . ,
Hate and curiosity in their eyes, the children
drew closer. Two loafers joined them, and one
addressed ibn Saud.
‘ It is so, brother. Let the children have their
sport. Who are you to stop it ? ’
‘ I am ibn baud.’
At that name the children, cruel no longer, but
shy and worshipping, drew away. The loafers,
whose hatred of the English had apparently not
induced in them any desire to join the army of the
insurrection in the Khan il Khalil, slunk aside.
Ibn Saud touched the girhs head. She had lost her
hat.
‘ How did this happen ? ’ he asked in English.
‘ Mother and nurse took me to the bazaars. I saw
a shop I liked, and went into it. It had lots of doors.
REVOLT
I9I
Perhaps I came out at the wrong one. When I did
I couldn’t see either mother or nurse. Then I
walked and walked. And those children struck me
and cried things and chased me. I ran. Then I
saw you.’
Thus, succinctly, the little maid. Ibn Saud stared
down at her, a wonder in his eyes.
‘ But why did you think I would help you ? ’
The girl raised clear, confident eyes. ‘Oh, I
knew you would because—because you are
different.’
An odd flush came on the face of the insurrec¬
tionist. He stood thoughtful. Folly, in any case.
He was only saving the child for—•—
Oh, inevitable. He glanced impatiently round the
dusking street. Then :
‘ What is your name ? ’
‘ Clare.’
He stood very still and then bent and stared into
her face. For so long did he remain in that posture
that the child’s lips began to quiver. As in a dream
ibn Saud heard himself question her.
^ Where is your mother staying in Cairo ? ’
‘ At the Continental. If I could get a taxi ’
She was calm and methodical and very grown-up
now. Ibn Saud took her hand.
‘ Come.’
He hurried. Through a maze of odoriferous
alleys and walled-in corridors—the kennels of the
Cheated of the Sunlight—he led her till on the dusk
blazed a long sword of light. It was the Sharia el
192 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
Muski, strangely bereft of traffic. With difficulty
ibn Saud found an ’arabiyeh. When directed to take
the child to the Continental, the driver blankly
refused. Not to-night. Then ibn Saud drew aside
the folds of his head-dress and spoke his name, and
the driver saluted to head and heart. In Cairo
that night that name was more powerful than the
Prophet’s.
What would it be by dawn ?
‘ Thank you very much.’ The earnest eyes of the
child looked up into ibn Saud’s dark face. With a
sudden thought: ‘Please, what is your name?—
so that I can tell mother.’
Child though she was, she was never to forget
him, standing there in the lamplight as he answered
her:
‘ I am Thomas O’Donnell.’
v
Brugh! Boom ! Brugh 1
In a great square space, ringed about by the
bulking of the bazaars, three bonfires burned,
shedding a red light on the massing hundreds of the
Black Warrens. Against the Khalil wall was up¬
raised a giant platform. At the other side of the
square, curious, antique, a thing of the ages and
with the passion of all Man’s sweated travail m its
beat, was mounted a gigantic drum. Out into the
night and the lowe, over the heads of the massing
REVOLT
193
insurrectionists, over the hastening chains of
Cairenes converging on the Khan from alley and
gutter, its challenge boomed, menacing, stifled, a
gathering frenzy.
Already, eastwards and northwards, curtains of
scouting insurrectionists, awaiting the final word,
hung as self-deputed guards upon the heart of
the revolt. But there was little need of guard.
The gendarme had laid aside his uniform, kept
his rifle, and was now mingling with the mobs
of the Khan il Khalil. The petty official, long
European-clad, was in burnous and kuftan, up¬
lifting his voice in the wail of chanting which
ever and anon rose to drown even the clamour
of the drum. Spearhead of the revolt, the Cairene
Labour Union massed its scores of rail and tram¬
way strikers.
The hour was at hand.
‘ Brothers ’
From amidst the notables on the platform, one
had stepped forth. High and dim above the Cheated
of the Sunlight he upraised his hand.
Es-Saif of El Azhar. An echo and an interpreta¬
tion of the savage drumming, his voice beat over
the silenced square. He had the marvellous
elocutionary powers of the trained Egyptian, the
passion of the fanatic, the gift of welding a mob
into a Jihad.
Presently, at the words rained upon them, long
Eastern wails of approbation began to arise. Other
speakers followed Es-Saif. The great bonfires,
N
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
194
heaped anew, splashed the throngs and the grisly
walls with ruddy colour. Quicker began to beat
the blood in heart and head. Clearer and louder
arose the pack hayings of applause.
Jammed in the midst of the vast concourse
below the platform, Rejeb ibn Saud stood listening
to the voices of his lieutenants. As if deafness
had crept upon him, they sounded incredibly
remote. . . .
That child ... By now she would be safe. And
to-morrow, somewhere amidst charred beams
and smoking rafters, he might stumble over her
bones. ...
Surely the square and the bodies around him
steamed with heat ? What was Es-Saif saying ?
‘ Our starved children who have died, who have
cried in the darkness and held out their dying
hands ’
Children crying in the darkness. . . . What was
all history but a record of that ? Hundreds, this
night. Clare weeping in terror, the terror-filled
mites of the Warrens, Hassan . . .
‘Ibn Saud 1 ’
In a long lane that was closing behind him, a
man had forced his way from the foot of the giant
platform.
‘ We thought you lost or captured. We would
have torn down your prison with our bare hands.
Come, it is near your time to speak.’
He spoke in the commanding voice of a worship¬
ping disciple, and then turned back towards the
REVOLT
x95
platform. Through the opening throng ibn Saud
followed him. . . . Near his time. In a few
minutes now he would stand forth on that platform
and fire the blood-lust in the maddened horde
whose wrongs he had stressed and nourished all
those long years.
He found himself climbing to the platform. Dim
hands guided him on either side, faces, red-lit,
grotesque, profiled and vanished in the bonfires*
glare. Abayyad was speaking now. At sight of
ibn Saud, Es-Saif leapt up, and kissed him and
led him to a seat, wondering a little at his lack of
greeting, and the brooding intentness of the dark,
still face.
Wave upon wave, a sea of faces below him. As
one looking out upon his kingdom ibn Saud
stood a moment, and suddenly his eyes blazed,
aweing to silence the murmured questionings of
Es-Saif.
Clare—Hassan—all the children of the Warrens
and of all the warring races of men—With them lay
the world. Not with his generation—white and
brown alike, they had failed. He sought to poison
the unguessable future that was not his : he sought
to murder it now in death for the hearts and
hands that might save the world. Never his genera¬
tion, but some time, it might be, theirs, would yet
win a wide path through all the tangles of breed
and creed and race, reach even to that dream that
might yet be no dream—the Brotherhood of
Man. . . .
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
196
Below him the mist that was the mustering in¬
surrection quivered. What was that ?
He stared across to the far side of the Khan.
Through the throngs, from the ditection of the
Shoemakers’ Bazaar, a Sudanese was slowly forcing
his way towards the platform. With the force of
an utter certainty, Rejeb ibn Saud knew him for
what he was.
He was Sayyiya’s messenger.
VI
Abayyad’s voice rose and fell in penultimate
peroration. Behind him, ibn Saud, watching the
approach of the messenger, stood with a sudden
fire alight in his chilled heart.
For the sake of that his vision of the World of
Youth, he would stake all on Chance and the mercy
of God. If Sayyiya’s note told of Hassan’s recovery,
he would violate every enthusiasm of his life in the
Warrens, would speak peace to the mobs, cry on
them to desist, preach to them the vision of the
world that had arisen before his eyes. So, if there
was a God, if he had but spared Hassan, he would
speak. . . .
The lights in the Khan il Khalil flung a glow upon
the heavens. Ibn Saud looked up. Beyond the
glow, clear and cold, shone the stars. Infinitely
remote, infinitely impersonal. . . .
Clare—Hassan—the saving of the near and dear
to one—how pitiful!
REVOLT
*97
‘ Ibn Saud ! ibn Saud !J
The shouting of his name beat in his ears.
Urgently upon his sleeve he felt the hand of Es-
Saif. Abayyad had finished. Following the shout,
upon the Khan fell a vast hush, broken only by the
sound of a throaty breathing as Sayyiya’s messenger
reached the platform.
Ibn Saud took the note that was handed up to
him, unfolded it, and read.
VII
Then a strange thing happened. About him, on
the platform of the insurrectionists, they heard him.
Ibn Saud laughed—a low, clear laugh, and glanced
up again at the stars.
Infinitely remote.
The note slipped from his hand. To the edge
of the platform he stepped forward and spoke.
For a full minute, sonorous, golden, the voice
beloved of the dim brown multitudes of the Warrens
rang clear. Then, obscuring it, began to rise
murmurs of astonishment, counter-murmurs for
silence. The stillness that had held the massed
insurrection vanished. The crowds wavered and
shook.
‘ Traitor! ’
A single voice spoke from the heart of the mob.
A hundred voices took it up, a hundred others—
those of ibn baud’s personal following—shouted
to drown the word. Pandemonmm broke loose.
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
198
Men screamed and argued, and over the whole
Khan swung and wavered the hand of an in¬
credible fear.
‘ Infidel! Englishman ! ’
Face distorted, Abayyad sprang forward upon
ibn Saud. As at the touch of frost, the hand
of that fear stilled for a moment the tumult
below.
In that moment Abayyad, with gleaming knife,
struck home.
Ibn Saud shook him off. Crowned in his pur¬
pose, infinitely humble, he outreached both arms
to the mob. . . .
With a roar as of the sea, the hordes rose in a
wave and poured upon the platform.
vin
Es-Saif wanders an exile in the land of the Senussi.
The secret history of that night in the Cairene
Warrens—that night which saw the insurrection
fall like a house of cards in the wreckage of the
stormed platform of the Khan, which saw the rebel
battalions, heart-broken and in despair, break up
and scatter to hut and hovel—is as dim to him as
to any who heard the traitorous speech for which
Rejeb ibn Saud paid with his life.
Yet from the platform Es-Saif salved a curious
relic—the crumpled note sent by Sayyiya to the
leader of the insurrection. Reading it, who can
REVOLT
x99
guess the dream for which ibn Saud cheated him¬
self of his bargain with God, or what crown he
went forth to conquer ?
£ To my master, Rejeb ibn Saud. The mercy of
God the Compassionate be with you. Thy son
Hassan died at the fall of darkness.—Sayyiya.’
Ill
U Allegro
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO
i
OUTSIDE the caje aming the noon-bla^e of the
sun in the Place of the Green Step was almost
liquid. A sakkah, his dripping goatskin slung on his
back, slouched through the dust. Then a string of donkeys.
A Ford car. A gendarme, with carbine and tarbouche,
came loitering along the middle of the street. The trees
of the Esbekieh Gardens lifted their branches to peer
over the roof-tops towards us, or to ga^e in vegetal surprise
at the windows of Sednaoui’s great clothing emporium
opposite, where flaunted immense notices of the delectable
mise-en-vente within. My eyes blinked in the sun-
shimmer.
Coincidence (said Sergei Lubow) is the mother of
Necessity, Necessity the mother of Invention, and
the children of Invention—they are Gossip and
Glamour.
You saw the red-haired girl drive off from
Sednaoui’s in the runabout ? You paid her no
heed ? My friend, you did well: she is outside
and beyond the province of likelihood. For her
mother was Coincidence and her children even
those I have named. . . .You would prefer to
sanction their pedigree yourself? But certainly !
Why else this tentative story-approach ?
200
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO zoi
ii
It is nearly a year ago since I met her. I had
been in the Red Desert for a moist three weeks,
geologising, my friend Freligrath called it, but I had
consulted perspiringly in my vocabulary and called
it other things. Just as the fountains of my body-
moisture dried, leaving me as a well-cured skin,
the expedition came to an end and we returned to
Cairo, Freligrath to his love, I to mine, domestic
souls of rigid pattern the pair of us. Darya fed me
and fanned me and read me the latest gossip from
Russia, and no clients were in view, and I had no
need of them. So I lazed and loved the world and
slept in the shade of the eucalyptus tree that fronts
our flat.
Till, a week after my return, I received one day a
note from the English doctor, Adrian, the friend
of my friend Saloney, then newly gone home to
work with the sovyets.
I took a tram-car down to his house in Shoubra,
finding him in, or it may be out in, his garden, a
peaceable place, with every plant perspiring and
fainting back on the leaves of its neighbour. Adrian
himself was the one energetic object, fauna or flora,
in view. With a letter clasped unaflectionately in
his hands he strode to and fro the paths, endanger¬
ing the lives of those roses that are his pride,
scowling now at the wall, now at the house, now
down at the missive in his hands. But at sight of
2oz EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
me he crumpled the paper and uncrumpled the
scowl.
* Thank God you’ve been able to come,
Lubow ! I’ve been nursing this letter, off and
on, the last three days since I got it. Have a
drink ? ’ . .
* Undoubtedly,’ I said. 4 And this letter—it is
a delicate matter ? ’
‘ Eh ? ’
4 Else hardly it would need this nursing.’
‘Kate delicate? Hell!’ He carefully un¬
crumpled the letter again, folded it into the shape of
a crinolined female, and proceeded to wring its
neck. From my seat on a nearby flower-bed I
regarded this by-play in mild appreciation.
‘ Kate ? ’
‘ Kate. The one and only of her species ever
suffered to afflict the planet. My sister. From
England.’ He began to stride again up and down
the paths of the garden. ‘ I’ve to be out on my
rounds in ten minutes again, but I’ll explain you
the business first. Did you say you wanted a
drink ? ’
I said I might now want two, and Adrian shouted
for his servant. While we drank I gathered the
reason for his perturbation. His two sisters were
coming from England to pass the season in
Cairo.
‘ Not that I object to Helen. Nice little thing
or was. Must be eighteen or nineteen now. Five
years since I saw her. But Kate ’
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO 203
4 She is a spinster ? * I enquired with sympathy,
and memories of Miss Austen upon me.
Adrian stopped and grinned upon me lop-
sidedly. 4 Eh ? Starched and under-done and
wearing boots ? That what you’re thinking,
Lubow ? Nothing so pleasant. She’s just—Lord,
the most unpleasant female I’ve ever met! And
I’ve met a few.’
I said that this sounded peculiar from a doctor
whose speciality was the curing of women’s unease.
41 have heard our friend Freligrath call you the
best gynaecologist in Cairo.’
4 Oh, they’ve the rottenest job on earth, women.
It was the ghastly time that one of them had made
me specialise.’ He scowled at the garden. 4 I’d
rather go through hell in celluloid slippers than be
a woman. One can excuse them anything—almost.
But sister Kate’s beyond excuse—or any reason for
it. Why the devil hasn’t Egypt stricter immigration
laws ? ’
He swallowed his drink in a single ungrateful
gulp and banged the glass upon the table. 4 And
if she expects—or Helen either—a round of enter¬
taining and sight-seeing with me in charge, she’s
mistaken. She’ll have to take you as second-best,
Lubow, God help you. You’ll wish you’d never
escaped from Perekop. . . . That is, if you’re free
of other engagements and can take it on ? ’
My bones, remembering the stresses of the Red
Desert and my promise to rest them, groaned
silently one upon the other. But I had grown
204
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
interested in this second incursion of the plagues
of Egypt that Adrian so feared.
‘ I shall be pleased—if Miss Kate will consider
me a suitable guide ? ’
‘ She’ll damn well have to. I’m no guide and
I’ve no time. Work enough on hand to keep a
college of surgeons going. Especially now that
Lesdiguieres leaves in a fortnight.’
‘ Lesdiguieres ? ’
‘ My partner. Never met him ? Middle-aged
Breton chap. He’s due for return to France on
retirement; good job, too, in some ways. Kate’d
terrify him. He never took a course in pestology.
... As it is, he’s finding Cairo more and more
shocking every day. His latest: some young
woman has set up as a doctor out Heliopolis way—
a German, he thinks, and a protegee of Citadel
Hospital. Haven’t met her myself, but Lesdiguieres
did the other day—at the house of your friend
Freligrath. He’d been attending the Freligrath
baby, and of course his methods are rather obsolete.
Time he retired. Anyhow, Mme Freligrath wasn’t
content with his ministrations and called in this
young woman from Heliopolis.’
‘ Well ? ’
Adrian chuckled, strolling to the garden end to
call loudly that his automobile might be got ready.
‘ Some unsmacked young Bosche from a Frankfort
college, I gather. Certainly Bosche, according to
Lesdiguieres ! . . . She met him in the hall of the
Freligrath house, told him his methods were ante-
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO
205
diluvian and appears to have hinted, without any
modest reserves at all, that it was indeed time a
woman doctor had come to Cairo—Cairo, shades
of the harem! . . . Coming round with me ? ’
in
I slept until nearly next Thursday at noon, making
up as much arrears of sleep as the noise of the
tourists thronging into Heliopolis would allow me.
The season had opened. So, towards noon on the
Thursday, did I also, and remembered that Adrian’s
sisters would now have arrived. So I arose and
set out to call at the Nile-bank house, as I had
promised.
It was a cool, clear afternoon, I remember, the
air a little bitter as though the taste of kvass was in
it, and I sighed at memory of that taste, myself an
exile in this land of sweet, sick wines. There was
no traffic visible all the wide curve of the road to
Cairo, and I decided to test out my rested bones by
walking as far as Abbassieh. In three minutes’ time
I was regretting the decision in companionable
sympathy with my still-unconvalescent thigh-joints,
and half was minded to turn back for a tramcar
when the burring approach of a motor-cycle behind
me made me climb the sidewalk in an aching speed
to avoid the dust. I was the only person in view,
so when the sound grew and increased behind me,
but did not pass, I turned about,
206 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
‘ Jump in, will you ? ’ said a voice. £ Going to
Cairo ? *
It was neither a motor-cycle nor a car, but a
vehicle of three wheels, the first runabout I had ever
seen. So I goggled upon it my surprise. It was
painted a brilliant yellow and quivered as the door
was flung open, and ensconced within, as though
fitted in a glove, was a girl. ^ ^
* I aw going to Cairo/ I agreed, ‘ but- 
She squeezed herself against the far side of the
vehicle, which emitted a panic-stricken creak.
‘ Lots of room ! *
In face of such mendacity I had no choice.
I climbed in, much gingered. The runabout shook
as in a high wind, screeched angrily, and then shot
down the white glitter of the road. I made to coil
myself as tightly as possible.
‘ Lots of room/
I decided that this was probably the battle-cry of
her clan. She was English. She wore a green cap,
a beret. Horn-rimmed spectacles bestrode with
much elegance her short, straight nose. Below
the beret was a hint of close-shorn hair, very vivid
hair of a smoky red, but her eyebrows were almost
black, fine brows which made me wonder as to the
colour of her eyes ; as Darya’s have taught me to
wonder. Her face was less young than at first I had
thought: it was less a girl’s than a woman’s, though
not the latter either in a manner satisfactory and
conclusive. Then I noted her hands upon the wheel
—intensely white hands, with blunt-trimmed nails.
CAMEL1A COMES TO CAIRO 207
4 Where do you want to go ? I’m running into
Shoubra myself.’
‘ That is my objective as well. If you will drop
me in the Sharia el Anwar ’
‘ You must point it out to me. I don’t know
Cairo very well yet.’ She turned her head and
smiled at me, to the imminent danger of the
nearing loom of the Abbassieh traffic. ‘ Except
some of its notabilities. You’re M. Lubow, aren’t
you ? ’
I admitted this. c But how did you know ? *
‘ Fame.’ She depressed the exquisite brows as
we entered the traffic. ‘ Why are all Cairene donkeys
so morbidly suicidal ? ’
We out-manceuvred a straying string of the
moody beasts, amidst the loud outcries of their
driver. Thereafter she paid all her attention to the
streets. In a moment I was explaining ‘ El Anwar
is the next turning. The house on the corner is
where I—decant.’
She had pleasant laughter. ‘ “ Decant ” is the
word I’ve been searching for myself. This
one ? ’
Out on the pavement I turned round to thank her.
She had pushed up the horn-rimmed spectacles,
and I said to myself, en passant, that it had been
more than a shame to keep secret the colour of
such eyes.
c. . . Nothing at all, M. Lubow. Besides, I
know a friend of yours who is always singing your
praises—Mme Freligrath.’
2o8 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
I looked down at the pale hands that had puzzled
me, remote from both their century and the Shali-
mar. But now I had sudden enlightenment. Why,
then you are the new doctor ’
But our conversation proceeded no further than
that. The runabout abruptly disgorged its remain¬
ing occupant into the embrace of a girl who had
come running from the courtyard opening of
Adrian’s house.
‘ Camelia! ’ cried this girl. ‘ How ever do you
come to be in Cairo ? Noel! Kate ! It s Camelia
Carson! ’
IV
So, mothered by Coincidence—or was it sired ?
I forget the metaphor—that meeting. In a quarter
of an hour all of us sat drinking tea in the courtyard
of Adrian’s house, and I looking over my dish with
some interest at the three strangers to that garden.
Dr. Camelia Carson was by Adrian’s favourite
rose bush, the Misses Adrian, Kate and Helen,
grouped near her. Adrian himself I saw sit
toying with an empty cup, or occasionally
glancing from his sister Kate to the new Helio-
politan doctor and indulging in a sardonic twitching
of eyebrows.
4 But how did you know where m were, Camelia t
Oh, of course, you didn’t. It was pure luck your
giving M. Lubow a lift ’—with a smile at me and a
plunge into seriousness. ‘ And if it hadn’t been for
CAMBLIA COMBS TO CAIRO 209
that we might never have met again ! You didn’t
write me once in five years—and wherever have you
been all that time ? ’
This was Helen, you understand, very young and
naive, somewhat, it seemed to me, like a pleasingly
early, be-tinted edition of Adrian himself. Very
obviously she was a worshipper of the mysterious
Dr. Carson, in spite of neglect.
‘ But I did write—once—after I left London,’
said the guest who had brought me. ‘ It was you
who never answered.’
Now Miss Kate intervened, smilingly. ‘ Ah, but
it was to me you wrote, wasn’t it, Camelia ? I
remember I received your letter and was too busy
to answer it at the time. Then it must have slipped
my memory. ... Of course you remember, my
dear ? ’
Adrian’s younger sister turned on Miss Kate.
‘But you never told me ’ and then stopped,
glancing from one to the other. Camelia Carson
smiled into her cup.
‘ Was it to you I wrote, Miss Adrian ? Perhaps.
Anyhow, it was rather a mixed time. I spent the
next year in the South of France and the next four
in Germany, where I took my degree. Then I came
out here at the invitation of the Citadel Hospital
people, as there wasn’t a woman doctor in Cairo,
and they said—quite truthfully—that one was
badly needed.’ She glanced across the court.
‘ Do you know a man Lesdiguieres, Dr. Adrian ? ’
I looked at Adrian. He was leaning back in
u
210 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
his chair, surveying the sky. ‘ Intimately. He is
my partner.’
‘ Oh.’ Though she did not continue, she seemed
but little taken aback; rather, I thought, amused
and a little contemptuous. Miss Adrian poured
tea.
‘ And you’re a doctor now, Camelia ? How
interesting ! Must be so convenient! . . . Remem¬
ber what a wild young thing you were in college¬
time ? Noel disapproved of you very much that
year he was in practice in London and you became
Helen’s friend. He said you would never take
your degree.’
All this, you must know, she said smilingly, and
I began to understand the peculiar quality of her
Englishness. Adrian, I thought, had been right.
She was a small woman, neat and pleasantly garbed,
with a constant pleasant smile and a constant
flitting eye. Only after a little had I noted that
no warmth ever came in her eyes, and only now
did I realise that our tea-gathering was developing
into a duel between her and the owner of the
runabout.
I had heard her last remark without comfort, as
evidently had the young Helen. But Adrian him¬
self continued surveying an entirely uninteresting
sky, and on Camelia Carson’s face was merely
amused indifference.
‘ Let’s hope he’s a better doctor than prophet. . .
Well, I must go back. Prescriptions and things to
make up. Why, yes, Helen, come often.’
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO m
She stood up and the rest of us rose also. Miss
Adrian, with screwed-up eyes and smile un¬
waveringly pleasant, regarded her from head to
foot.
‘ And that illness that made you leave London ?
You never suffer from it now, do you, dear ? So
unpleasant! We were never quite sure what it was,
either.’
‘ No ? Oh, a very common complaint. Can I
give you a lift anywhere, M. Lubow ? ’
I had no indecision over that. For the one thing,
it seemed to me there was more than mere courtesy
in her offer; for another, Adrian had intimated to
me that my duties would not commence until the
morrow, and in the acid Miss Kate I found no
inducement to stay in gossip.
‘If you will.’
v
We collected then various small packages from
her chemist’s in the next street, and drove back
through the evening traffic, both of us silent and I
in a queer expectancy of I knew not what. I saw
Camelia Carson peer ahead with a little wry smile
upon her comely lips, and of a sudden heard myself
being questioned.
‘ Well, M. Lubow, do you like me ? ’
I think I was commendably prompt. ‘ Very
much.’
She nodded. She was very frankly pleased. It
212
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
was to strike me very soon she was the frankest
person I had ever met. ‘ Rather hoped you would.
Mme Freligrath said we’d be friends. I’ll need
all I can find in Cairo. . . . Kate Adrian detests
me, of course. You see. I’m not quite respectable.’
By an inch she avoided a gamin, we burred down
the Sharia Abbassieh, she turned upon me brows
whimsically upraised. ‘ So I’d better forestall her,
for she’ll hint to you and most Cairo about it, no
doubt, till you suspect me of simony and hashish.
The matter’s a good five years old, but Kate hasn’t
forgotten. Funny. Something wrong with her
glands, no doubt. . . . That illness she spoke about
is a very common one, as I said, M. Lubow. I
had to leave London because I was going to have
a baby.’
She looked straight ahead, then started a little
and turned her head questioningly.
‘ Always,’ I said, ‘ I like to shake hands with
those who are to be my friends.’
Lightly her disengaged hand reached to touch
mine. 4 Well ’
She had been an orphan in London, five years
before; eighteen years of age, with an elderly
guardian who had done but little guarding, I
gathered. By the wish of her dead father she was
also a medical student—a student very much bored
and disgusted.
‘ Noel Adrian had good grounds for his prophecy,
I suppose. Fun and excitement and—oh, well!—
admiration was what I wanted. And had.’ She
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO 213
whipped betwixt a train of camels and a tramcar
here. ‘ Not that I still don’t want them. Lovely
things. But that year: I was eighteen and very
young and unsmacked ’
‘ It was possibly your glands,’ I suggested.
The smile of Camelia made devastation of the
grave groundwork of Dr. Carson. So we shot out
of the evening Abbassieh haze.
‘ Probably. I came to know the Adrians through
Helen. Adorable child. But the other two after a
bit I couldn’t stick. Nor they me. Mutual. . . .
‘ And then I was disreputable—shockingly—and
had to go away. Rather a scared infant myself,
you know, though not so scared as my partner in
indiscretion. He was—oh, not nearly so much a
fool as myself, I suppose ! Goodness knows how
we ever came to either the intimacy of detail or
indiscretion. . . . He’d a reputation to consider,
and plainly imagined I’d trapped him somehow.
Generosities go very quickly in a business like that.
Mine did.
‘ We kept the matter as secret as possible. He
insisted on the usual convention, but didn’t figure
in my farewells. A trying round, that, especially
with the three Adrians. Then I went away to the
south of France with an old German nurse. He
came south to see me, once—aftenvards, when I
was recovering. I taunted him—hysterically—and
he went away. Never saw him again. Poor man,
how I detested him !
‘ Baby died, as I very nearly did. Clumsiness and
214
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
mismanagement. Funny how one awakens to life.
Before that I’d never known there were women in
the world—as women. It sent me to Germany for
four years, and I studied—hard. Gynecology.
And now I’ve come out to Cairo to work.’
She laughed, this very cool and disciplined young
woman, with the light of memory on her face.
‘ Though I don’t suppose the Adrians will ever
believe it! ’
Now for some reason I thought then of a wild
night beyond Perekop when I had lain for hours in a
gun-pit and heard a man screaming for water. And
I had feared to go out to him : I had not gone out
to him. Not a memory of which to be proud.
But I do not think that since then I have either over¬
estimated myself or made hasty under-estimation
of others. So I understood the new doctor who had
come to Cairo.
‘ I do,’ I said.
vi
Now, next day Lesdiguieres made his farewells
and departed for France. So much I learned from
Adrian himself, chance-met, hurrying, and over¬
worked.
‘ Helen alone wants to see you to-day, Lubow.
Relief, eh ? Kate won’t be in evidence. Out making
friends—the Lord help thetn / ’
* You miss the good Lesdiguieres ? ’ I enquired,
sheering aside with a dragoman’s tact.
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO 215
* Confound him, yes. Time he went, but why
just in the busiest season, when half the residents
are insisting on propagating their kind, and half
the tourists ululating for medical aid to stave off
diseases incomparably less harmful than themselves
—well! ’
‘ You should take a new partner/1 advised. ‘ Dr.
Carson, for example.’
‘ God forbid. I wouldn’t trust her with a sick
kitten. See you again.’
I reached the Adrian house and sent in word to
the younger sister that I was at her service. Unfor¬
tunately, Miss Kate had returned earlier than was
expected, and insisted on accompanying Helen and
myself out to the Pyramids and back through feet-
wearying miles of bazaars. Inimitably, she succeeded
in making me feel both responsible for Cairo and
ashamed of it. By good luck, however, she proved
but a poor pedestrian, and in the Khan Khalil,
very footsore, was compelled to summon a taxi
and drive home. For the rest of the day I found
compensation in the naive enthusiasm of the
younger sister, and here and there leant against the
appropriate scenic effects and solaced myself with
a short nap the while the appropriate dragoman
patter rolled from my lips.
Next afternoon, however, when I arrived
again at the Shoubra house to take Helen on a
promised excursion up the Nile, I found her
absent. Miss Kate smiled upon me, unwaveringly,
instead.
2l6
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
‘ I’m afraid she’s gone to see Camelia Carson in
Heliopolis. The person rang her up this morning.
So annoying! Most undesirable acquaintance.
Not to be trusted as a doctor, you know, M.
Lubow. I’ve already had to warn several of my
friends in Cairo.’
I stared at her in astonishment and then for a
moment was on the verge of such uncensored
comment as employees but seldom use to their
employers. I saw beyond her cold, smiling face,
the brave, desperate head of Dr. Camelia. . . .
Pain of restraint sent me forth in something like
anger, almost into the arms of Adrian himself,
about to enter the courtyard.
‘ Hello, Lubow.’ And then, ‘ What’s wrong ? ’
‘ It is my sense of humour failing me, I think.
Tell me, is it English professional etiquette to
blackguard rival practitioners ? ’
‘Eh?’
I told him of Miss Kate’s conversing with her
friends, and he stood and scowled and then grinned
at me curiously.
‘ Pretty damnable. Yes, I know all about
Camelia Carson. But how did you ? ’
‘ She told me herself.’
He stared undisguised surprise and then shrugged
his shoulders. ‘ She did, eh ? . . . Still the same !
Probably has a dozen lovers in Cairo by this time
and told the lot of them. So why worry ? ’
‘ But are you sure this disease is uncontagious
inside the family circle ? ’
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO 217
4 What ?J
‘ But scandal-mongering/
He pushed me aside, half-angrily. ‘ Rot. She’s
only playing at being a doctor—as she once played
at being a student. Gives her cachet. ... As for
such distractions as a quarrel with Sergei Lubow—
I’m too busy.’
No such press of work drove Camelia Carson,
I was to discover. Going home, she hailed me from
the Heliopolis House Hotel terrace. We sat together
and drank iced coffee and watched the sunset come
over the desert while she puzzled on the failing
demand for her professional services.
4 Funny. I was getting on quite well, too. Not
that I came out to Cairo to doctor decaying
Europeans, but a practice is necessary among
them before I can get at my real people—the
Egyptians.’
I hesitated to hint at the cause and went home
and debated the matter with Darya, who gave sage
advice that strayed into a questioning for portrait-
details of the new doctor’s appearance. By the
following evening, however, necessity for action
on my part was overpast. The explosion had
already occurred.
VII
I was myself no witness of it. Helen, the younger
Adrian sister, very puzzled and dismayed, consti¬
tuted herself my reporter.
21 8
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
Adrian, it appeared, had but newly returned
from a strenuous day when the runabout drew up
in the Sharia el Anwar and Dr. Carson sent in word
that she wished to see Dr. and Miss Adrian.
Followed a very angry scene in front of Helen,
whom they had forgotten: Miss Kate, still I
imagine with the smile and the flitting eyes and an
air of shocked remonstrance, Adrian louring,
Camelia Carson in a white passion of wrath. The
scandal-whispers had reached her.
‘ I don’t expect fairness from either of you. I
suppose it’s your way to bolster up your practice.
But if there’s any more of this filthy gossip I’ll
report you to the medical council of Cairo.’
4 There’ll be no more gossip,’ said Adrian. ‘ And,
anyway, the remedy’s in your own hands.’
4 Whatever he may have meant by that/ related
Helen. 4 What, anyhow, could have been all this
awful gossip of Kate’s ? Camelia went out and
banged the door and was gone in the runabout
before I could catch her. . . . It’s quite too
beastly.’
Though less puzzled, I also agreed it was oppres¬
sively zoological. We were on the Nile while she
told me this, down opposite the Geziret Roda, in
the late afternoon and with a little blow of River
wind. In despite the comicalities and distractions
of the scene, Adrian’s younger sister persisted
in an unwonted low-spiritedness.
4 Noel’s temper gets worse and worse. I’ll be
glad—almost—when the season’s over and we get
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO 219
back. Anyhow, he’s off to Alexandria for a week
to-morrow, and, whatever’s happened, I’m going
out to Heliopolis to call on Camelia again.’
She shivered, and I awoke to a good guide’s
cares. 4 You are cold ? ’
‘A bit. Feeling out of sorts. I think we’ll
turn the boat and go back.’
VIII
Next day she stayed in bed, with still the out-of-
sorts feeling upon her. Adrian went up to her room
to see her, and made brief diagnosis. ‘ Feverish a
bit. Quinine. Don’t jw# go and fall ill, for I’m
off to Alexandria for that operation, and my
patients’ll get scanty attention from the Citadel
Hospital people. Anything you want ? ’
‘ Yes,’ she had said, sitting propped around with
pillows and very bored. ‘ Collect M. Lubow when
he comes, and ask him to come and gossip with
me.’
‘ Good Lord,’ was her brother’s announcement
of this proposal when I called. ‘ There's a drago¬
man’s job for you, Lubow ! ’
I had carried out many more oppressive and far
less pleasant. I sat and told all the seemly lies I
could call to mind from the literature of five lan¬
guages, and the patient sat and called for more, and
exacted from me a promise of a further supply on
the following day.
That next day Adrian set out for Alexandria.
220
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
I did not reach Shoubra until late in the afternoon,
meeting Miss Adrian about to drive away from the
house in her brother’s car. She smiled at me
graciously.
‘ The dear child is all right again, though very
peevish.’
‘ You have but newly come from her ? ’ I asked.
‘ No, but I was in after lunch. Sleeping now,
I think. One of the servants will show you up,
M. Lubow. I must fly. I know you’ll excuse me.
Cairo—so interesting ! ’
I was shown up to the room, but after repeated
knockings had no invitation to enter. Still, though
in some hesitation, I went in. . . .
It was almost half an hour thereafter, before I
could find Camelia Carson, and that at last through a
chance telephone call to Darya, with whom she sat
drinking a dish of tea and discoursing my lack of
demerits. ‘ Will you come at once ? ’ I said. ‘ Helen
Adrian is very ill—in delirium, and has been
unattended I do not know how long.’
IX
I do not cherish in memory details of that
night nor yet of the following day. I stayed at the
Shoubra house with the feeling that, in the absence
of Adrian, it was somehow the concern of myself.
In the forenoon Camelia Carson brought a nurse
from the Kasr-el-Ain Hospital, and at two
CAMELIA COMES TO CAIRO 221
o’clock in the afternoon came and sought out
Miss Adrian.
‘ Send a telegram to Alexandria and tell Dr.
Adrian to come back at once.’
‘ But I thought jou were a doctor, my dear ?
Do you need his assistance already ? ’
Camelia Carson disregarded this challenge.
* Helen’s seriously ill and he’s her brother. . . .
And you must do your share of nursing. Nurse
must rest sometimes and I’ve one or two other
patients to see to.’
She was back again inside three hours. By then
the younger sister was in delirium and worse. Miss
Adrian was frightened and would have awakened
the nurse, but I had stopped her from that and taken
some little part in the nursing myself. Camelia
Carson, her small face without expression, and
upon it no sign that she had not slept for nearly
twenty-four hours, evicted both of us, summoned
the nurse, and closed the door of the sick¬
room.
I did not need to be told of the diagnosis. I had
seen enteric fever before—acquired in Helen
Adrian’s case through the drinking of a chance
cup of street-bought lemonade, we guessed. There
came from that upstairs room sounds unpleasant to
hear. Miss Adrian sat and listened with a face
very drawn and scared by then, and minus its
once unwavering smile. Darkness came down,
long stifling hours of it, and still, with the very
brief interludes of calmness, the unseen battle went
222 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
on. Half the night had gone before I heard the
noise of a taxi drive up and Adrian himself came
through the courtyard and into the house.
He delayed a minute with me in the hall, then
climbed to the sick-room, knocked at the door,
and vanished inside.
x
An hour later that door again opened. The
nurse came out and went to her room, and Camelia
Carson leant over the bannisters and beckoned.
‘ You may come up and have a peep. . . . She
considered. ‘You as well, M. Lubow. You
deserve it/
So we climbed the stair and went in on the pussy
foot. Adrian was standing by the window, looking
out; Camelia Carson had sunk into a chair. Upon
the many-times smoothed pillows of the bed reposed
the head of Helen Adrian. The flush and perspira¬
tion had gone from her face and she was fast
asleep.
I looked from her to the doctor who had carried
on this long fight of thirty hours. In despite the
horn-rimmed spectacles she looked most absurdly
young and tired, her small body drooping there in
the chair, most sheerly weary. I sought in appro¬
priate colloquialisms.
‘ You must be dead-beat/
She smiled at me, repressing a sudden yawn,
‘ Nearly. Sleepy, at least/
CAMEL1A COMES TO CAIRO 223
And then Adrian turned round from the window,
and their eyes met, and the smile went from her lips.
XI
Suddenly I found myself staring from one to the
other and realising impossible things. But they had
no eyes for a spectator. They might have been
strangers who had come through long miles of
tunnel together and now saw each other in the light
at last. The face of Adrian was white while Camelia
looked at him.
Then her lips began to quiver. A faint smile
came on them.
‘ Well, Noel, do I pass now ? ’
She held out a tentative hand, found her eyes
closing involuntarily, and yawned again.
‘ Oh—Camelia ! ’
He had left the window. He smiled down on her,
an unwonted twitching in his smile, and then put
his hands under her arms and raised her from the
chair.
‘ Lubow is right. Dead-beat you must be. I am,
with half the cause. We’ll go to bed. . . . Lubow,
you’ll be wanted in Heliopolis, I guess. Kate
can keep an eye on Helen. Don’t wake us unless it’s
anything urgent.’
‘ But ’ It was an amazed twitter from Miss
Adrian. ‘ Where are you going ? ’
‘ To bed. Both of us.’
224 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
The eyes of Adrian’s elder sister appeared to be
about to pop from her head. Camelia Carson turned
round, drowsily, from the doorway.
‘ That coat of mine, there. Bring it, will you,
Noel ? Ready ? ’ She smiled at Kate Adrian with
sleep-weighted eyes, and Adrian put his arm about
her. ‘ Quite all right, you know. Noel and I were
married in London five years ago. ’Night.’
IV
1/ Penseroso
DIENEKES’ DREAM
i
TO see the face that launched a thousand ships
peep from below a poke-bonnet at a street-
corner confessional induces a sense of shock that
speedily passes into irritation. Such face, you feel,
no doubt had once its appropriate function and
setting ; but in the twentieth century it is fantastic.
Horatius kept his bridge well enough for the
purpose of inspiring later ages to juvenile recita¬
tion; reincarnated as a gangster with a machine-
gun in a Chicagoan alley he loses charm.
Leonidas and his Spartans, holding liberty and
Thermopylas against the hosts of Asia, were
heroes, but 
And you stand, a strayed tourist in the unfre¬
quented warrens of Cairo, and stare at that wall and
inscription in the Sharia el Ghoraib.
It rises high, this street-wall that girds the rear of
some ancient khan. It glimmers dour and brown
and unremarkable, all the length of it—except at
this one spot. For here, from a distance of three
feet upwards, the dried mud is pitted and flaked as
though, in its liquid state, it had been pelted with
pebbles. Below those marks of an incompre¬
hensible hail-storm, a great red stain is a dull
blotch in the sun-shimmer, and carved into
225
p
226 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
that blotch, in letters Greek and gigantic, is the
single word
0EPMOIIYLAI
You stare at it and transliterate Thermopylae;
you go closer and see a line of smaller lettering.
A quotation—a familiar enough quotation.
A mis ascribed quotation.
Who really spoke it? You wander back in
thought to forgotten pages of a forgotten history-
lesson. Of course 1 Not Rhizos—whoever he
was—but Dienekes of Sparta when they told
him the Persian arrow-hail would darken the
Fantastic thing to find inscribed on the wall of
a Cairene khan 1
ii
It stood a wall still uninscribed that night seven¬
teen years ago when the weavers of Selitsa—oyer
thirty of them, men, women, and children, clinging
to pathetic and parlous packages wherein were
shrouded their dismembered looms—tumbled out
of the Alexandria train into the dark inhospitahty
of Cairo Central Station. >
‘ Are you all here ? ’ roared Georgios Londos, a
trifle mechanically, when they grouped round him
outside the station gates. They chorussed a tired
and optimistic yes. Londos ran his eye oyer
them, scratched his head, considered the flowing
DIENEKES* DREAM 227
darknesses and jaundiced lightnings that were
Cairo, and seemed a little at a loss.
‘ Then—we’re here, then.’
Here indeed at last they were—Sina, with his wife
and mother and two daughters; the Latas; the
Vasos ; the little thin widower with a single son and
a name like a battle-cry, Kolocrotoni; these, the
others, and the two who were the group’s actual, if
unnominated, leaders, little Trikoupi and the giant
Londos. Here in Cairo at last. . . .
‘ What shall we do now. Big Londos ? ’ piped ten-
years-old Rhizos Trikoupi from the side of his
father, Elia. He voiced the silent questionings of
the party.
The giant of Selitsa yawned, ear-achingly, and
found solution in the yawn. His silhouette
vanished, materialising to view again as a dim
recumbency.
* We’ll sleep. I haven’t had a wink since we left
Dourale. . . .’
in
There was no moon that night, but presently the
coming of a fine frostiness of stars. In that star¬
light the Greek weavers huddled in an uneasy
rhythm of sleep beneath the bland bass snorings of
giant Londos.
The winter nights are cold in Cairo—as you may
have noticed from the terrace of the Continental.
And long—when you lie on damp cobblestones and
228 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
your body exudes heat and inhales rheumatism in
enthusiastic accord with some mystic law of physics.
Young Rhizos Trikoupi was never to forget the
feel of those cobblestones under his insufficiently-
padded hip : it was so bad he thought the cobbles
must ache almost as much as he did. ...
A late train chugged out of Cairo. He raised
himself on his elbow and watched its wavering
comet-tail of sparks grow dim and disappear.
Perhaps on board it was some Greek returning to
Greece—Cairo to Alexandria, Alexandria by un¬
ending discomforts of the trading boat to Dourale,
Dourale to—perhaps someone on board that train
would even journey up from Dourale to Mother
Selitsa in the eparchy of Oitylos !
Once Spartic of the Spartans, Selitsa town. But
its weaving community had fallen on evil days
and were near to starving when Londos, a lumbering
Moses, knocked from door to door and at each
delivered his ultimatum.
‘ Stay here—and starve; abroad—we may eat.
Greece buys but the goods of the American
machines; Mother Selitsa has no need of us—
but she’s sent our reputation abroad. Such cloths
as ours still sell well in Egypt. Let us go there.
And here the most of them were—the last of
their money gone in fares for their varied and un¬
easeful journeyings—sleeping on the Cairene cobble¬
stones, waiting for the dawn.
Rhizos laid his head down again, and again sought
sleep. But, with a pallor upon the stars, the night
DIENEKES* DREAM 229
had grown colder than ever. He found young
Kolocrotoni awake near him, and they conversed
in whispers, looking at a sky that grew darker and
darker in the moment before morning, and then
was suddenly aflaunt, all along the flat roof-spaces,
with the blown streamers of a host of crimson
banners. The boys stared raptly, the cold forgotten.
‘ When weVe beds,’ averred young Kolocrotoni,
cautiously, ‘ it mayn’t be so bad to live here.’
Rhizos remembered giant Londos’s promise.
‘ Our Mother has a fortune waiting us here.’
iv
And then 
Were this still no more than prelude I might sing
you a very pretty Odyssey indeed of the wanderings
of those Selitsa weavers in search of a place in
Cairo wherein to lay their heads. Penniless, full
of hope, and much be-cursed by the Greek consul,
Londos and Elia Trikoupi tramped the streets while
the other males guarded the women and looms
and grew hungry and thirsty and were evicted
by carbine’d gendarmes now from one squatting-
place, now another. For Cairo declared itself over¬
crowded and poverty-stricken already. * Go back
to Selitsa,’ said Cairo, literally and in effect. Where¬
at Londos, an uncultured man, cursed it forcibly.
‘ We’ll stay in Cairo and set up our looms,’ said he,
‘ on a midden—if need be.’
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
230
Not that they might not have found employment.
But they had learnt, they and generations before
them, tenacity in the bitter Peloponnesus. They
were determined, with an altogether regrettable
archaic obstinacy, to erect their own looms, not to
work for others. They found an archway under
which they were allowed to camp, and there
endured existence for three days until on the third
midnight giant Londos returned to them in some
excitement and shot the sleepers out of sleep, and
some of them nearly out of their wits, with his
shout:
‘ I’ve found it! ’
Dazed and drowsy, they packed up and set out
after him, tramping through the dark Cairene streets
for hours, a grotesque procession enough. Until
beyond the Bab el Zuweiya, and at the foot of the
Sharia el Ghoraib, Londos halted and pointed.
And the place to which he had brought them was the
cul-de-sac wherein the sharia terminated, a waste
space of half an acre amid the high walls of the
surrounding khans. Once it had been a rubbish
depository, but had been long abandoned for even
that purpose. Yet still from the ancient buried
offal arose a sickening odour.
It troubled even the nostrils of the gentle Elia
Trikoupi, no aesthete. ‘ Has it not—a little per¬
fume ? ’ he asked, turning diffident eyes on the giant.
Whereat Londos’s immense laugh boomed out
over the sleeping Warrens, startlingly. The other
Greeks took it up. They stood and rocked with
DIENEKES’ DREAM
231
laughter in that Cairene midnight, hungry, forsaken,
light-hearted. The giant of Selitsa wiped his eyes.
‘ Little Perfume—what a name for our midden !
You have christened it, Elia ! ’
v
They set to building sheds on the edge of it
next day—the waste and odoriferous piece of land
claimed by no one, the seeming haunt of half the
pariah dogs and all the amorous cats of Cairo. They
tramped to the edge of the town, to Nile-bank, to
the Greek quarter, begging, borrowing and stealing
stray pieces of timber and canvas. They delved
out foundations at the edge of the waste—the smells
that arose were dreadful—and drew up the huts
at an angle fronting towards the Sharia el Ghoraib.
In three days the huts were almost habitable. And
then Londos procured a slab of wood and a piece
of charcoal and, grinningly, scrawled a legend on
the slab, and nailed it up above the angle hut:
4 Little Perfume.’
They were on an island, the Selitsa settlers—an
exceedingly dry island. There was no water nearer
at hand than that in the public fountain at the far
end of the Sharia el Ghoraib. From this fountain
water had to be fetched—a task which fell to the
children, for the older settlers from Selitsa, men and
women, betook themselves to the looms as soon
232
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
as these were erected. On an advance of yarn
and silk they set to weaving the mantles that had
already won them reputation in Egypt, and the
straggling, hourly procession of children making
towards the fountain would hear the thump and
boom, rise and fall, behind them in every hut of
Little Perfume.
It seemed to them the only friendly sound in
Cairo. The sharia looked on them sourly, and at
the fountain itself they would find the Arab hosts
marshalled to give battle—children who threw
stones and dirt, and spat with some venom. Ring¬
leader of this Asiatic opposition was a small,
ferocious and underclad girl whose favourite amuse¬
ment was to drop dust-bricks into the fountain
just prior to the arrival of Rhizos and his com¬
panions. Rhizos bided his opportunity, found it
one afternoon, dropped his bucket, pursued the
damsel, tucked her head under his arm in a business¬
like if unchivalrous fashion, and proceeded to
punch her with great heartiness. . . . But such
satisfactions were few enough, and wilted in retro¬
spect on the painful return march to Little
Perfume, with small arms aching and small back
breaking and the conviction deep in one’s heart
that some meddler had elongated the sharia in one’s
absence. ...
That was in late winter and for a time the locality
was endurable. But the summer drew on. Des¬
perately engrossed as they were in the attempt to
find an opening for their wares in the Egyptian
DIENEKES* DREAM
233
markets, the Selitsa settlers had borne with their
strangely-odoured habitat uncomplainingly. They
rose with the first blink of daylight, into those fervid
Cairene mornings when the air is unthinkably pure
and the day for an hour has the hesitating loveliness
of a lovely woman, and cooked their scanty break¬
fasts and set to work at their looms. They ceased
not even at the failing of the light, but took to the
coarser work under the glimmer of great tallow
candles, giant Londos and the gentle Elia leading
in feats of endurance. Sometimes it was midnight
before the humming of the looms would cease,
and Londos, a little unsteady, would lumber out of
doors to look up at the splendour of the Cairene
moon and chuckle tiredly as he caught the
glitter of moonlight on the notice-board of the
settlement.
But the summer drew on, and with it each morn¬
ing arose from the waste of Little Perfume, as
though a foul beast hibernated underfoot, a mal¬
odorous breath of a vileness unendurable. With
it came clouds of mosquitoes—insects rare enough
in Cairo—and hordes of flies. By midday the ancient
dunghill had a faint mist. In a fortnight two of
the Greek children were dead and half of the com¬
munity was sick in bed.
The evening of the day on which they buried
the children Londos stalked to the door of the hut
where Trikoupi leant pallidly over his loom and
little Rhizos knelt by the heap of sacking on which
his mother slept uneasily.
234
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
‘ Come out, Elia.’
So Elia went out, and waited. Londos strode up
and down in the evening light, debating with
himself, once stopping and throwing out his arms
hopelessly. Then he halted in front of the gentle
Trikoupi.
‘ There is only one thing we can do, Elia.’
‘ Leave Little Perfume ? ’ Elia had guessed this
was coming.
‘ No, remove it.’ Londos pointed to the waste
hillock towering away behind the huts. ‘ We must
shift that, and quickly/
Trikoupi stared at him as though he had gone
mad. ‘ Remove it ? But how ? And where ? ’
Londos indicated the louring of the Moqattam
Hills in the sunset. ‘ There. It is two miles away,
beyond the town boundaries/
‘ But move this hill—It is a month’s work for
scores of men/
Londos nodded. ‘And we must do it in a fort¬
night—if our children are to live.’
VI
They did it. It turned in the telling of later years
into an epic of struggle, a thing of heroism and great
feats, intermingled with shouted laughter. The
fatigue and horror and weariness the years came to
cover with the tapestry of legend : how Londos,
stripped to a breech-clout, dug and excavated and
DIENEKES’ DREAM 235
filled every one of the sacks and baskets for four
days on end, the while the others bore them on their
two-mile journey—Londos, gigantic, unsleeping,
pausing now and then to drink the coffee brought
him, and vomit up that coffee at the next nest of
dreadful stenches and even more dreadful refuse his
shovel uncovered; how the gentle Trikoupi bore
loads without ceasing, day or night, till he was
found walking in his sleep, a babbling automaton ;
how the women, laughed at and pelted by the Cair¬
enes, bore load for load with the men ; how three
died in that Iliad—one of them, the Vasos mother,
by the pits beyond the walls—and there was no time
to bury their corpses; how the police descended
on the excavators and gave them a time-limit in
which to finish the work; how in desperation the
weaver Gemadios went to Citadel in the dark hours
of one night and stole a great English Army hand¬
cart, and worked with it for two days (doing feats
in the removal of offal) and then returned it, the
theft still undiscovered ; how 
They did it. It was cleared at last. The burning
Cairene sunshine smote down on ragged floors, once
the floors of some Mameluke’s palace, perhaps, in
the days of Cairo’s greatness. Underneath those
floors was plentitude of bricks and stonework. And
the odours died and passed, and the weavers, men
and women, reeled to their huts and flung them¬
selves down beside their looms and slept and slept,
and woke and groaned with aching muscles, and
slept again.
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
z}6
Little Rhizos Trikoupi, staggering to the foun¬
tain alone that night with an endrapement of pitchers,
found seated on the coping the ferocious little
female whose head he had once punched. She
sat and regarded him without apparent hostility.
He disregarded her, ostentatiously.
But as he lifted up the laden jars she came to his
side.
‘ I’ll help,’ she said, friendly of voice.
She bore a jar to the confines of Little Perfume.
There she set it down and smiled at Rhizos. ‘ My
name is Zara,’ she said, inconsequently. Then told
him disastrous tidings, casually. ‘ They are not to
allow any more of your people to carry water from
the fountain to the Place of Stinks.’
VII
It was a crushing blow. Londos and Elia Tri¬
koupi went and argued with the ward-masters.
But they refused to be moved. All of them except
Muslih, a Nationalist and father of that advanced
feminist Zara, were quite openly hostile to the
Greeks. The fountain was intended to supply the
streets which surrounded it, not such carrion-
grubbers as might settle in abandoned middens . . .
That evening Londos himself, bidding the
children stay at home, went for water with two
great buckets. He came back hatless and bleeding,
but grinning, with a jeering, stone-pelting crowd
DIENEKES* DREAM
237
behind him. But the buckets were full. He put
them down, emptied them into the settlement’s
jars, and started out again. By the fountain-coping
three men still lay and groaned where he had left
them. He refilled the buckets.
But next morning Rhizos and young Kolo-
crotoni, scouting, came back to tell that there was
a policeman on guard at the fountain. Giant
Londos swore at that information and scratched
his head. It was one thing to crack the cranium
of the stray and obstreperous Cairene, another to do
the same to a gendarme. The Greeks collected to
debate the matter, Elia Trikoupi, dust-covered from
exploring the uncovered floors of Little Perfume,
arriving last.
‘ Abandon Little Perfume now we will not,’
swore Londos. ‘ Not though we have to carry
water from the Nile itself. Those lawyers ! Elia,
we’ll rear that son of yours to be one and defend
our interests. Then we may drink in peace.’
‘ We may drink before that,’ said Trikoupi,
gently. ‘ If you will all come with me ’
They went with him. He led them to the middle
of the waste of Little Perfume. In the ground was
a circular depression filled with earth and building
rubbish. Londos stared at it and then embraced
Trikoupi.
‘ A well—once a well. And we’ll make it one
again.’ He threw off his coat, groaned like a bull
at an ache that leapt to fiery being between his
shoulder-blades, and called for a spade. ‘ This will
238 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
clinch for ever our right. We can start building.
We can start making gardens.’ He sighed, almost
regretfully. ‘ The great tale of Little Perfume is
over.*
VIII
But indeed, could he have known it, they had
lived no more than its prelude. Almost unnoticed,
yet weaving assiduously into the web and woof of
Cairene life stray threads of story-plot from Little
Perfume, the War years passed over Egypt. Demand
for the products of the looms that had once hummed
in Selitsa grew in volume and value. Nor did
the aftermath bring any slump. The settlers
flourished.
Yet out of its profits the little community suc¬
ceeded in banking scarcely a piastre. Replacing
the saving instinct of generations a new habit had
grown upon the weavers—the enrichment and
embellishment of Little Perfume. Its gardens grew
famous throughout the Warrens. . They even
planted trees—quick-growing Australian trees pro¬
cured by Rhizos Trikoupi when he learnt of those
plants in botany lessons. A great shed, built of
mud-bricks, airy and cool and flat-roofed, gradually
rose to being in the centre of the one-time rubbish
depository. This was the communal loom-shed.
Round it, one by one, were built the houses of the
weavers—twelve houses with much space and
garden-room. Those houses at night were lighted
DIENEKES’ DREAM
239
no longer by candles, but by electricity. The long-
tapped well brought water to each. . . . Londos,
gigantic still, but bulkier, slower, than of yore,
would sometimes walk away down the Sharia el
Ghoraib and then wheel round abruptly, in order
to shock himself into fresh surprise over the miracle
of Little Perfume. He would stand and stare at it
fascinatedly, and so was standing one evening in
October when young Rhizos Trikoupi, the law-
student returning from his studies in Cairo, hailed
him as he came down the sharia.
‘ Dreaming again, papakes ? ’
‘ Eh ? y The giant started. ‘ Ah, you, Rhizos.
And how much have you learned to-day ? ’ He
chuckled. ‘ Apart from the shape of the ear of
Zara Muslih, I mean.’
Rhizos coloured a trifle, and attractively. Daily,
almost, he and Zara, both students at the University,
travelled into Cairo together. Her father, the fervid
progressive and friend of the Greeks, had deter¬
mined to give her such education as would shock
her mother and every other veiled woman east
of the Bab el Zuweiya. . . . She had certainly
lovely ears.
Londos chuckled again, clapping an ungentle
hand on the law-student’s shoulder.
‘ And why not ? But remember you are our
Samson, and there must be no Delilahs.’
‘ There are no Philistines,’ said Rhizos, tolerantly,
and then nodded back towards the Sharia el
Ghoraib, the street which had stood decaying ever
24o EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
since that midnight when the Selitsa settlers
passed through it to the conquest of the ancient
offal-heap. ‘ At least, not nearer than the sharia!
What is happening there ? ’ .
‘ Eh ? Oh, the house-breaking in the upper
half?’ Londos shrugged indifferently, his eyes
on the night-shadowed peace of Little Perfume.
‘ Its owner following our lead at last—it has taken
him ten years. Clearing away the huts and building
houses, I hear. Site-prices are soaring high in
Cairo.'
IX
Cairo, indeed, was advancing in Westernisation
in great strides. Site-prices had doubled and
trebled since the \\ ar. New buildings were spring¬
ing up in every ward of the ancient city of the
Mamelukes. Nor were effects unforeseen and
numerous enough slow to erupt from all that causal
activity. Title-deeds and land-rights were every¬
where being questioned and overhauled, claim and
counter-claim jostled one the other jn every lawyer s
office. And presently, from the midst of this mael¬
strom of modernisation, a long wave reached out
and burst like a thunder-clap against the shores ot
Little Perfume. ,
Twenty-four hours after that talk with Londos,
Rhizos returned to find his father, the giant, Vasos,
and old Sina in anxious consultation over a long
tri-lingual typescript. They cried out their relief
DIENEKES’ DREAM 241
at sight of him, and Londos handed over the
document.
4 It was wise to train this son of yours, Elia,’
he said, and wiped his forehead. 4 He will deal
with it.’
Rhizos took the crinkling sheets of paper and sat
down and read them, and presently was aware
of a deafening, sickening beat of blood around
his ears.
It was a notice to the effect that the site-property
of El Ghoraib, ‘ commonly known as Little Per¬
fume,’ was required by its owner for building
purposes, and that the Greek squatters at present
in occupation must vacate it within a month’s time.
x
The Greeks took the case to the courts, Rhizos
engaging a lawyer on behalf of the settlement.
But even with this development Londos and the
older weavers refused to treat the claim seriously.
‘ An owner for Little Perfume ? ’ said Londos.
‘ It must be the man in the moon. Or of a certainty
a lunatic.’
He proved less unharmful. They caught their
first glimpse of him as the case was being tried—
a rentier, a Parisian Egyptian of the new generation,
suave, sleek, and bored. His lawyers submitted
the claim with a casualness which was deceptive.
It covered certainty. El Ghoraib, together with the
242 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
nearby Sharia el Ghoraib, had been the property of
the Falih family from time immemorial. The title-
deeds were impeccable.
‘ Why did you not evict the squatters before ?
demanded the Greeks’ lawyer.
Falih smiled. ‘ Because until recently I d for¬
gotten El Ghoraib’s existence.’ He added coolly :
‘And I make no claim on the squatters now,
provided they leave the site undamaged.
It was as heartless a case as had come within his
province, said the Egyptian judge in a curt summary.
Nevertheless, there could be no disputing the claim
of Falih.
Judgment was entered accordingly, and Londos
and Trikoupi, acting for the settlers, allowed to
appeal.
The appeal was quashed.
XI
The news was brought to Little Perfume.
Giant Londos, shrunken, rheumatism-crippled,
stared from Rhizos to his father, then around the
circle gathered to hear the news— all old men, bent
with toil at their looms. Rhizos could not meet that
stricken look in the eyes of the giant whose labours
in clearing the rubbish-waste were already legendary .
‘ But—it means we go out of here as we came .
It is impossible,’ said Londos, and burst into tears.
The old men sat silent, but Rhizos slipped out
of the gathering and walked the Cairene evening in
DIENEKES* DREAM
243
a red passion of anger. He found himself at length
outside the door of the Muslih house, at the other
end of the Sharia el Ghoraib. It was a familiar
enough door to him and in a moment it was closing
behind him the while he made his way to the room
where Zara sat over books and lecture-notes. At
sight of him she rose eagerly.
‘ The appeal ? ’
He laughed. ‘ Quashed. Falih can evict us
when he chooses.’
She kindled from his own anger. ‘ It’s a shame
—oh, a damned shame ! Those old men and women
who have worked such a miracle. . . . Can’t they
claim compensation ? ’
4 They can take away nothing but the looms they
brought. We’re liable to prosecution if we damage
the very houses we’ve built.’
She looked at him in helpless pity. ‘ Surely
something can be done? If only that Bill were
passed in the Chamber ! ’
What Bill ? ’ he asked, indifferently.
He had been too busy heeding to the court
cases to know of outside events that might affect
them. He listened half-unlistening, until meaning
of what she was saying penetrated the cloud of his
anger.
‘ A Bill enforcing value-compensation for
improved sites—to become law as soon as passed !
That would mean Falih would never dare evict us
from Little Perfume. It would cost him too much,
. . . But when will it pass ? ’
244 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
‘ They are fighting it, my father says, but it is
bound to pass. When ? Within the next week or
so, perhaps.’
4 Too late. If only ’
He began to walk up and down the room, Zara
looking at him. He stopped and stared at her,
absently. They had each the same thought.
‘ If we could keep off Falih till then ’
XII
That was on the Monday. Next day the Greeks
of Little Perfume received a notice from Falih s
agent to vacate the site within twenty-four hours.
They made no attempt to comply. Instead, Rhizos
went and argued with the agents. Reluctantly,
those agents extended the time-limit another forty-
eight hours. But they were insistent that at the
end of that period the site be left vacant. Later in
the day they sent a note curtailing the extra forty-
eight hours to twenty-four. The growth of support
for the new Bill in the Chamber had alarmed
Falih. , . , , . r
Meantime, Rhizos organised the inhabitants or
Little Perfume. At a meeting they voted him to
control the situation, with young Kolocrotoni his
assistant. Then they retired to uneasy beds, won¬
dering what the next day would bring.
It brought Falih’s bailiffs, four of them, knocking
at the door of Trikoupi’s house. The Greeks
DIENEKES’ DREAM 245
gathered round the arrivals quickly enough, while
a crowd of curious Egyptians flocked in from the
far end of the sharia. Nor were they hostile to the
Greeks, those Egyptians. The Greeks had won
their place. Here were thieves come to dispossess
them. . . . The bailiffs grew angry and frightened,
beating upon Trikoupi’s door. The gentle Elia
opened it.
‘ This house must be cleared/ said the leader.
He motioned forward one of the others. ‘ Carry
out the furniture.’
Londos, who had been waiting for this, as in¬
structed by the absent Rhizos, rose from a chair.
They saw a tipsy giant behind a table littered with
full and empty bottles. ‘ Drink first/ he invited,
swayingly. ‘ Drink to our leaving this place of
stinks. Sit down and drink.’
The bailiffs hesitated, but a growl came from the
crowd pressing round the open door. Falih’s men
sat down and, not unwillingly, filled glasses from
the bottles indicated. . . .
They passed down the Sharia el Ghoraib late that
evening in two arabiyehs hired by Rhizos; they
passed down it drunk and roisterous and singing
improper songs. They had fallen mysteriously
asleep after the first drinks, had slept until afternoon
and had awakened to be again forcibly regaled with
draughts of the potent Greek brandy. . . . Listen¬
ing to their drunken brawling receding into the
evening, Rhizos turned to Zara, who had come to
see the day’s denouement. She was flushed and
246 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
laughing at the strategem’s success, and he stared
at the shapeliness of her ears.
‘ We’ve won the first skirmish, but to-morrow
 ’ and his face grew dark.
She suddenly kissed him. ‘ Luck for to¬
morrow ! ’ And was gone, leaving him staring
after her breathlessly, with flushed face.
XIII
To-morrow 
The papers bore news of the Bill. It had passed,
after a fierce struggle, into the Egyptian equivalent
of the committee stage. From there it had still to
emerge, still to receive the King’s sanction. Rhizos
read the news from the sheets of El Abram, he and
young Kolocrotoni together.
‘ Falih’s men will return long before then,’ said
Kolocrotoni.
‘ They’ll return to-day,’ said Rhizos, ‘ unless we
go to them instead.’ He had already planned his
next move. Within half an hour, after canvassing
from house to house in Little Perfume, he went
down into Cairo with notes to the value of three
thousand piastres in his wallet. Of what he accom¬
plished on that journey he never told. ^ But he
returned with an empty wallet and Falih’s agents
did not come that day. Falih himself, indeed, had
gone to Alexandria.
But Rhizos knew it was only a respite, that to
DIENEKES’ DREAM
247
buy off subsidiary agents was not to buy off Falih’s
lawyers. He read the news about the Bill with
growing anxiety. There were difficulties in the
committee stage.
‘ It’s hopeless to wait for it/ said Kolocrotoni,
dark and young and fierce. They stood together
in the sunset, looking at Little Perfume from Lon-
dos’ ancient stance at the mouth of the sharia.
‘ Better that we leave it so that this Falih will wish
it were a midden again.’
4 How ? ’ asked Rhizos.
‘ Burn it, blow it up.’
‘ Blow it up ? Where are you to get the ex¬
plosives ? ’
Kolocrotoni laughed. 4 That would be easy.’
And he told of a warehouse in Cairo where arms
were stored before being smuggled through to the
Senussi. 4 It is from there that the Nationalist
students get their arms.*
4 Could we ? ’ asked Rhizos.
Kolocrotoni stared. He had hardly meant to be
taken so seriously. 4 Revolvers ? ’
4 Yes.’ Young Trikoupi seemed to be calculating
rapidly. 4 Or automatics. Thirteen revolvers and
ammunition.’
XIV
Now, as I’ve told, there was only one street
which led into the square of Little Perfume. Down
this street the next morning came a body of men,
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
248
labourers and carpenters. With them was Falih’s
own lawyer. Gemadios’s youngest son brought to
the Greeks news of the invaders’ approach. Giant
Londos, bending over the garden-patch in front
of his house, with a great hose in his hand, nodded.
The lawyer halted his host, glanced at Londos,
and then walked past him. Or rather, he prepared
to do so.
‘ I would not pass,’ said Londos, in friendly tone.
And added, as an anxious afterthought, ‘ This is
the first time I have used a garden hose and I am
still inexpert.’
The little lawyer turned on him angrily, and at
that moment was lifted off his feet by a stream of
water hitting him in the chest. He rolled out of
Londos’s garden, rose, and was promptly knocked
down again. The hose appeared to have gone mad
in the hands of Londos. He stabbed a beam of
water to and fro amid the heads of a lawyer s
following. They broke and ran for the sharia, and,
running, found themselves objects of suspicion to
the Egyptians of the sharia’s hovels.
Cries rose : ‘ Who are they ? ’ .
The answering cry came quickly. ‘ Thieves !
Stop them! ’
Thereat, apparently in a passion for justice, the
Sharia el Ghoraib emptied a multitude of pursuers
and assailants upon the followers of Falih’s lawyer.
They were pelted with refuse, kicked, cuffed, and
finally driven ignominiously from the street. . The
little lawyer, beyond the reach of the last missile,
D1ENEKES’ DREAM
249
turned and shouted. Zara Muslih, standing listening
at the door of her father’s house, heard him and
went up through the laughing, excited street towards
Little Perfume. Beyond the inhabited quarter,
towards where the sharia terminated in the strange
settlement of the Selitsa weavers, she found Rhizos
Trikoupi staring up and down the two hundred
yards of high, blank-faced street-wall.
‘ The lawyer has gone for the police.’
Rhizos nodded. ‘ I expected he would. But he’ll
take some time to change his clothes and get there.
By then the police chief will be having his siesta.
They’ll not dare to disturb him very early in the
afternoon. When they do, the lawyer will find
that my father has arrived simultaneously with him¬
self, lodging a counter-complaint for assault and
damage.’
Zara’s eyes sparkled. ‘ This is generalship. Oh,
splendid ! ’ Then her face fell. ‘ But how long can
you keep it up—playing them off by tricks ? ’
‘ This is the last of the tricks.’
‘ And father says the King is almost bound to
sign the Bill the day after to-morrow.’
Rhizos’s eyes turned to the high, ravine-like walls
about them. ‘ We shall keep Little Perfume until
then.’
And then some realisation came to Zara of what
he intended. She stared at him, sick at heart. ‘ But
—it will be the gendarmes who will come to¬
morrow.’
He nodded. ‘ I know. And you must not come
25°
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
again until—after. Not down into Little Perfume,
I mean. I don’t want other people implicated or
‘ Am‘l“ other people”?’
He could smile at that. ‘ Always, for me. Apart
and adorable, my dear.’
But her momentary flippancy had passed. ‘ Oh,
it’ll be madness.’ Her eyes widened. ‘ And it’s
not just a scuffle you intend. That is why Kolo-
crotoni has been buying revolvers—I heard of it.
. . . Rhizos—you who’ve always hated fighting
and laughed at the dark little melodramatics of
history 1 ’
His look almost frightened her. ‘ Do you think
I haven’t hated the trickeries and treacheries of the
last few days ? Do you think I don’t hate the dirty
little pantomime we’re staging now ? But I’d
rather mime in the dark than crawl like a coward
in the sunlight.’ He shuddered and passed his
hands across his eyes. His voice fell to a dull
flatness. ‘ And there’ll be no fighting. Look here,
Zara, I must go back.’
They touched hands, not looking at each other.
She did not kiss him this time. Her eyes were
suddenly blind with tears.
xv
That evening the Greeks—thirteen of them,
young men between the ages of eighteen and thirty,
DIENEKES’ DREAM
251
and all unmarried—moved out from Little Perfume
with pickaxes and shovels, and, a hundred yards
along the Sharia el Ghoraib, began to dig up the
roadway. It was very quiet, in that hushed Cairene
semi-darkness, and Rhizos Trikoupi, with knit
brows and a tape-line, went from side to side of the
street, measuring and calculating. It might have
seemed to the casual onlooker like an ordinary gang
of street workmen but for the silence that went with
its operations. Young men from the representative
families of the settlement—Kolocrotoni, Vasos,
Sina, the two young Latas, Gemadios, Zalakosta
and the others—they dug and hewed through the
dried mud and were presently excavating the ancient
paving-stones. From behind them there was silence
also in all the locked and shuttered houses of Little
Perfume. Even the looms had ceased to hum.
For a battle had been fought there over the paper
Rhizos had prepared and forced the Greek house¬
holders—his father among them—to sign. This
was a document disowning Rhizos and his followers
as ‘ young hotheads ’ whom the elders of the com¬
munity were unable to restrain. Little Perfume,
it declared, entirely dissociated itself from them.
‘ I will not sign it/ swore Londos, in bed with
rheumatism, and groaning as he stirred indignantly.
But, like all the others, sign he did at last, and held
Rhizos’s hand, peering up into his face. ‘ If only
I could come with you ! ’
‘ You’ll be less bored in bed, papakes’ Rhizos
assured him lightly. ‘ Probably we’ll all catch
252
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
damnable colds. But our bluff will keep them off for
a time—and they can only give a few of us a week
or so in prison when it’s over.’
But midnight saw a barricade, business-like
enough and breast-high, spanning the sharia from
side to side. Then, leaving the Latas, armed with
cudgels, to look after it, Rhizos and his companions
went back and slept in Little Perfume, a sleep that
was broken in early dawn by one of the Latas coming
panting to the door of the Trikoupi house with the
news that Falih’s lawyer was approaching with his
gang of labourers. Evidently he expected to take
the settlement by surprise.
Rhizos dressed hurriedly and went to the barri¬
cade. With the lawyer he saw two Egyptian police¬
men.
The party was evidently staggered at sight of the
barricade. What happened then is not quite clear.
For a little, while his young men ran up, Rhizos
stood and parleyed with the lawyer, the gendarmes
at first laughing and then losing their tempers in
the quick, Egyptian way. One of them unslung his
carbine—it was in the days when they still carried
carbines—and, levelling it at Rhizos, ordered him to
start demolishing the barricade. For answer
Kolocrotoni, looking over the barricade, at some
distance from Rhizos, called out:
‘ Drop that carbine ! ’
The gendarme looked up and found himself
covered by a dozen revolvers. His carbine clattered
to the ground. At the order of Kolocrotoni the
DIENEKES’ DREAM 2 5 3
other policeman also disarmed. Sina climbed
over the barricade, and, in the midst of a queer
silence, went and collected the weapons. Then he
returned and the two parties looked at each other
undecidedly. Suddenly the first gendarme turned
round and hastened down the Sharia el Ghoraib.
His companion trudged stolidly after him. Falih’s
lawyer, after a moment of hesitation, followed
suit, his gang behind him in straggling retreat.
The young Greeks at the barricade avoided each
others’ eyes and beat their hands together in the chill
morning air. Somewhere a cock began to crow
shrilly.
At ten o’clock a policeman came down the sharia,
surveyed the barricade and its defenders, and then
retired. Kolocrotoni brought Rhizos a cup of
coffee, and while the latter drank it, himself mounted
to the highest point of the defences and watched.
Suddenly he drew a breath like a long sigh.
‘ Here they come.’
XVI
How far those thirteen young Greeks had
imagined the affair would go it is impossible to say.
In the subsequent enquiry the police affirmed that
the Greeks fired the first shot. There can, at least,
be little doubt that the police at the beginning made
no attempt to shoot. The squad of twenty men
marched to within ten yards or so of the barricade,
and Rhizos called them to halt. For answer the
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
254
officer in command ostentatiously turned his back
on the barricade, ordered his men to club their
carbines and charge, himself turned round again—
and came forward at a rapid run, swinging a loaded
stick in his hand. The attackers were greeted with
a hail of stones. Carbine and revolver shots rang
out. The officer pitched forward into the dust,
and for a moment the policemen wavered. But
only for a moment. They came on again. And
then Rhizos committed himself openly. He leant
over the barricade and shot three of them in rapid
succession. Thereat the survivors broke and ran.
The Greeks did not fire, but glanced, white-faced,
at their leader. Rhizos, white himself, calmly
ejected the spent rounds from his revolver, and
re-loaded it.
Then, with a glance down the empty sharia, he
climbed the barricade and inspected the four
uniformed figures lying in the dust. The officer
and one other were dead. Two of them lived, one
with a broken arm, the other with his skull slightly
grazed. Rhizos bandaged the last one, helped the
man with the wounded arm to his feet, and pointed
down the sharia. Holding to the wall, like a sick
dog, the policeman shambled out of sight. Rhizos
was turning in perplexity to the other bodies when
his companions called to him urgently. . . . He
gained shelter just as the rifle-fire opened.
None of the defenders had any experience of war¬
fare, and it says much for the skill with which the
barricade was constructed that in the first few
DIENEKES’ DREAM 255
minutes only two of them were killed. Kolo-
crotoni was shot through the shoulder. Rhizos,
calling to the others to keep their places, crawled
to him and bandaged him. Presently the rifle-fire
ceased for a moment, but after another abortive
charge opened again. . . .
By evening there were eight Greeks, including
Rhizos, left alive. In spite of threats and entreaties
on the part of those who held the barricade, non-
combatants—the gentle Elia among them—crawled
out from Little Perfume and took away the bodies
of the dead. But with the evening the gendarmes
withdrew (in futile search of a way over the khan
walls, as was afterwards told), the stretch of street
in front of the barricade was left deserted, and,
staring at each other unbelievingly, the young men
ate the food brought them from Little Perfume.
They seemed unending those evening hours.
Rhizos had two bonfires lighted at a distance of fifty
yards or so down the sharia, so that there might be
no surprise attack. A tarpaulin had been brought
from the settlement and erected behind the barricade
in the form of a hut, and what dark thoughts assailed
the outlaws till they dropped exhausted in its shelter
no one will ever know. But long after midnight
some of them awoke and heard Rhizos, alone wake¬
ful and guarding the barricade, singing in a strange,
shrill voice snatches of a song they had never heard
before. It was a frightening thing to hear in the
listening silence of the sharia, and Kolocrotoni
prevailed on him to go and lie down. Utterly
256 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
weary, he swayed to the shelter, staggered—and
was asleep before Kolocrotoni’s arm caught him
and lowered him to the ground.
Near three in the morning, eluding somehow the
police-picket at the upper end of the Sharia Ghoraib,
Zara Muslih reached the barricade and whispered
the news to Kolocrotoni: the Bill was to be signed
and issued in the morning. The story of the affray
in the Warrens had hastened the signing.
e And you must all get away at once,’ she urged.
‘ Throw up rope-ladders over the khan walls/
Kolocrotoni shook his head. ‘ We cannot leave
here until the Bill is definitely signed, Rhizos says.
If we abandon the barricade now the police may be
in possession of Little Perfume before morning.
‘ Rhizos—he doesn’t know what he’s done !
You people were in a searchlight of sympathy before
he started this resistance—no one has a scrap of pity
for you now. • • • Oh, tell him I must see him!
The young Greek shook his head again, looking
at her with narrowed eyes. ‘ He’s asleep. This isn t
a woman’s business.’
A moment they looked at each other, Kolocrotoni
implacable, Zara desperately pleading. Then she
glanced at that tragic barricade for the last time,
and went back through the dying light of the bon¬
fires and never saw either Rhizos or Kolocrotoni
again. . ,
For at starset, in the lowering darkness that
precedes the Egyptian morning, they shook Rhizos
awake. The police were approaching again, and
DIENEKES’ DREAM
^57
in considerable force. He started up as he felt their
hands on his shoulder, and looked at them, Kolo-
crotoni and the younger Latas, remotely, alertly.
‘ What is it ? The Persians ? ’
They stared at him, stumblingly attempting to
follow strange rhythms and accentuations in his
speech. ‘ It’s the gendarmes,’ said Kolocrotoni.
‘ And we’ll hardly be able to make them out.
There’s not a gleam of sun yet.’
Rhizos laughed, jumping to his feet, speaking
again in words they barely understood—albeit they
might have been direct answer to Zara’s passionate
denunciation. . . . Then he shuddered and passed
his hands across his eyes, as though awakening from
an inner sleep.
‘ What is it ? What have I been saying ? I had
a dream. . . . The gendarmes ? ’
Far down the sharia came the steady tramp of
disciplined feet.
XVII
They sent an armoured car against it eventually,
that flimsy erection behind which a dwindling
band of Greeks defied the hosts of the Orient.
It crashed through, indifferently, half an hour after
the promulgation of the Bill, and it was then that
Rhizos and Kolocrotoni were killed. Three of the
defenders, Sina and the two Latas, escaped back into
Little Perfume, their ammunition exhausted. There
they managed to scale the khan walls and were
258
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
seen never again in Cairo. But before they went
they told the tale of those last few hours. . . .
The historian pauses, his theme in diminuendo,
himself standing in the bright Cairene sunshine,
lost in fantastic speculation as he sees again that
misascribed quotation graved below the word
0EPMOIIYLAI on the dusty wall of the Sharia el
Ghoraib :
‘ So much the better. We shall fight in the shade.
—Rhizos of Sparta.’
V
U Allegro
SIWA PLAYS THE GAME
i
OUTSIDE the cafe awning the noon-hla^e of the
sun in the Place oj the Green Step was almost
liquid. A sakkah, his dripping goatskin slung on his
back, slouched through the dust. Then a string of donkeys.
A Ford car. A gendarme, with carbine and tarbouche,
came loitering along the middle of the street. The trees
of the Esbekieh Gardens lifted their branches to peer
over the roof-tops towards us or to ga%e in vegetal surprise
at the windows of Sednaoui's great clothing emporium
opposite, where flaunted immense notices of the delectable
mise-en-vente within. My eyes blinked in the sun-
shimmer.
Ask (said Sergei Lubow) with but a sufficiency of
persistent stupidity, and ye shall receive. Seek, with
eyes but sufficiently myopic, and ye shall find.
Where prayers may leave the Gods unmoved the
clownish clamour of reiterated conviction may
bore them to the compliance of exasperation.
As witness the tale of George Menteith Elvar de
Selincourt.
You have heard of George Menteith Selincourt—
with the Elvar de thrown in ? Alas, and who in
your English world has not ? And, had you but
cast your eyes across at the fa9ade of the good
Sednaoui’s some three minutes ago, you would
259
260
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
have seen him in the flesh vanish within these
portals in the tow of his lifetime’s dream and desire.
He is the dreaded warning : he has found what he
sought. Heaven lies about us in our infancy.
11
It is some two months ago when I first met him
—or rather, was summoned to his presence in the
Continental. He had heard of the two best guides
in Cairo, he told me—Anton Saloney and Sergei
Lubow. Anton had gone, therefore, did I prove
satisfactory on examination, he would engage me.
All this he told me with a pompous assurance,
his small form, padded and pink, bulging from the
depths of a basket chair, his small eyes, padded and
pink in like manner, bulging from the depths of his
almost featureless face. I looked upon that face
in some astonishment, and, being without clients
at the time, repressed my ribaldry and paid him my
thanks. He beamed with a fatuous complacency.
There may be fauna on this unfortunate planet
gifted, when complacent, with a greater fatuousness
than the average Englishman, but so far God in
His mercy has spared me the horror of encountering
them.
‘ That’s all right,’ he said. ‘ Now, look, this is
what I want. You’ve heard of me, of course ? ’
he broke off.
I expressed my regrets. ‘ I am but little acquainted
with the English aristocracy.’
SUVA PLAYS THE GAME 161
‘ Fourth Estate/ he corrected, and waved his
hand to the bookshelves in the room. Three tiers
there were crowded with volumes still encased in
their paper jackets. ‘ I am a novelist.’
‘ May I inspect ? ’ I asked, and he nodded with a
pleased graciousness.
But you have heard of him and will guess what
titles I inspected in that room in the Continental.
Purple Sands, I saw, had reached its fortieth
thousand. A Dahlia in the Desert was in its tenth
printing. The Yellow Silence—I forget the staggering
sales of this work, but I turned my eyes upon its
author with renewed surprise.
‘ Then you have been much in Egypt ? I had
gathered that this was but a first visit/
He smiled, complacent as ever. ‘ So it is. I
have never been in Egypt before. Imagination ’—
he waved again to the astounding shelves—‘these
are the fruits of. They are, I think, the best proof
of how sheer intuition may reach to awareness of a
life never actually lived. . . , That, however, is
now over. I have come to Egypt to gain a deep
personal acquaintance with that mysterious East
whose life I have hitherto known only intuitively.’
Some secret doubts stirred then in me, but I
merely nodded, and the good George proceeded
with his explanations. He wished to journey to
Solium and from there take a camel train down to
Siwa in the Red Desert—c The oasis of Jupiter
Ammon, in the footsteps of the Great Alexander.
I’ve heard rumours there’s a tribe of a lost white
2()2
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
civilisation in that neighbouthood ’—his eyes made
a further unseemly pop from his head, ‘—and there
at least the True East still lives unchanged. I want
to hear the singing from the harems at night, see
the veiled, dusky beauties go by through silent lanes
at noon, listen to the tom-toms beat at a native
wedding. Cairo J—he glanced disparagingly
around his gorgeous apartment—‘ is not the East.
And I want a guide to take me into those haunts
where civilisation has not yet penetrated.’
All this he delivered with his fat legs crossed
in repose, his small pig-face glinting with assurance.
I said, ‘ But I know nothing of Siwa. It is far from
here. You had better employ a native who knows
the district. Doubtlessly such can be found in
Cairo.’
He nodded. ‘ That is what I want you to do,
arrange the—expedition, shall we call it ?—gener¬
ally, employ a guide who knows Siwa, and spare
me all the details which an artist must avoid if he is
to concentrate on his art. I will pay you well, of
course.’
I considered him for a moment and then the
gods played upon my weakest point, my sense of
humour. I saw far off in the depths of the weeks a
twinkling mirror reflecting oddities innumerable,
and if I refused employment I should assuredly
miss the sight of them. Darya could live with the
Dans while I was away. I nodded.
‘ Very well, I will come at the salary you offer.’
SUVA PLAYS THE GAME 263
in
Three weeks later we were approaching Siwa, an
unclean blot on the south-western landscape.
I remember the afternoon very well, because it was
then that the Khawaga George (I had reached to
the stage of calling him by his first name, as well
you may do when you have also reached to the
stage of anointing a man’s saddle-sores and holding
his head the while he is sick) turned towards me
and groaned at the movement in the saddle of his
camel.
‘ Good God, is that Siwa ? ’
‘ Such,’ I said, ‘ I understand from Selim Hanna
to be the case.’
The Khawaga George groaned again and then
Selim, our Siwan guide who had halted his camel,
struck in with that unfortunate flow of unauthentic
colloquialisms which was his passion. ‘ By God,
yes, sirs, that’s him all right, all right. Much
plenty colour of East, no ? ’ and he peered at our
employer ingratiatingly, the while I drew forth my
handkerchief and in its depths concealed side by
side with many a companion of the past three weeks
another of those laughs which had saved me from
combustion or collapse.
I think that the good George had had doubts of
Selim from the first. For our guide was neither
taciturn nor sinister, as were all good guides in the
books of George himself. Instead, he had the
ingratiating geniality of a leech and something
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
264
of its blood-surfeited odour. Large and perspiring,
his head in the past two weeks since we had left
Solium, had bobbed assuredly in the van or was
deep-bent over his passion—a copy of The Descent
of Man by the German savant, Haeckel. This was
Selim’s Bible. At frequent intervals he would draw
rein by the side of the long-suffering Khawaga
George.
‘ By God, sirs, he is some fine chap, this Sheikh
Haeckel! Him show God and Muhammud and
Isa ben Miriam—them all damn muck. Damn
fine! ’ And Selim would beam again the while
George’s eyes goggled like those of a crab in the
throes of colic. But for some remote spark of
genuine pride, coupled with a kind of pig-like
obstinacy, it was plain to me that he would long
before have cancelled the whole expedition—despite
the hope that Siwa itself might be different, more in
accord with the stirring pages of The Yellow Silence,
a copy of which I had purchased in Cairo and wept
over in silent laughter through many an hour of our
southwards trek.
For, if you comprehend the mentality of The
Yellow Silence’s author, he felt actually insulted.
He had come to the East in the fullest expectation
that he would find it faithfully reposing as portrayed
in his own books—written mainly, I believe, in a
London suburb called (unaccountably) Balham.
And, in the unamazing, disgusting world of the
actual desert, there must have grown upon him a
thing equivalent to the belief that some malignant
SUFA PLAYS THE GAME 265
deity had seized and changed and transformed the
landscape for the sole purpose of vexing his soul 1
For Arabs were neither hawk-nosed nor hand¬
some !. instead, they had generally the appearance
of having been violently dropped upon their faces
by careless nurses in their early youth. They were
neither taciturn nor abstemious nor fanatic ; instead,
they behaved, as he told me, like drunken dock-
labourers on a charabanc tour. And there were no
ruins or signs of them. No beauteous maidens
wept at eve beside the pillars of a civilisation long
buried in the sand 
‘ Ah ! You will listen, no ? ’
Selim Hanna had halted again, his finger upraised
to his ear. Siwa lay closer now, its unclean walls
offset by the tarnished greenery of its palms.
And in the air throbbed and whined a strange noise
■—a noise like that which one might hear from an
amorous cat supplicating its mistress. I glanced
at the Khawaga George and again sought my hand¬
kerchief. Unburied in the sands, unwept at eve,
civilisation had penetrated to Siwa. From the
Southern Gate a gramophone was wailing forth
the haunting transpontine strains of 4 Ma Baby’s a
Wow.’ y
IV
For the time being, at least, it seemed that had
broken the spirit of the Khawaga George. He
allowed himself, almost in silence, to be led by Selim
266
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
and myself to a tumble-down hotel that had less
pretensions at being a caravanserai than has
the average public-house in unwarranted Balham.
There we found him a room, arranged for his
supper, and left him to the mysteries of the Eastern
night. Selim had invited me to visit his home.
Also, he had told me something of his personal
and family history. His father was the Sheikh
Ohmed, keeper of a sweetmeat stall by the Southern
Gate, and very early in life Selim had displayed those
qualities which were later to stand him in such good
stead. His was, I think, a good Siwan example
of the kind of career which your Samuel Smiles
would have loved to brood upon and adorn with
comely epithet. Becoming bored with life in Siwa
he had, at the age of sixteen, stolen a camel and set
out for Cairo. Since then, and after selling the
camel, he had never looked back. Neither had he
ever come back. However, a delayed correspond¬
ence had smoothed things out, the original camel-
owner had died, and he now expected, so he told
to me in his exceptional English, ‘ Some booze
and a dance of welcome, God damn it, no ? ’
He received even more. Behind the closed doors
of the Southern Gate dukkan we found the whole of
the Hanna clan, or so it seemed to me, assembled
to honour this Siwan prodigal. I enjoyed myself
considerably and without reservation. Old men
and young men, women veiled and women unveiled,
crowded around Selim. The gramophone played the
Hanna's single surviving record, ‘ Ma Baby’s a
SIITA PLAYS THE GAME 267
Wow ’; and whenever it ceased from playing some
thoughtful soul would rewind it and start it afresh.
There was arrack to drink and honey-cakes to eat.
And presently Selim, who had no Oriental reticences,
led a woman through the throng and introduced
her to me.
‘ This my sister Zoo. You like her, yes ? Perhaps
you sleep with her ? Virgin/ And he regarded
me and the sister with a speculative eye.
I also looked at the woman and a little shock of
surprise came on me. She was much lighter in
colour than either Sheikh Ohmed or the dis¬
reputable Selim. Her face, indeed, would have
been lovely but for its defiant sullenness. But at
me she smiled slowly, consideringly, and beneath
the layers of grime I saw the possibility of a charm¬
ing woman emerge.
‘ Your sister ? But surely she cannot be ? ’
I said to Selim, the while the girl sat down beside
me, and, unaware of a word of English, turned on
me her large, brooding eyes. Selim explained rapidly
and without hesitation. She was his half-sister.
Her mother had been a Greek woman sold from
bidder to buyer, a mere girl, in the days of the Mahdi
and at length, in her old age, had reached the Sheikh
Ohmed’s possession. Then, surprisingly, she had
given birth to Zoo, and died when the latter was
a year old. ... I caught at the name.
‘ Zoo ? Ah, her name is Zoe/
‘ That’s right, all right, khawaga. Damn bitch
she is. Won’t marry mens come for her—scavenger
268
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
he offer to buy. Won’t marry. Third wife for old
sheikh that makes shoes. Won’t go. Says she only
marry white. You like her, yes ? ’
I shook my head, ‘ But I am married already,’
and looked into the eyes of Zoe Hanna in some pity.
And there, deep in their depths, was a look and a
dreaming desire such as I had thought Siwa in¬
capable of bearing outside the novels of the good
Khawaga George, now seeking his sleep in the un-
authentic caravanserai by the Eastern Gate.
v
Of that sleep we heard more than a little next
morning ; and then it was that the absurd George
misbehaved in such fashion as for me put him
beyond the pale of the merely humorous. I
gathered that his supper on the preceding night had
consisted mainly of goat-gut and garlic. That on
top of his desert-aches, he had retired to bed with an
aching head and a stupefied stomach, but even so
had found no rest. For he was in the Glamorous
East. Bugs in battalions infested the strings of the
bed, and all night long, horse, foot, and artillery,
insisted on practising their annual desert manoeuvres
across the novelist’s small and shuddering chest.
To cap it all, far into the romantic Eastern night a
gramophone played again and again on one madden¬
ing record and apparently one maddening needle,
the refrain of ‘ Ma Baby’s a Wow.’
SUVA PLAYS THE GAME 269
So perhaps the good George’s awakening con¬
dition was in some measure understandable, if but
slowly forgivable. Myself, I had slept with some
relish and the after-affects of the Sheikh Ohmed’s
arrack, and awoke next morning more than hungry.
Having breakfasted, I sent for Selim, and together,
as two good employees should, we betook ourselves
to the room of the Khawaga George to demand his
instructions for the day.
The voice that bade us enter might have served
as forewarning. But it was not until we stood in
front of him—he raised the popping eyes of fury
above a riddled suit of pyjamas, for some mis¬
chance had led him to occupy the worst room of the
hotel—that he released upon me the full blast of his
indignation. I stood and regarded him in an amaze¬
ment of great blankness, for hitherto I had taken
to myself no blame for the unseemly condition of
the fauna and flora encountered in our desert
expedition.
But now I learned that I was to blame for most of
the happenings since our encounter in Cairo. What
did I mean by saying in the Continental that Siwa
was the last oasis where the genuine East was still
to be found ? How had I the impudence to stand
before him as now I did when I had led him into
the beastliest hole on earth, out on an expedition
in which he had suffered nothing but disgust and
discomfort ? And where were the ruined cities
I had promised to show him, the relics of the lost
white race I had said inhabited Sahara ?
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
270
It was a farrago of nonsense. But I had seemed
to hear it before, in a different context and setting.
And then I recollected : these were the things of
which he himself had spoken in his room in the
Continental! . . . Very suddenly he ceased to
amuse and merely bored me.
4 You are being slightly more absurd in fact than
your books are in fancy/ I said. ‘ What orders
have you for me or Selim to-day ? ’
He was almost in a hysteria of weeping dis¬
appointment by then. And from the midst of the
hysteria he issued his ultimatum. 4 This : find me
some of the things I was led to expect, or I’ll sack
the pair of you—here on the spot—and you can
find your way back to Cairo as you like.’
It was an absurd enough threat, and did not
greatly worry me. The good George apparently
forgot that he would also have to find his way back
to Cairo. But Selim took the matter much to heart
and broke loudly into expostulation.
4 God damn it no, not do that. Much to-day show
you, wazzas, girls dance the Charleston, my father
he have gramophone, in house of mullah’s cousin
is the radio, there is the new beer-shop where they
make the cocktails, no ? No sack. Hell no.’
I dragged him away from the Khawaga George’s
curses, and together we went out into the winding,
odorous lanes which twist amid the palms and dung-
heaps of white-walled Siwa. And there it was that
a sudden idea came upon me. I halted and looked
back at the crumbling facade of the hotel, looked at
SIITA PLAYS THE GAME 271
Selim, and remembered a passage from the pages of
Tbe Yellow Silence. The idea, a seed at first, ger¬
minated, sprouted and burgeoned the while I stood
in the sun-glare and looked at the Sheikh Haeckel’s
last, most faithful worshipper. I took him by the
shoulder.
It seems there is nothing we can do at the
moment to please the Khawaga George,’ I said.
Now let us entertain ourselves. And as we go
you can tell me more of your family history and
dispositions.’
VI
That day the good George fretted through
ail alone, never leaving the hotel in which he had
bedded so hardly during the previous night. By
noon, I imagine, he was already regretting his hasty
dismissal of Selim and myself. Siwa yawned and
gossiped and chattered beyond his windows. The
hours wore by. Still neither Selim nor I returned,
selfishly immersed in our own amusements, our
employer guessed. But Romance outrides all aids.
It was there in Siwa, as in great detail George after¬
wards made plain to me, and like called to like across
the bounds of creed and race.
For, just as the darkness fell, he had retreated
to his own room with a book, and there lighted the
paraffin lamp set for the convenience of guests.
No sooner had he done so than mosquitoes with
drones like the noise of twin-engined bombers
11z EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
came pinging through the window and gathered
about him in clouds : mosquitoes such as the hero
of Purple Sands had never dreamt of, far less engaged
in pitched battle. And just as George smote at
them bitterly, Romance came flying through the
window and hit him full in the face. Literally.
He gasped and bent gingerly to pick up the thing
which had hit him. It was a woman s garment,
extremely soiled and of so intimate a nature that
George, all of whose books were exceptionally
reticent, blushed with a very great vividness. But
there was something else. Pinned to the garment
was a note, and George rent it free and spread it on
the table before him. .
‘ Oh my hero, my hero, come quick and save
me ! I you in Siwa have heard be : I am prisoner
in the white house by Southern Gate, and to-night
to old Sheik am married be.
‘ My father was professor Hellene whom Arabs
capture and now to one I am to wedded be unless
you come. Oh, me come and save, for of you 1
have heard 1 ... u*
‘ This is my gage and bringing it you may be
known. For me a faithful dying friend this write
I have no english. Quick come.
There was no signature. But, you will gather,
none was needed. In a moment the Khawaga
George was upon his feet. His eyes, popping
enthusiastically forth from the P^ff^Tnever
rivuleted his face, shone with the light that net e
was, to re-quote a phrase he had made his own.
SIWA PLAYS THE GAME
273
Romance ! Romance, even as he had written and
dreamed, was out there in the glamour of the
Eastern night. Romance and intrigue, a frightened
maiden to rescue, were there in the night. Siwa
-—Siwa, in fact, in the phrase beloved of his books,
was playing the game.
VII
His messenger fell in speedily enough with Selim
and myself: we were returning towards the hotel
when he came upon us. Fired by the urgency of the
call, we coursed up to George’s room at racing speed
and there found him, in leggings and a revolver,
abrim with the news and determined to sally forth
in rescue of the daughter of the ‘ professor Hellene.’
I attempted to dissuade him. ‘ Even if it is not a
trap to seize you and hold you to ransom, what can
you do with this Greek girl when you rescue her ? ’
But he had his answer pat for that, even as, while
putting the question, I had known he would. And
I stood and stared at him a moment with the
astonishment of one who finds a piece of mechanism
act as it is warranted to act, yet is of such peculiar
action that your astonishment remains unquenched.
‘ Do ? We’ll escape from Siwa. You and Selim
must fix up the camels—an extra one for the girl—
and have water and provisions ready. One of you
come with me and help in the rescue—I’ll do all the
actually dangerous work—and we’ll make for
Solium as soon as we’re mounted.’
274 EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
‘ But still you have not told me what you will do,
even if you reach Solium,’ I persisted. ‘ What
thing is to happen to this Greek girl, especially if
she is young and comely ? ’
It was then that Selim struck in, his eyes upraised
to the sweating ceiling in reminiscence. ‘ By God,
yes. Now do I remember, of her I have heard.
She the beautiful girl, captive in old white house,
with great dark eyes of perishing fawn, in Siwa call
her the Desert Flower.’
‘ What ? ’ It was, if I may so describe it, a bay of
joy that came from the Khawaga George. Looking
at him, I knew that necessity for further questioning
was needless. That which he would do was plain
to me. And I myself would be there to see that he
did it.
VIII
And so as planned the rescue fell out, for was it
not the Glamorous East ? While I and the cook
awaited with five camels by the Eastern Gate,
George and Selim, as they afterwards told me, crept
on that white house at the other side of the town,
flung the unmentionable gage in through a window,
and had but a minute to wait when a door thrust
open and a veiled figure glided from it. In the star¬
light the figure made for George and flung its arms
about his neck. He choked and then employed his
own arms to like effect. Then the veil slipped
aside and George looked upon the face of the
SWA PLAYS THE GAME 275
girl, and choked again, as might an overstrung
cockerel. . . .
So all that night we fled northwards over the
desert till at dawn we made camp, safe, in Selim’s
estimation, beyond temporary pursuit. Then we
ate a swift breakfast and held a swift conference.
Selim was despondent, and even the Khawaga
George heeded to him, turning his glowing pop
eyes a moment from the vision of the Grecian
captive beside him, sitting in demure beauty and
silence, eating the dates we had given her.
‘ Hell of row, oh yes, they raise, the Siwa Araba.
Damn ignorant. They the abduction will call it,
we will be tried and jailed in Solium. Raise hell,
the Siwa Arabs, oh yes.’
I suggested that perhaps they might be bought off
—if George cared to buy them and Selim cared to
go back to Siwa and make the attempt. Selim
intimated his willingness. But—it was not the kind
of thing that was done by the heroes in George’s
books.
4 We have guns and camels. We are in the right.
We’ll fight it out if they follow,’ he said, his fat
cheeks glowing damply.
I glanced at Selim. He nodded, still more
despondently, to George’s remark.
‘ By God yes. But in the last abduction in Siwa
the mans they caught oh yes, and split him open and
put the salt and sand in his turn-turn. By God
yes he screamed. . . .’
A short half-hour later we mounted our camels,
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
276
and turned to look south. Far off, a swift-moving
dot, was Selim on his camel, hull-down, piastre¬
laden, returning on his hopeful mission to soothe
the Siwan choler.
IX
They were married in Solium, the Khawaga
George and the Greek girl whom he had rescued.
I acted as witness, and George bought me and him¬
self the new and elegant drill as garb for his wedding.
Then we got aboard the waiting tanker and came
back to Egypt, from Alexandria to Cairo; and I
received my promised emoluments, and made them
my bow.
Then I returned home to Darya, and laughed and
wept, and grew sober, and laughed again, and grew
solemn in wonderment as to how that odd jest
that was yet no jest would turn out in the sequel.
But it was needless for me to have worried. But
yesterday as I passed through the lobbies of the
Continental a servant summoned me to a gorgeous
suite and there I found the new Mrs. Selincourt
seated at a table, brooding upon a letter she had
written, very charming in her handsome clothes
new-purchased in Cairo. We greeted one the other
and she handed me the letter and I sat and read in the
looping Arabic script:
‘ This is the last five hundred piastres I can send
to you and to the Sheikh Ohmed. I have got it from
Jorj, as with other sums. But soon he would begin
SWA PLAYS THE GAME
277
to suspect, and, though he is a fool, I love him a
little. He has not beaten me yet.
< Also, I need pay no heed to your threats for he
would not believe you. You thought to win great
wealth from the trick that you and the Russki
played on Jorj, but you had forgotten that Egypt
is not his land. In two day’s time we leave for Eng¬
land, and I shall be far from you, away with Jorj,
who, though a fool, I love a little.
‘ Kiss the saint’s tomb by the Southern Gate for
me, though I do not worship the Prophet now,
being wife of Jorj, who, though a fool, I love a little.
He has not beaten me yet.
‘ Your sister,
Zoe.’
x
One wonders if, after all, George Menteith Elvar
de Selincourt has not the best of it!
VI
7/ Penseroso
THE CHILDREN OF CERES
i
HIS is a tale they tell in the little streets that
1 glimmer and brood in the scent and stench
behind the Tent-makers’ Bazaar. A myth, a fable,
or an idle fancy, this youngest of tales that already
is old, El Kahira listens and nods and questions
neither objective truth nor objective origins. For
are not the great glass globes still there, plain for a
man to view ? And are not the thoughts of men
known to God and made known to man once
again ?
So the tale begins with the great glass globes
that were reared above the roof of the tall new
restaurant overshadowing the entrance to the Wagh
el Berka. By night they glowed their invitation in a
spectrum of colour; by day the wheeling sun above
the Cairene streets wheeled them upon the dusty
walls and cobblestones of the dank, still entrance
to the Prostitutes’ Street. Ground and blown from
the fine white sand of the Delta beaches, heritors of a
million years of sun and sky, the voices of the earth
and its waters, the great glass globes grew over¬
night a landmark above the bazaars.
And the tale tells on how it came one day that a
gendarme stood at the entrance of the Wagh el
Berka, and scowled on the streets, for his belly
278
THE CHILDREN OF CERES 279
pained him and his brain was an ache and despair
within his skull. The night before he had drunken
of arrack, and gamed, and drunken of arrack again,
and it seemed to him that the long daytime duty
hours would never pass, and allow him the ease of
the bed that his aches so craved.
And he raised his eyes to the wheeling lights of
the great glass globes and saw at last that it was late
in the afternoon. And he lowered his eyes down the
coloured spray of the sunlight shafts, and there,
in a blotch of prismatic shadow, he saw the woman.
She squatted by the left-hand corner of the Wagh
el Berka’s entrance, and he stared at her in surprise
for he had not seen her come. For a while, in the
dazzle of light, he made little of her look or like¬
lihood, and he shaded his eyes with his hand and
made a half-step towards where she crouched. A
strange lightness came in his head and veins.
But that passed. For he saw the crouching woman
with great clearness then, the dull, brute face and
jaundiced eye, and he turned aside and spat his
disgust. Some woman of the Street whose days at
her trade were overpast, he guessed, and meditated
a blow in her ribs with his carbine, and then spat
again. Involve himself in a brawl with a hag when
his duty drew at length to its end ?
And the tale tells then that a young man drew
aside from the drift of pedestrians in the street
below, and looked at the entrance to the Wagh el
Berka, and looked at the gendarme, and peered
at the little watch which was strapped on his wrist,
200
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
He was young, he was comely, a Gentile, an
artist. He saw the globes as the wheeling suns of
the Dog Star, and life was good in his mouth, and
women desirous under his hands. And he laughed
as he saw that he stood at the entrance to the
Prostitutes’ Street, and looked again at his little
watch, and went swiftly in towards the Wagh el
Berka.
It was then that he too saw the crouching shape
by the left-hand entrance. No more than a shapeless
shape, a fusing of sun and shadow, he saw in his
haste, and paid her no heed, and went whistling out
of the sunlight into the dark, quiet shadows that
mantled in warmth and stench the silent Street.
But hardly had he gone than along the street two
women came, one a heathen woman from the island
of Japan, one Italian, and harlots both of them from
the great houses of the Wagh. In search of foods
or of laces to deck their bodies, they had spent long
hours away from their rooms, and returned
exhausted now from the day’s adventurings. And
their feet were swollen with their wanderings and
their minds made brittle by anger, for all men knew
their trade and their lives, and called to them,
jeering, and shamed them in unknown places. So
they came with sly, quick looks at the face of the
gendarme, and he saw them come, seeing them, it
so was, at the moment they themselves cast eyes
on the squatting woman of the left-hand comer.
And the gendarme, stilling the ache of his head,
called them by jesting, obscene names, but for once
THE CHILDREN OF CERES 281
they paid no heed. And the Italian woman stared
and spat, as one moved to sickness, and cried :
‘ Look on the foul whore in the corner ! She is
shameful and diseased. Ah God, why is she not
gaoled ? ’
And horror came also on the face of the
harlot from Japan. ‘ Her face ! Do you see her
face ? ’
So the two of them stood for a frozen moment
and looked at the horror of that face, and then, near
to running, white and terrified, they sheered to the
right and plunged within the portals of the Wagh el
Berka. And the gendarme stared in their wake,
without understanding, and looked upon the sky,
and looked at the woman who squatted there in
the left-hand corner. And he spat again at that
sight.
And the tale tells then that the hour of sunset
drew near, and with its coming came two others, a
man and a woman from the great Giaour land of
wealth across the seas. Their youth was over and
the days of gladness when the blood sang as a song
in their veins, and peace and plenty, the untroubled
mind, were now their desires. So they came to the
entrance to the shameful Street, and stopped and
looked, with the little books held in their hands.
And they read in the little books that in this Street
women sold their bodies to the lusts of men. And
the twain from the land of wealth were displeased
and eager, and the man said, * We have a little while.
Shall we go look ? ’
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
282
So the woman said that they would, and they
turned into the entrance of the Wagh el Berka. And
as they turned the woman touched her man and
cried, ‘ Look at the dear old one who is seated
there! ’
Then the man looked, and saw her who squatted
in the left-hand entrance. And he was troubled.
‘ She looks as one un-evil and respectable,’ he
said, and the woman whose bed he had ceased to
desire nodded her head, and pointed again to the
neatness of the clothes of the squatting figure. And
she said, ‘ Throw to her money.’
So the man drew forth his purse and searched in
it and as he and his woman moved forward into the
Wagh el Berka the coin he had flung spun and rang
about the feet of the squatting figure. But she paid
it no heed. Hearing the ring of the coin the
gendarme turned and watched, and he saw that the
woman paid no heed, and he spat yet again, saying
to himself, ‘ The drunken sow has not noticed they
have flung her a piastre.’
Now an old man, a Greek, came shuffling then
from the streets that led to the Sharia Muhammud.
Nearly seventy years had passed since the day he
had come to Cairo from forgotten Lemnos, and he
walked dimly, in the painless stupor of the old, till
he too neared that corner where squatted the woman
in the shadow. And he looked at her, and, half-
blinded though he was, saw her with clearness,
albeit that he blinked and half-halted with the
faintness that came on him then.
THE CHILDREN OF CERES 283
It was her beauty that brought the blood beating
in such wise in his heart. That, and her youth, for
under the veils he saw her face, so fair and young
that a little cry came from his lips, and far back in
the years of lost Lemnos he heard the singing of the
ghosts of desire.
‘ Why stays she there ? Awaiting the coming of
someone ? ’ And he sighed. ‘ Alas, not I!J
So he too went on, slowly, remembering, and
the light waned fast above the streets, and the
gendarme paced with aching head at the entrance
of the Wagh el Berka. Sleep weighed upon him,
and pacing, he glanced at the squatting woman and
saw that she too nodded. And then he heard quick
steps come sounding from the entrance of the Wagh
el Berka, and turned and looked at the man who
came.
He came and paused in the dying sunlight and
set a match to the tip of a fine cigar. For wealth
and respect and a clear, quick mind was his,
the noted Fransawi of the Street. His was the
task to procure fresh women for the Wagh el
Berka, and as he threw the match from the
lighted cigar his glance fell on the woman of the
corner.
And he invoked his Faith, asking, ‘ Who can she
be ? Not of the houses—but surely not of the
streets ? ’
And he felt angered and dismayed at the thought,
for such life was a waste of the goods she might sell,
and he stepped a quick step towards her and stood
284
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
in wonder. Tall and long-limbed, with the painted
face and eyelids he saw her, a harlot surely of value
and experience, one such as brought him much
credit and profit. And he thought of the third
house up in the Street, where a new woman
purchased a fortnight before had failed so
signally to withstand the playful lusts of a giant
client.
But he shook his head. ‘ No. She hunts the
bigger game for herself. It were better to leave her
now.’
So he too passed her, with the backward glance
of regret, and went on, and found himself in the
throngs that foreshadowed the coming of night.
And as he went, tells on the tale, the new woman
looked out and saw the sky and planned her escape
from the third house up in the Street of Shame.
She crawled from her bed then, in the dankness of
her little room, and sought for her clothes, and
found them, though she shuddered at the touch that
they brought to her hand. And frightened as a
child, as indeed she was, she stood and listened, and
drew the garments about her, and staunched at nose
and mouth the little foamings of blood that came.
Then she found her shoes, and was shod, and slowly
crept down the stairs to a doorway deserted and the
Wagh el Berka beyond like a sharp-edged nullah
with the sunlight aglow on its long, grey ledges.
As yet she was safe, for the trade and thronging of
the Street came after dark.
So this child who had looked on a woman’s
THE CHILDREN OF CERES 285
terrors crept then away from that doorway, and
with stealthy walk, clinging to the wall, made her
slow way past house after house. Near to the
entrance of the Street she raised heavy eyes, and
they swam with little specks in her sickness, and she
saw the light wheel from the great glass globes in
a long, straight shaft that the darkness waited
to devour. Beyond the entrance she saw the
gendarme pace, and fear came on her again, but
she might not stay, and crept by the wall in the
shadow.
So she came at last to the entrance and stepped
from it, and far off then in Abbassieh, tells on the
tale, the sunset gun pealed forth its cry. And the
woman started at the sound as a frightened fawn,
and the blood that had sprayed from her mouth in a
little foam became of a sudden a torrent. Staunch¬
ing it then, and swaying in sickness, she raised her
eyes and looked and saw the woman who squatted
in the left-hand corner.
And she knew her at once, the face turned towards
her, remembered, un-angered, compassionate. How
had she known? How was she here? And fear
went from her, and she made a last stumbling run.
‘ Mother! ’
And the tale tells on how the gendarme heard that
cry and wheeled round and looked. And he saw
the girl who came stumbling from the Street of
Shame, and he saw her fall and lie still, and he looked
286
EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
unmoved. And then he gasped and clutched at his
carbine and was fearful.
Darkness was filming the streets, and the play of
light from the great glass globes of the Delta
beaches had gone. So had the Woman who waited.
MAKTOUB
>
