National Library of Scotland
*6000391201*
THE
CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
By the Same Author
ANCIENT AMERICA
HANNO, OR THE FUTURE OF EXPLORATION
SPARTACUS
Etc
BAS-RELIEF FROM THE SO-CALLED TEMPLE OF THE SUN, PALENQUE
The figure-carving is among the most exquisite in Old Empire sculpture
By permission of the trustees of the British Museum
THE
CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
By
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
With a Foreword by
PROFESSOR G. ELLIOT SMITH
M A., M.D., Litt.D., D.Sc., etc., F.R.S.
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited, 34 Paternoster Row, 5.C.4
mcmxxxiv
Made and Printed in Great Britain at
Tht Mayflower Press, Plymouth, William Brendon & Son, Ltd.
TO
ALEXANDER GRAY, M.A.
FOREWORD
EVER since its existence was made known to
the people of Europe, the exotic civilization
of the mysterious Maya people in Central
America has always excited the curiosity and aroused
the interest of both scholars and the man in the
street. But the interest and importance of the Maya
civilization are far more significant than the merely
intrinsic curiosity they excite, for the problems which
the attempt to interpret this civilization sets involve
the fundamental issues of anthropology. As I have
recently devoted a whole volume {J'he Diffusion of
Culture) to the elaboration of this aspect of the prob¬
lem, it is unnecessary for me to discuss it in detail
here.
When the Europeans discovered what was aptly
called the “ New World ” they were amazed to find
the strange people who inhabited it engaged in prac¬
tices—architectural, artistic, religious, ritual, agri¬
cultural, and social—that presented obvious likenesses
to those of the Old World. The problem arose of
deciding what significance this resemblance involved
—whether it was due to the spread of ideas and
practices from Asia or Europe, or whether it implied
independent development that led to the same arbi¬
trary result. For centuries men have wrestled with
this problem, until anthropological theory for the
world at large has become involved in the essentially
American issue.
Although much has been written about the Maya
people and their achievements, the vast significance
of their civilization has never been adequately ex¬
pounded in a connected and coherent work. It has
remained for Mr. Leslie Mitchell to expound this
great theme in this lucid and illuminating book, in
which he has put the issues clearly and given enough
10
FOREWORD
information and discussion to define the problems
and suggest their solution. No discussion of these
matters can be regarded as adequate unless it deals
with the issues in a comparative way, using the
ample anthropological materials collected from the
world at large in recent years. Mr. Leslie Mitchell
has the wide knowledge and competence to achieve
this difficult task and write a book which forms a
definite contribution to the great task of anthro¬
pology, for he has interpreted the issue which repre¬
sents the foundation of anthropological theory. If
he had done nothing more than cut the Gordian knot
of the calendar-discussion he would have rendered a
great service to anthropologists: but his achieve¬
ment is far greater. By explaining the function of
the calendar and its intimate relations to the agri¬
cultural and social affairs of the Maya, he has inci¬
dentally interpreted the essential elements of this
people’s culture.
He has achieved a great work which will earn the
gratitude of all students of Human History.
G. ELLIOT SMITH.
I934-
CONTENTS
Foreword 9
Introduction I5
CHAPTER
I. Rediscovery of the Maya .... 21
i. The Land and the Monuments
ii. Scripts, Chronicles, and Commentators
II. Pre-Mayan America 38
i. Early Man
ii. Early Man in America
iii. The Archaic Culture in Central America
III. Rise of the Maya Old Empire ... 56
i. Origins
ii. The Ancient Stone-built Sites
iii. Architecture in the Ancient Sites
iv. Sculptural Art in the Ancient Sites
v. Painting, Pottery, and the Minor Arts
vi. The Sciences in the Ancient Sites
vii. Script and Calendar in the Ancient Sites
viii. Religion in the Ancient Sites
ix. Origins Reconsidered
IV. The History of the Maya Old Empire . 123
i. The Dated Inscriptions Cease
ii. War or Peace ?
iii. Old Empire Historical Fiction
iv. The Strayings of the “ Toltec ” Xiu
v. The End of the Maya Old Empire
r-
V. Life in a City of the Ancient Maya . .148
i. Footnotes to Caution
ii. Morning
iii. Evening
VI. Rise of the Maya New Empire . . .169
i. Origins
ii. The Sites
iii. Art and Architecture
iv. The Sciences
v. The Katun Count and the Ritual Calendar
vi. Social Grades and the Economic Life
11
12
CONTENTS
CHAPTSB rAGB
VII. Interlude in Ancient Mexico . . . 193
VIII. The History of the Maya New Empire . 203
i. The Great Descent
ii. The Little Descent
iii. The Golden Age of Itza
iv. The Coming of Kukulcan
v. The Reign of Kukulcan
vi. The League of May afan
vii. The End of the League
viii. The Period of Disunity
ix. The Great Hurricane
x. Pestilence and War
IX. The Conquest of the Maya .... 231
i. Preludes and Prophecies
ii. Expedition of Hernandez de Cordoba
iii. Expedition of Juan de Grijalva
iv. Expeditions of Hernando de Cortes
v. Montejo lands in Yucatan
vi. Eviction of the Spaniards
vii. The last Five Years of Mayan Freedom
viii. Return of the Spaniards
Epilogue 268
Bibliography .
Index
271
275
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Bas-relief from the so-called Temple of the Sun,
PALENQUE ....... Frontispiece
FACING FAGS
Tikal : small Temple on Pyramidal Foundation . 66
Monolithic Sculpture at Copan : the “ Archaic
Phase” 
Monolithic Sculpture at Copan : the “ Formal
Phase ” 
Monolithic Sculpture at Copan : the “ Classic
Phase” 
80
82
84
116
118
120
142
156
162
Bas-relief from Menche—Yaxchilan
Skull decoration on an Altar at Copan
Transpacific Diffusion of a Sculptural Motif based
on a Greek Myth 
Ruins of a Maya “College” at Chicken Itza.
Front of the so-called House of the Governor,
Inner Doorway of the Great Ball Court, Chicken
Itza . , 
Sculptured Monoliths of the so-called Temple of
the Tables, Chicken Itza 164
Facade of the so-called House of the Nuns, Uxmal 174
Apparent Building in Storeys : the “ Palace,”
Layil ^6
A Temple at Chacmultun *78
A Finely-pillared Temple at Labna . . . 186
Heads of the Rain-God on the House of the Nuns,
Uxmal  
IN THE TEXT
The Egyptian-like Figure at Palenque .
Itzamna, the Maya Zeus . . . . •
The “False Arch” in Tarentum and Palenque
13
PAGB
26
34
78
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
14
The Winged Disc 
The upper Part of Stela B at Copan
The Elephant-headed God Chac ....
The Hindu Monkey-God Hanuman as a Maya Deity
The Elephant-head Decoration on Stela B at Copan
The so-called Maya “Death-God” . . . .
A God 
The so-called “ Sun-God ” 
The so-called Maize-God ......
A Variant of God Chac 
87
88
113
114
121
144
160
184
227
229
INTRODUCTION
rr^HE explorations, excavations and writings
of Gann, Blom, Le Farge, Eric Thompson,
Morley, Earl Morris and others within the
last two decades have made the word Maya well
known to the average educated reader , and only a
very little research would open his eyes to the im¬
mense amount of literary discussion the ancient
Mayas have provoked during the last four hundred
years. He would find books by the score on them :
books by antiquaries, books by archaeologists, books
by Americanists, books by Egyptologists, books of
science and books of senility ; books of incredible
dullness, books with exasperating lacunae, books of
a fatuous erudition. He would find that the Maya
were descended from the ancient Israelites, from the
Prophet Joseph Smith’s colonists, from the ancient
Egyptians, from the Polynesians, from the Chinese,
from the Thibetans, from the Cro-magnards, from
Plato’s Atlanteans. Also, he would discover that
they civilized ancient Egypt and Sumeria, and were
the originators of all human civilization, including
that of Atlantis. He would learn from one school of
writers that they were not even semi-civilized, that
their buildings were masses of rubble, their writing
a primitive picture-script, their religion fetishism,
their kingdoms myths, their social life and customs
similar to those of cannibal Caribs, who were prob¬
ably their cultural superiors. Alternatively, it would
appear that in certain aspects of art and branches of
science they were on a level with present-day Europe
and far in advance of the Europe contemporary
to themselves—immoderately beyond the furthest
achievements of the old Nilotic or Two River civili¬
zations ; that their glyphs undoubtedly enshrined
an alphabet; that their religion was foreigner-
INTRODUCTION
16
debased, but originally pure, containing a figure as
morally impressive as the Buddha; that their
customs and speech differed completely from that
found anywhere else on the American or any other
continent. . . .
Except in the case of the hardiest, the natural re¬
action before this choice of fine, mixed reading is a
recoil of dismay. To charter these swamps and seek
out the life and history of an actual people and civil¬
ization appears such task as might occupy several
lifetimes.
Fortunately this is no more than a superficial
impression. That the Maya are capable of being at
least partly rescued both from the ancient litter of
the antiquary and the modern piled detail of exca¬
vation is proved by two recent books—the History
of the Maya, by Dr. Thomas Gann and Mr. J. Eric
Thompson, and Histoire des peuples mayas-quiches, by
MM. J. Genet and P. Chelbatz.
Both of these books are plain-told tales, and
the author of the present volume, had he con¬
sidered them completely (and satisfactorily) explan¬
atory and expository, would have had no excuse for
attempting to supplant them. Therefore it is worth
while considering in what measures they appear in¬
adequate.
The History of the Maya was not, as the authors
themselves make plain, written in close collabora¬
tion : each collaborator wrote a certain number of
chapters, one collaborator writing in Chicago, one in
Central America. Consequently the book has a
ragged sequence and suffers from a certain amount
of tautology. More seriously, it is written by two
Americanists who appear in considerable ignorance
of the dictum of M. A. Gagnon: “ Je dirai meme
que Tarchseologue que faire de TAmerique b unique
INTRODUCTION
17
champs de ses etudes, pourra certainement nous
donner des details du plus haut interet sur les civil¬
izations indigenes, mais il naura pas qualite pour
nous en dire Torigine s’il ne peut en meme temps
comparer ces civilizations avec les civilizations
orient ales.” (1). Unawareness of, or disregard of
that dictum, has left the History little more than a
stale compendium of archaeological data.
The case is different with Histoire des peuples
muyus-quiche. Here the attempt is made, and with
considerable success, to set forth plainly the position
of the Mayas-Quiche in American history. The
authors, however, are more concerned over racial
origins for the actual autochthones of Central
America than for the origins of their culture, and
suffer (like most Europeans of last century who dealt
with the matter) from an unfortunate “ Toltec com¬
plex ”—leading them to ascribe most of the causes
of the efflorescence of Maya genius to the Toltecs of
Mexico. Further, the middle sections of the book
appear to have been written in the completest
ignorance of the last thirty years excavation and
ground research.
Three principles have guided the present author .
To correlate the information in the ancient writings
of the Conquistador historians and check it with the
results of archaeological research and excavation in
modern times ; to recheck these sources of informa¬
tion by references to all pages of Old World history
which appear to have any bearing on them ; and to
mould the whole with such simplicity and elegance
as he may command into a narrative history of the
most remarkable culture discovered in the New World.
The title will no doubt suggest comparisons to the
two histories of W. H. Prescott-Z^ History of the
Conquest of Mexico and The History of the Conquest
B
INTRODUCTION
18
of Peru. But the vision of history is apt to change
and enlarge in the course of a hundred years. What
for Prescott was of predominating interest—the over¬
throw of the final efflorescence of the American
cultures by the Spanish conquerors—may now be
seen as only a culminating play of the historic forces,
and in the present work is relegated to a final chapter.
The “ Conquest ” of this title is the term that may
be applied to every racial grouping which apprehends
the essence of civilization—the conquest of the human
spirit and its limitation and broadening through the
channels of culture, the conquest of the means of
power over the animate and inanimate universe—an
apprehension of a cultural history as a whole, not
merely from a military aspect.
At the end of this history a short bibliography of
the more interesting and less exhausting works on
the subject is appended, these works being occasion¬
ally referred to throughout the text by the numbers
given them in the appendix.
This list might be easily enlarged to an unhealthy
embonpoint which would at least pay tribute to the
author’s erudition if it gave little help to the general
reader in search of further information. The in¬
accessibility of a mass of such publications warrants
their omission. Similarly, footnotes and their stray¬
ing vagaries have been dispensed with.
Lastly, it must be observed—as Sir Walter
Raleigh observed from the Tower of London
long ago—that there is no such thing as authori¬
tative history. Witnesses are mistaken, scripts
prevaricate, and mendacity is the child of excava¬
tion. One does no more than fill in a tenebrous
outline with the fragments of a broken mosaic,
and that this was the seeming and shape of
the mosaic, far less its colouring, each successive
INTRODUCTION
generation may doubt. Nevertheless, deal in fantasy
though he may, the historian’s task is still plain : to
attempt with good will and care the disentanglement
of contemporary desire or distaste from the face of
antique times, and honestly apprehend the miracle
of the change and transmutation of the human spirit
under the burden or inspiration of alien cultural
forces.
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
THE
CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
i
RE-DISCOVERY OF THE MAYA
i. The Land and the Monuments
A HUNDRED years ago nearly all Mexican and
Central American ruins were still spoken of
L as Aztec, in spite of the hauntings of the
ghostly “ Toltecs.,, The Mayas of Yucatan were
given little space by the historians of the time. They
were presumed to have been an Aztec-influenced
tribe at a slightly lower level of culture than the
Mexican. They had been mentioned by Cortes and
Bernal Diaz, conquered by the two Montejos, and
their history—the usual thin comminglings of
fantastic legend and fable—committed to writing by
two clerics, Lizana and Cogolludo. Remote on the
lands of the Pacific coast the Quiche and Kaxchiquel
were also recognized as tribes of Mayance blood, and
justly assessed as barbarous. But the land lying
between the Pacific and the northern Yucatecan
coasts was credited with but a feeble cultural
development prior to the arrival of the Europeans.
If Yucatan possessed some degree of mention and
importance in the histories, far less was ascribed to
that stretch of country in which it is probable that
the first American civilization rose into prominence.
This stretch of land, watered by the Grijalva,
Usamacintla and Pedro, joining in confluence to now
into Campeche Bay in the north-west, an(i Jy the
Rivers Hondo, Belize, Grande, Motagua and Charnel-
icon, flowing into the Gulf of Honduras in the south¬
east, is a swampy and densely forested region, partly
comprising the modern Mexican states of Chiapas and
Tabasco, the Republics of Guatemala and Honduras,
21
22 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
and the colony of British Honduras. A great
mountain-chain runs west of this country, severing
it in some measure from the Pacific. On that Pacific
coast the descent is comparatively short and steep
to the long rollers of that ocean which separates
Central America from Asia and the Australasian
islands. East of the mountain-chain lies the country
with which we are concerned, and with which, in
exploration and excavation, the nineteenth century
began to concern itself.
The climate is tropical in the great forested belts,
with a heavy rainfall that produces a dense and
bright-green vegetation. In ancient times the main
mode of communication through this region must
have been the rivers—principally the Usamacintla,
along the course of which are strewn some of the
most remarkable ruins of the antique civilization.
But in cleared spaces, as in the lowlands that slope
down from the mountain shoulder, cultivation of
maize, beans, cacao and other food products is a
comparatively simple and unlaborious task. The
great triangle where the Old Empire Maya culture
rose was rich with forest detritus and a virgin and
welcoming soil to greet the agricultural necessities
of that civilization.
In this densely wooded region, where the air is
bright with the wings of insects and the sheen of
water through the dark-green glow of the lianas, the
fauna is as rich and varied as the flora. Macaws and
birds of a like colourful plumage abound, the quetzal
among them, that bird which played as great a part
in the life of the ancient Central Americans as the
roc and the phoenix, combined with the ostrich, in
that of the peoples of the Ancient East. Turkey,
large, edible, and not too agile, are plentiful; deer
of many kinds and qualities abound—it is possible
that the ancient civilization actually domesticated
herds of deer. The peccary, small and succulent, is
and was another food-animal of considerable value,
and the little river-horse of the Americas, the tapir,
RE-DISCOVERY OF THE MAYA 23
probably supplied stout leather for sandals and belt-
work, then as now. In the marshy inlets from the
coasts the alligator is the lord of the waters, pushing
a crusted saurian snout from under the driftage that
seeps from the forests, and watching the changing
play on the banks that has replaced the bright
colourings and frail canoes of the early craftsmen
with the motor-boats and pearling-luggers of con¬
temporary times. Saurian philosophy supplies us
with no comment on either.
Now, in a great inverted triangle in these forests,
prior to and verging on the beginning of the nine¬
teenth century, some remarkable voyagings and
stravaigings had been carried on by various travellers
—Dupaix, Waldeck, and Galindo the most prominent.
Some had special facilities from the then Government
of New Spain, some were enthusiastic amateurs.
M. de Waldeck (2) penetrated with great labour from
the north, on mule-back, to Palenque, and emerged
from there (and from Uxmal) with a voluminous
account of the ruins which the historians of the time
greeted with some caution, especially as the plates
which illustrated his accounts showed the ruins in a
remarkable state of preservation. Waldeck computed
the age of the Palenque ruins as between two and
three thousand years : this computation he made on
the ringing of trees (which he had sawn for the
purpose) and the length and mass of large drip-
stalactites in various buildings. At the edge of
the period when the antiquary was about to give
place to the archaeologist, Waldeck’s acceptance of
such data as authoritative is interesting. For the
data is now generally recognized as untrustworthy,
tree-rings or stalactites. Trees grow with a regrettable
irregularity in their later years, stalactites accumulate
or retard their mass in conformity with a straying
multitude of causes. A later generation of American¬
ists is aware of these facts, but is still apt to accept
various geological and such-like evidences as
having dated themselves with the regularity of a
24 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
radium chronometer. Particularly, as will be noted
later, is this the case with regard to the lava deposits
superimposed on the archaic remains at Cuicuilco in
the Panuco Valley of Mexico.
Thirty years after the issue of Waldeck’s latest
publication, and while W. H. Prescott in America
was assiduously (through a number of emissaries in
Spain and Mexico) compiling material for his History
of the Conquest of Mexico, John Lloyd Stephens, an
American traveller and diplomat, was despatched by
the President of the United States to negotiate some
nebulous commercial proposals with the then Central
American Republic. Arriving in Central America,
Stephens discovered that Republic in the process
of dissolution, federal and confederate forces in
conflict. Between whiles of attempting to discover
the whereabouts or actual existence of the Govern¬
ment with which he was to negotiate, Stephens
visited a large number of the ruined cities of the great
triangle, drawn to this investigation by a mixture of
genteel curiosity and genuine historical passion.
His books (3) and (4) may still be read with some
interest because of his style and comment; from a
historical point of view, however, they would be
more or less valueless but for the fact that he was
accompanied on his visits to the various ruins by an
English artist, Frederick Catherwood. Catherwood,
considering the unfamiliarity of the subjects which
he was called upon to depict, displayed remarkable
genius for separating the essential from the non-
essential in the grotesque bewilderment of design
and over-design to be found in the decorative statuary
of such ancient sites as Copan. He gave to the world,
in Stephens’ books, the first accurate limnings of the
strange sculptures and buildings of the Mayas. In a
remarkable degree he was the first to unveil the
problem that the years had hidden away under the
legends and forests detritus of the Usamacintla.
The first of the ancient ruins visited by Stephens
and Catherwood was Copan, at the extreme south-
RE-DISCOVERY OF THE MAYA 25
east of the inverted triangle, a site in the modern
Republic of Honduras. Accounts of the existence
of such ruins had recently reached Europe and
America, Stephens tells, and excited the curiosity of
Catherwood and himself. “ Though I ought perhaps
to say that both Mr. C. and I were somewhat sceptical,
and when we arrived at Copan, it was with the hope,
rather than the expectation, of finding wonders.
Their consequent reactions to the great stretch of
ruins have a unique interest, bringing back as they
do that primal freshness of appraisal which has been
so much overlaid by a century of excavation and
measurement. “ The sight of this unexpected monu¬
ment put at rest at once and for ever, in our minds,
all uncertainty in regard to the character of American
antiquities, and gave us the assurance that the
objects we were in search of were interesting, not only
as the remains of an unknown people, but as works of
art, proving, like newly-discovered historical records,
that the people who once occupied the continent of
America were not savages. . . . Our guide ... con¬
ducted us through the thick forest, among half-buried
fragments, to fourteen monuments of the same char¬
acter and appearance, some with more elegant
designs, and some in workmanship equal to the finest
monuments of the Egyptians; one displaced from
its pedestal by enormous roots; another locked m
the close embrace of branches of trees, and almost
lifted out of the earth ; another hurled to the ground
and bound down by huge vines and creepers; and
one standing, with its altar before it, m a grove of
trees which grew around it, seemingly to shade and
shroud it as a sacred thing ; in the solemn stillness
of the woods, it seemed a divinity mourning oyer a
fallen people. The only sounds that disturbed the
quiet of this buried city were the noise of the monkeys
moving among the tops of the trees and the cracking
of dry branches broken by their weight.
So with an elegance and vocabulary unfortunately
lacking in most of his successors who have carried out
26
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
THE EGYPTIAN-LIKE FIGURE
discovered by J. L. Stephens, at Palenque. (Old Empire.)
(After Catherwood, in J. L. Stephens' “ Travels.”)
RE-DISCOVERY OF THE MAYA 27
researches either in Copan or elsewhere in Central
America, Stephens discovers his first impressions of
the antique ruins of America.
Besides Copan, Stephens visited Quirigua, Tecpan
Guatemala, Quiche (in neither of the last two he
found any inscriptions, and rightly concluded they
were posterior to and inferior to such sites as Copan),
Palenque, and Uxmal in Yucatan. In still another
journey he travelled extensively in Yucatan alone,
coming at length to the conclusion that, despite
certain disturbing resemblances, the ruined cities
presented a spectacle of “ a people skilled in archi¬
tecture, sculpture, and drawing, and, beyond doubt,
other more perishable arts, and possessing the culti¬
vation and refinement attendant upon these, not
derived from the Old World, but originating and
growing up here, without models or masters, having
a distinct, separate, independent existence ; like the
plants and fruits of the soil, indigenous ” (3).
The next high-light in the rediscovery of the Maya
took place with the rediscovery, in 1863, of the
Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan of Bishop Diego
de Landa. This, written in 1566, had been
mislaid for three centuries until retrieved and edited
by the Abbe Brasseur de Bourbourg (5), a skilled
and competent Americanist, but unfortunately
greatly at the mercy of a wonder-loving imagina¬
tion over-stimulated in the fables of his Church.
The discovery of the Landa MS. proved of great value,
quite apart from its excellent account of the Maya of
Yucatan, their everyday life and customs, as Landa,
the first Bishop of Yucatan, had observed them.
Others before the discovery of his Relation h&d made
extensive descriptions of that antique life in the
limestone peninsula at the time when the Spaniards
came to subdue it. But for well over two hundred
years all knowledge of the ancient glyphic writing
had been mislaid. In the words of Prescott (6),
speaking of the glyphic writing on the walls of
Palenque made known by the illustrators of Waldeck
28 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
and Stephens: “ That its mysterious import will
ever be deciphered is scarcely to be expected. The
language of the race who employed it, the race itself,
is unknown. And it is not likely that another
Rosetta stone will be found, with its trilingual in¬
scription, to supply the means of comparison, and to
guide the American Champollion on the path to
disco very.’’
The Relacion supplied no Rosetta stone : what it
did supply was an account of the calendar of the
Maya of Yucatan, with illustrations of the signs em¬
ployed for the “ months ” and days. This laid the
foundation for the interpretation not only of the
glyphic writing on the stelae of the ancient cities, but
on such apparently Maya-written scripts as survived
in the libraries of Europe.
But the earlier Americanists who based their re¬
searches on Landa, especially his editor, the Abbe
Brasseur, were led seriously astray by the fact that
Landa professed to set forth a Maya alphabet.”
There can be little doubt that the signs he gives for
each letter-sound in the Spanish alphabet he gives
in all good faith: but either the Maya Indians who
supplied the signs mistook the meaning and intention
of the Bishop’s questions, or deliberately lied to him.
Considering the activities waged by Landa in his
bishopric, the latter seems much the more probable
solution. The alphabetic signs were seriously dis¬
credited in the famous attempt of the Abbe Brasseur
to interpret the Dresden Codex with their aid.
The Abbe produced long lines of meaningless words
and terms, in which nevertheless he professed to
find traces of a coherent narrative—an account
of the inundation of a great tract of country,
Mu. This inundation had been accompanied by
impressive seismic convulsions, including volcanic
eruptions. . . . Subsequently the Abbe made a
remarkable retraction, declaring his translation was
merely “ experimental.”
The next labourer in the vineyard of Maya redis-
RE-DISCOVERY OF THE MAYA
29
covery was the remarkable Dr. Augustus le Plongeon,
an Americanist of something of the order of Schlie-
mann of Troy. One of the most interesting, curious,
and combative of men, he spent several years in ex¬
cavating Chichen Itza, the great Yucatecan site,
diversihed with pondering over the Abbe Brasseur s
attempted translation of the Dresden Codex.
From both the result of his individual excavations
and individual researches in the Maya literature,
he believed he had unravelled the secret of
the calculiform glyphs and the beginnings of
Maya history. In one of his books (7) he re¬
produced several pages of the Dresden Codex,
appending translations and comments. One of the
most impressive of these “ translations appears m
a footnote—two cramped personages surrounded
with the usual cryptic glyphs—from which one learns
that the motherland of the great civilization which
built Chichen Itza was Mu, another name for Atlantis,
and that here the personification of that unfortunate
continent is seen invoking a goddess to spare it. the
goddess, of a saturnine and taciturn disposition,
is declining with singular and sardonic brevity. #
Such vagaries of research had the effect of arousing
considerable criticism. Le Plongeon’s mam contri¬
bution to the rediscovery of the .Maya was the
passionate opposition which he upraised like a dust-
cloud against his own colourful beliefs. By then there
was in existence a considerable body of detailed and
documented evidence regarding the Maya, their art,
architecture, and life in general. Dr Lamel G.
Brinton introduced a cooling sanity into the over¬
heated imaginings of Le Plongeon but himself
showed that singular barren conservatism of outlook
—terror of attempted synthesis or theory outside the
general corpus of European criticism-which has
afflicted the orthodox Americanist ever since. He
ascribed to the Maya of the great inverted
triangle a culture—a barbaric culture P ?
the achievements in civilization of the dahlia
30 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Mexico. Further than that, however, he translated,
very badly, various of the native scripts, written in
Zuyua, but in Latin lettering, and published them (8)
to act as a fairly reliable check on the results of future
excavation.
Between 1881 and 1894 the field-work of Dr. A. P.
Maudslay laid the foundation for the scientific study
of the monuments to a degree hitherto impossible.
Avoiding preconceived notions on the origin of the
ruins among which his researches took place,
Maudslay carried out a detailed scheme of mapping
and photographing in the principal sites known to
his time, extending all over the great triangle we
have named, and beyond its limits, into Yucatan itself.
Further, and most important, he took moulds of
many inscriptions and monuments by means some¬
times of plaster, sometimes of paper-squeezes, in
spite of the difficulties of clearing bush-grown sites
and obtaining the necessary labour in an area
where scientific archaeology and excavation were un¬
known. These moulds were transported to England,
casts made from them, and those casts exhibited in
the Victoria and Albert Museum of London. Mean¬
time an account of his researches, very adequately
illustrated, was published by Maudslay, somewhat
incongruously, as the “ archaeological ” volume of
a ponderous series of works, the Biologia Centrali-
Americana.
Maudslay’s work presented to students di¬
vorced from actual contact with the sites and monu¬
ments considerable material for study. The age
for either the glowing visions of a Le Plongeon or the
bleak sterilities of a Brinton was definitely over.
Forstemann, Seler, and others in Germany set to
work on elucidating the calendar-dates of the monu¬
ments reproduced by Maudslay’s labours. W. H.
Holmes, of the Field Columbian Museum of Chicago,
carried out in 1895 and 1897 excavations and archi¬
tectural measurements (9) of an importance second¬
ary only to Maudslay’s. C. P. Bowditch (10) pro-
RE-DISCOVERY OF THE MAYA 31
duced the first cautious and well-documented study
of the astronomical, calendrical, and mathematical
systems of the ancient builders of the ruined sites,
as left in the evidence of the inscribed stones at the
ruins. The great face of the problem now appeared
to be known in its dim outline: further and more
intensive research could fill in that outline, both by
the discovery and exploration of other sites and
the sifting and testing of the accepted signs of the
calendar—not to mention that large host of signs
which at first appeared to have little relation to
calendrical calculation.
From 1900 onwards the archaeological unveiling of
the antique face has proceeded with great rapidity.
A grouping of fresh and important cities—the Tikal-
Uaxactun group—has been laid bare by Dr. S. G.
Morley and his corps of assistants from the Carnegie
Institute of Washington. Dr. Thomas Gann, a
retired medical officer of British Honduras, has
carried out a series of independent researches engag¬
ingly described in a series of travel-books—re¬
searches which have the great benefit of opening up
afresh many dormant problems, besides discovering a
number of subsidiary architectural sites. Mr. J. Eric
Thompson, in charge of the Marshall Field Expedition
to Central America, has carried out both ethnological
and archaeological work of high order and import¬
ance. Tulane University, in 1926, despatched Messrs.
Blom and Le Farge on an exploring mission into the
heart of this triangle, a mission which made some
unique discoveries. From the labours of these and
many others the evidence continues to accumulate
for a detailed interpretation of the history of the
Maya, long lost to the memory of men, now redis¬
covered to pose a number of fascinatingly interest¬
ing questions, as well as to demonstrate the manners
and beliefs of an existence both aberrant from the
human norm and yet copying with singular and
apparent fidelity many phases of art and architec¬
ture and conduct long vanished elsewhere from the
32 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
world while it still flowered strangely in the Central
Americas.
ii. Scripts, Chronicles, and Commentators
Before launching on a description of the Maya civili¬
zations and their conquest of the Central Americas,
it is necessary to give a slight outline of the further
sources of information available to the student—
apart from the monuments and sites, the most endur¬
ing and authoritative. These further sources may
be regarded as a constant litter of footnotes upon the
pages where the monuments stand : sometimes they
definitely relate, sometimes they are obviously ir¬
relevant, sometimes the footnote blandly contradicts
the evidence carved with such ingenuity and care on
the face of the jungle-surrounded stones.
The first contact of the Spaniards in Central
America was with the Maya of Yucatan—a people
descended from or cognate to that which inhabited
the great triangle to the south and west. These
Maya, in the words of Mr. T. A. Joyce (n), were dis¬
covered “ inhabiting villages of considerable size,
with stone-built shrines erected on pyramids, using
a hieroglyphic script and a calendrical system almost
(though not quite) identical with that of the early
Maya, and preserving traditions which can be shown
to connect them beyond doubt with sites which are,
indubitably, extensions of the Early Maya civiliza¬
tion.”
This summary, slightly ambiguous, nevertheless
pictures neatly and succinctly the state and people
which were to provide, through the chroniclers
among their Spanish conquerors, nearly all the oral
or translated history which had a bearing upon the
past of pre-Columbian Central America.
In the Conquest great quantities of native scripts,
written in the characteristic calculiform (i.e. pebble¬
shaped) glyphs on a tough, durable paper made
from the Agave Americana, were destroyed, the
RE-DISCOVERY OF THE MAYA 33
Catholic priests who accompanied the conquerors
holding, with some measure of reason, that the pre¬
servation of these scripts would continue to add
authority to the discredited theology of the native
priests, and perpetuate the heathen abominations of
their worship. From the great holocausts there
survive intact only three of the actual scripts,
though several others were translated from the
literary Yucatecan of the time into Spanish before
the originals were destroyed and knowledge of
writing or interpreting the hieroglyphs lost.
The three actual survivals are the Dresden Codex,
preserved in the great public library at Dresden;
the Codex Peresianus, preserved in the Biblioteque
Nationale in Paris ; and the Troano-Cortesian Codex,
divided into two parts and preserved in separate
museums in Spain. It is possible, though not very
probable, that a few other native scripts may be in
existence, hidden away in great private libraries in
Spain or elsewhere, and awaiting chance discovery
or destruction.
The three codices supply a singular paucity of
historical material. This is for two reasons: they
appear to be little concerned with historic happenings,
greatly with obscure astronomical calculations in¬
volving the presidency of various gods over various
periods ; secondly, only calendrical information, or
some extensions of such information, can yet be
translated, with the aid of Landa’s “ key ” and the
further “ keys ” provided through the researches of
modern Americanists.
In appearance the Codex Dresdensls is by far the
finest piece of art-work : the figures of the grotesque
gods are outlined with spirit and force, the grotesque¬
ness has the deep intentness of true art, the glyphic
signs, carelessly executed (as is to be expected) in
comparison with those on the monuments, are never¬
theless easily recognizable, showing the definite con¬
ventionalisation of each outline on which the scribe-
painter worked. The hieroglyphs and picturettes
34
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
are painted in various colours that still have a fine
glow on the white “ size ” ground applied to the
dried fibre of the Agave Americana.
The two other codices are much inferior in execu¬
tion, and apparently (though this is not certain) of
much later date.
The general style
of the Codex
Peresianus seems
to approximate
it to the murals
of the Late Maya
site of Tuluum,
and to date it
very close to the
Conquest. The
third Codex may
actually post¬
date the Con¬
quest, compiled
by some scribe in
hiding from the
Spaniards or
living under even
more ignominious
Spanish patron¬
age, with a mind
that grew misty
on the function
and form of many
of the glyphs, and fingers either unapt or uneager to
execute their outlines.
So much for the actual survivals, the last torn
volumes from what was once (apparently) a great
native literature.
Here it may be noted in passing that various
scholars of some eminence and note flatly deny
that the Maya possessed anything whatsoever in
the shape of a literature. These scholars affirm,
from consideration of the codices just mentioned
ITZAMNA, THE MAYA ZEUS
(From the Dresden Codex.)
RE-DISCOVERY OF THE MAYA
35
and the inscriptions on the ancient monuments, that
the glyphs were used for the purpose of recording
astronomical calculations and calendrical computa¬
tions only, plus a meagre spraying of proper names
here and there associated with the calculated date of
an event. This theory appears premature in the
state of our present knowledge of the glyphs: the
ancient writing may be rebus-writing, or picture¬
writing, or even (it is possible) a syllabary. And
the early Spanish chroniclers definitely lay it down
that great quantities of the codices burned in en¬
thusiastic auto-da-fe by Landa and his compeers
were historical records of the natives, as well as
calculations for ceremonial or agricultural purposes.
This would appear to be borne out, though in an
admittedly meagre fashion, by the next section of
the documentary evidence to call for consideration—
the so-called Books of the Tiger Priest (Chilan-
Balaam), native historical records, compiled by the
priests attached to various Maya clans in days before
the Conquest, and subsequently translated from their
glyphs into Spanish by scholars acquainted with
both languages and in command of both methods of
writing. .
The Chilan-Balaam Books supply a thin thread of
fine light through the darkness of Maya history,
shedding here a confusing glow, here a helpful
gleam. The inevitable and overloaded datings apart,
they contain curt historical references to trek, cap¬
ture, dominance, and defeat on the part of the
Tutul-Xiu and other clans. If brevity be the soul of
wit, the native chroniclers of the fortunes of the
Tutul-Xiu were amongst the most mirthful folk who
ever existed. Nevertheless, it is from attempted
correlation of the Katun count in the Chilau-
Balaam Books to that in the Julian and Gregorian
calendars that modern Americanists have been able
(with doubtful success) to set some of the mam events
in the ancient history in a European calendrical
setting.
36 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Next in importance are the Spanish chroniclers
themselves. The most important readable of these
is that Diegeo de Landa, Bishop of Yucatan, already
referred to. A stern and bigoted priest, he ordered
the destruction of large quantities of the native
literature and possibly also of the native litterateurs.
But also, surprisingly, he sought to leave a fairly
complete description of Maya life and custom and
belief, writing and art and science. As already
noted, his Relacion, lost for three centuries, was re¬
discovered by the Abbe Brasseur and has helped
materially in deciphering the dates of the great
monuments.
Cogolludo (12), Lizana (13), Villagutierre (14), and
Herrera (15) deal with various aspects of Maya life
as observed by themselves or hearsay from others.
Villagutierre’s book, published in 1701, only a few
years after the conquest of the last independent
Maya state, gives an intimate picture of the life of a
fragment of the antique, though degenerate, civiliza¬
tion, which survived the main corpus for 150 years.
With these, the list of scripts and intimate chron¬
icles may be said to close. After Villagutierre there
follows that host of commentator-historians which
culminated in Dr. D. G. Brinton. Most important
of them all, though he knew little of the Maya and
confined most of his researches and comparisons to
the northwards Valley of Mexico, is undoubtedly
Alexander von Humboldt. In his Vues des cordilleres
he gives a graphic, though “ dated,” summary of
the many similarities between certain aspects of
antique American and Asiatic culture. This for long
served as the text-book of those Americanists and
non-Americanist historians who believed in Asiatic
influences as obtrusive in America in days before
the arrival of Columbus.
Until the opening of the era of scientific exca¬
vation inaugurated by A. P. Maudslay, most histories
and historical papers remained no more than repeti¬
tions and enlargements of the comments of the
RE-DISCOVERY OF THE MAYA 37
antique chroniclers. But the opening of that era
added to literary comment the results of archaeo¬
logical research. The works of E. Seler (16) in
Germany, T. A. Joyce (17) in England, Jean Genet (18)
in France, H. J. Spinden (19), S. G. Morley (20),
J. Eric Thompson (21) in America, and the relevant
publications of the various American universities and
the American Bureau of Ethnology outline the
results and the divergences of opinion on the origins,
functions, and status of the Maya civilization.
These, the main sources of Americanist evidence,
are generally accepted by the historian (in conjunc¬
tion with his own individual researches) as all-
sufficing in delimiting the Maya history and arriving
at conclusions upon it. As previously hinted, with a
quotation from a French-Canadian historian (1), the
present writer believes that a careful comparison of
Old World and New World cultural history is essential
for understanding the Maya efflorescence, and to be
omitted only by the historian still in the bonds of such
beliefs as that “ The bournes within which the human
mind and the human hand can function are in truth
rather limited everywhere, and the intellects of men in
this or that plane of development the world over are
therefore bound to create objects for the use and
delight of their makers which vary only between
certain not very distant extremes ” (22).
Only through quotation of such hazy summariz-
ings of outdated psychology is it possible to realize
the limited vision imposed, like a biological aberra¬
tion, on much of contemporary Americanist research
by a jealous misinterpretation of the processes of
cultural evolution.
II
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA
i. Early Man
HE Europeans who came to America after
the discovery of Columbus were greatly
1 exercised to account for the origin of the Red
Indian races. It was necessary to fit them in the
prevailing theological and cosmological opinions of
the time, and, as the true size of the New Continent
and its diversity of peoples was gradually appre¬
hended, this task became the more difficult. Either,
however, it was concluded that the Red Indian had
survived the Deluge, or was descended from one of
the sons of Noah—a nomad who had trekked with
speed to the New World after the landfall on Ararat
and then proceeded, with true Semitic fertility, to
people America with his descendants from the
North-West Passage to Tierra del Fuego.
It is interesting and amusing to note that there
was no gradual transition between this era of fan¬
tastic theorizing and the application of those theories
of slow and causal development which were almost
instantly applied to human affairs with the revolution
in biological method initiated by Darwin. It is true
that the new method for a time was still an uncertain
tool to handle : presuming the presence of some
“ ape-stock ” in the New World, it seemed that man
might have evolved from that stock separately to his
striving compeers on the other four continents.
Those were the days when it was presumed (as indeed,
it still largely is) that man’s development had a
flowing inevitability, and whatever the divisions of
time and space, any given portion of the earth in¬
fested with “ ape-stock ” would have instantly and
strenuously set about the production of Homo
Sapiens, and striven until that end was achieved.
The fluid flesh of man which produced the Nean-
derthaler and the man of Boskop gives little founda¬
tion for such belief: without outside interference or
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA
39
immigratian, and supposing the existence of an
American “ ape-stock/’ a species strange and remote
from Sapiens might well have been produced. How¬
ever, not only is there in America no evidence of the
existence of any ape of the order of Primates, but,
with some very doubtful exceptions, there is no
evidence that Man himself reached the New World
until the greater and more violent of the geological
changes were over. It is now generally accepted that
Man came to America across the land and ice-bridges
of the Behring Straits and Aleutian Islands, perhaps
in migrations spread over several thousands of years,
perhaps in several short and rapid drifts. Dr.
Hrdlicka (23) has set out in detail the evidences, such
as they are, for the prolonged migration, and esti¬
mates the coming of the original settlers as between
25,000 and 10,000 years ago.
But it is also a possibility, as others (24) have
urged, that America was at least partly peopled, in a
time as antique, by immigrants of the Late Stone
Age who followed the deer northwards through
Europe and so crossed the ice into Greenland and so
to America in that dim morning of Time. Mr. T. A.
Joyce champions (25) the long-heads, as distinct from
the Mongolian round-heads, as the European immi¬
grants. A third theory, much in favour with modern
archaeologists and ethnologists who are themselves
South Americans, finds overwhelming proof of the
southern half of the continent at least having been
settled by successive incursions of Melanesians and
Polynesians. The coming of the latter, however (if
come they did), must have considerably post-dated
the arrival of the Mongoloids, for there is no good
evidence that the Australasian islands, the home of
Melanesian and Polynesian, were peopled until eaily
historic times.
It is interesting to cast a bird s-eye glance over
this antique planet of 20,000 years ago. According
to those more modest calculations now m general
acceptance, the last Glacial Age was then fading
rm
40 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
from the wintry European landscape, the Cro-
Magnard and his successor the Magdalenian were
painting their caves and hunting the horse on the
bleak plains and amid the snow-crowned mountains
of France, the last Neanderthal survivors prowled
Eastern Europe and Palestine, (and perhaps tracts
still more to the east), low-browed, bowed of head, a
discarded experiment of Nature, watching the fires
of true humankind light up the nights. Africa is a
land of mystery, with perhaps here and there proto¬
humans each with his little skill of stick and stone, but
soon to vanish as time and true man come south. In
its north, and along the still uncultivated banks of the
Nile, true men hunted the geese and deer and pulled
handfuls of wild barley. Around the seons-long reser¬
voir of the White races in south-central Asia, the
geological confines—marsh, swamp, ice-belt—were
at length breaking down and releasing the sparse
wandering bands of hunters. In India, even the dark
tribes from Africa were as yet inapparent. Australia
and all the South Seas had yet to know human
habitation, the Pacific gleamed under a sun that not
for many a thousand years was to see the prow of a
Polynesian vessel. In the Central Chinese area, the
short, squat, broad-faced Mongoloids were also
wandering forth from their ancient area of differen¬
tiation. Probably it was a time and an era, twenty
thousand years ago, when the planet stirred and
moved, with the winter retreating and unlocking new
waves and flows of fauna and flora upon the conti¬
nents. It was the great Spring of our humankind;
the greater beasts had passed from the planet, in their
millenniums-long lives as hunters and scavengers men
had developed great skill and adroitness, a fine
synchronization of hand and brain and eye which
left them little at the mercy of other animals.
America still undiscovered, inapparent, nameless as
were all the continents, men set out, slow millennium
on millennium, on their conquest of the earth.
Some such picture modern research in geology and
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA
41
anthropology presents to our eyes. All these tribes
of men were at what has been called the Palaeolithic
stage of culture—they chipped or pounded or smote
their rough flint and stone tools into shape—they
were percussion tools, spears used in the hunting of
wild animals, knives used in cutting up their meat
and such-like activities. So, for thousands of years,
with periodic waves of technique that swept the
world, these tools had been used, and for thousands
more were to be used.
And here a curious fact is apparent, one which can
be noted only with brevity here, though its implica¬
tions are fascinating. Among all these widely
diversified proto-races of modern men the same tools
were in use. At first glance this seems to lend un¬
qualified support to the theory that accounts for all
human similarities by the “ narrow bourne ” in which
all mental and physical activities take place. But
on deeper investigation it is quite otherwise. In the
late Palaeolithic Age in France there appeared a
highly specialized method of tool-chipping which has
been called the Solutrean. Speaking in the space and
great time-periods of pre-history, it did not endure
for long in the land of its apparent origin. Other
methods of tool-treatment took its place. But long
after that time Solutrean blades were made in India,
were made in Australia, are discovered in southern
South America. Yet this quite unreasonably, if one
is to presume independent evolution for each district.
For there are scores of methods of chipping tools on
an equal scale of efficiency with the Solutrean.
Similarity of the human mind, in the phrase ongi-
nally blessed by Dr. Robertson (26), and for the past
one hundred and fifty years so productive of bad
analogy and poorer reasoning, may account for the
fact that two children scribble meaningless whorls
upon their slates. But the two children would not
bv £my means scribble exactly the same whorl
representationally meaningless. And if twenty
children of the same age, with the same materials at
42 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
hand, scribbled, how many of the whorl-inscriptions
would have even chance resemblances, far less be
accurate repetitions ?
It may seem unnecessary to over-elaborate this
point, but it has both a very acute bearing upon the
stage of culture of the original inhabitants of America
and upon the ingredients of the great Maya culture.
It seems obvious that in the ancient world, twenty
or twenty-five millennia before Christ, there passed,
slow year on year, with lacunae and lapses, methods
of tool-working from one group to another; till,
arising from a central inventive spot, that method
would penetrate in widening ripples to the furthest
confines of the planet. Men learn by imitativeness,
by absorption : inventiveness is the most uncommon
of faculties in a cultureless condition, otherwise the
great Palaeolithic era would surely have been reduced
by nine-tenths its immense duration in time.
It was the long Spring of the human race, the
Spring, it would seem, of a spiritual adolescence, not
a cultural one. Awakening from the long winter of
the planet with centuries-sharpened vision and skill
of hand the sparse hunting-hordes wandered into
new territories through long centuries, hunting and
food-gathering here and there, drowsing long years
away at convenient camp sites, uninventive, friendly,
quick and lazy in their appraisal of the speed of deer
and horses, the strength and bellowing agility of the
mammoth, that antique survival, sometimes moved
to portray him and his compeers in swift brush¬
strokes in caverns and under the lees of cliffs;
stumbling over an abandoned tool of some other
family-group and chipping tools of like model till
some newer fashion strayed in his ken ; or, once in a
millennium, himself inventing and setting adrift the
seeds of his invention out on the wind. This was his
life and existence for many thousands of years after
the vanishing of the great sea-and-ice barriers.
It is worth while to make a note of another aspect
of early man—his character. So far from being that
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA
43
monster of lust and blood whose brutalities, in the
words of Mr. H. J. Massingham (27), “keep our
circulating libraries on a sound financial footing,”
there seem excellent reasons for believing that Early
Man, of whatever race and in whatever land, was of
the normal sanity common to all undiseased and not
over-bitterly pressed animals. The foundation of his
life was the family-group, with a measure of tolera¬
tion for the young male unakin to that shown by
his nearest relative, the African gorilla, or probably
by the Neanderthaler either. Very early in his career,
with a happy gregariousness, the definite family-
groups of man seem to have enlarged into groups
■p incorporating many families. It is impossible to call
these groupings clans or tribes : they were the freest
of assemblies and associations, for there was no rule,
no authority, no chief, no council of elders, no law,
no sexual problems, no wives, no husbands, no gods,
no devils, no science, no war, few irrational hopes
and possibly fewer irrational fears. Men were sturdy
children in a world hard, but not entirely inhospit¬
able • they doubtlessly bred in great numbers and
died 'in equally great numbers before they reached
maturity, they had little salvation from the cold of
night, the chances of famine, or the fear of death.
But that last chance excepted, it is possible they
had'as little need of shelters, physical or spiritual, as
they had of the as-yet inapparent clothes
Such is the picture of early life which historic
anthropology excavates from the evidences of the
past the French and African caverns and the Indian
river-drifts, in conjunction with the character and
type of life led on this planet until recent years by a
straying diversity of surviving peoples from the Old
Stone Age—Mr. H. J. Massingham gives a list of over
thirty (28)—lost pockets of men m this and that
crinkle of our planet living the ancestral life as at the
time when, it may be, the first Asiatic immigrants
crossed the first land-bridges into America.
44
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
ii. Early Man in America
The first emigrants from Asia into America in that
remote era of time Mr. P. A. Means (22) describes as
members of the “ yellow-brown race of Asia and
Polynesia. No such race has ever existed—it is
tantamount to speaking of the pinky-white race of
Europe. Such definitions belong to the childhood of
anthropology. To judge by their cranial and hirsute
characteristics, the majority of the Red Indian races
are descendants of a migration, or series of migra¬
tions, from North-Eastern Asia. Either these migra¬
tions took place in a time when the Mongol stock
had not yet reached its historic characteristic develop¬
ment in such detail, or—more probably—there was a
considerable infusion of Alpine blood in those
Siberian stretches around the sources of the Yenisei
whence the migrations appear to have originated.
Groups of the hunters and fishers doubtlessly
strayed for long centuries, of mixed and unmixed
race, in the great Siberian forests. Then, in an era
definitely more genial as to climatic condition than
that prevailing to-day, for that Springtime of the
world extended far to the north, exploratory groups
of > early men, together with their women folk,
drifted across the land-bridges from Asia into Alaska!
following game, perhaps: certainly not driven by
starvation or war, as sometimes has been supposed.
Starvation was a remote possibility haunting a vigor¬
ous race of hunters and fishers, war a thing which had
not yet come into the world. And, so far from finding
themselves shivering aliens in a bleak and hostile
world, it is probable that the immigrants wandered
down to the conquest of the two Americas in happy-
mi§rations, finding a land of strange fauna
and flora, edible fruits, plentiful game, and a climate
that grew the more equable the further south they
penetrated. The hunter of those days required a
great stretch of country for his livelihood not through
lack of game, but through that straying propensity
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA 45
that led mankind on his conquest of even the re¬
motest corners of the planet.
Some strange animal survivals of geologic time had
not yet died out when Man reached South America.
The Glyptodon still crashed through the Amazon
jungle paths. The giant sloth was a strange and
awesome monster to look upon, if a harmless beast
in the hunt. So, slow century followed on century,
hunting, fishing, stravaiging in thin groupings across
the antique American scene till a great differentia¬
tion of tongues arose—that rich differentiation of
which an agglutinative basis was capable. Possibly
in their wanderings the proto-Amerindians discovered
earlier settlers from Europe. More probably these
came later, and mingled and interbred with the Mon¬
goloids. But the latest of the European hordes turned
northwards into the snows in pursuit of walrus and
bear, and upbuilt there, with the ready adaptability
of the earth's most adaptable species, the singular
cultural life of the Eskimo.
It is probable that the main treks from Asia were
not very widely separated in time; on the other
hand, all the evidences, despite Dr. Hrdlicka, point
to the fact that communication between the American
and Alaskan coasts, via the Behring Strait or the
Aleutian Islands, was kept up remotely into historic
times. Tribes and clans crossed or recrossed, chang¬
ing their habitat at pleasure. The early archaic
civilization came pressing up through North-East
Asia and crossed the strait, its arms loaded with its
dubious gifts which were to alter the face of man s
fortunes in America. Remote in Patagonia, thou¬
sands of years after its invention in France, crossing
three-quarters of the world, there came such fitful
epics of technique as the making of the Solutrean
blade. Reciprocal invention in this and that small
item of tool-chipping doubtlessly flowed back into
the mother-continents. Inventiveness in Palaeo¬
lithic Man was confined almost entirely to changing
and reshaping his tools ; inventiveness in the sense
46 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
of altering the shape or function of his habitat was
beyond his vision. The tool was an extension of
his arm ; with a ready and swift and skilful arm he
could envisage no other needs.
This peace, millennial in several senses, appears to
have lasted on the American continent from the day
of the earliest immigrants until close to the beginning v
of the Christian era. America was remote in space
from the Old World where, as the result of a series of
4- accidents, there arose, to alter and dominate, and
seemingly conquer, the ancient free spirit of the
food-gathering groups, the first civilization.
Modern evidences, as we have seen, demonstrate
that the belief that cultures developed independently
at different points on the surface of the globe
" through the similarity of the innate disposition of
the human mind ” is a belief without objective
foundation, a theory not evolved from facts, but
superimposed upon them. Civilization, culture, did
not arise independently at various points all over
the earth : there was no slow upward climb from
primitive to savage, savage to barbarian, barbarian
to civilized man, in the ordering beloved of the older
school of historians. Civilization rose from the midst
of primitive freedom, with comparative suddenness,
revolutionizing human life and spreading abroad the
planet much as the technique of the Solutrean blade,
from one accidental point in the Old World.
That accidental point was Ancient Egypt, and the
history of the beginnings of the strangest adventure
of the human spirit has been set down in consider¬
able detail by such competent investigators as Pro¬
fessor Grafton Elliot Smith (29), and Dr. W. J.
Perry (30). Here only the briefest summary need
be attempted.
^ Barley and millet grew wild in the Nile Valley,
bor thousands of years, possibly, members of the
hunting and fishing communities which made the
Valley their home were in the habit of adding to their
meat and fish diets by devouring the harvested
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA
47
heads of these plants. But this they did without
thought of either sowing or harvesting, gathering
them casually as they gathered now and again other
seeds and fruits. Yet nowhere but in the Nile Valley,
with its peculiar times of flood and ebb, its obvious
influence of the water upon the seed, could the con¬
nection have been so impressed on the mind of
primitive man. It is indeed extremely doubtful if
either of these cereals grew elsewhere in a condition
likely to tempt the food-gatherer to add them to his
stores of food. Chance and long centuries of obser¬
vation forced agriculture upon the Ancient Egyptian.
Here, in all the doubts and delays of the hunt, ap¬
peared a secure and certain way to procure periodical
quantities of succulent foods.
Men, naked, cultureless, houseless, imitated the
processes of nature. They invented the first crude
system of basin agriculture to enlarge the area of
the Nile’s fertilizing floods. They found forced upon
them the necessity of inventing gourds and sheds in
which to store the seed. They saw an apparently
obvious connection between the heliacal rising
of Sirius and the Nile inundation; they saw
beyond that the power and interconnection of these
two events with the First Irrigator . controlling the
flood, he surely also created it. They made of him,
the King-Irrigator, dead, the First God. Burying
him in state, they created Architecture in making
his tomb. , ^ , ,
Agriculture gave birth to theology, the arts, ana a
multitude of handicrafts within the limited period ot
a few hundred years in the Nile basm—this at no
remote period in human history, but probably
between the years 5000 B-c* an(^ 4°®<? B-c-
Thus, in a lonely valley in a world where the rest
of men still wandered in food-gathering tribes, in the
life that later ages were to remember with a wistful
memory as the Golden Age of Mankind, originated
the first civilization. Presently it spawned the seeds
of the Archaic culture all abroad the Ancient World.
48 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
The pre-dynastic Egyptian sought woods and spices
and presently gold and precious stones to add to the
decoration or sanctification of this new edifice of
civilization. He trekked into the wastes of Syria,
camping and exploring ; he went by sea, sailing the
sounding coasts to the lands of Sumer, exploring
there ; and so, in slow centuries, around each of these
new focal points, the Archaic culture grew into a
strange new flower, with petals and pistils of different
colour and shape, but the same roots and stalk.
Agriculture was its basis, the bait that drew primitive
man to apparent security of existence and actual
slavery—worship of its dead and mummified King
its central rite, the search for Life-Givers its principal
urge.
From very early times in various parts of the
Palaeolithic world Man had associated life-giving
functions with various objects and qualities—the
cowrie shell had an obvious resemblance to that
“ humble portal through which we all enter the
world.” It was prized accordingly, and strung in
necklaces by the Magdalenians and their compeers
of Europe. So were the teeth of animals—strength¬
giving—and beads of such material as red carnelian—
partaking of the qualities of blood, which Early Man
believed to be the essence of life. These symbolic
saviours with the coming of civilization were added
to, and the vision of symbolic salvation greatly
enlarged. Shells in ancient Egypt came to be
imitated in the light and durable material of gold—
so that, in conjunction with the obvious life-giving
properties of the sun, to which gold had an acute
resemblance, gold itself came to be prized as the
supreme life-giver, and was sought accordingly. So
was malachite—green, the colour of the new-coming
crops. So was jade—with, as we shall see, a possibly
close connection to the growth of civilization in
America.
Rearing their great megalithic monuments in vary¬
ing shapes but all with the same initial idea, mummi-
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA
49
fying their dead or remembering that practice in
various debased forms, settling ever on the sites of ap¬
parent gold-fields, pearling beds, or other repositories
of Life-Giving objects, the prospectors of the Archaic
civilization penetrated far and wide into the coun¬
tries of the Food-gathering peoples. These in time
themselves took to agriculture, upbuilt their state
religions, modified the superstructure of the Archaic
culture in their own likeness, and sent abroad their
own travellers and prospectors in the unceasing
search for gold and precious stones.
By about 2500 b.c. the prospectors of the Archaic
civilizations of Central Asia were opening up the
gold-fields of the Yenesei in Siberia—whence, as we
have seen, Dr. Hrdlicka and others have good reason
to believe the first Amerindians had originated long
before.
Nor, as we have also concluded, is it likely that
that communication had ceased, however slowly and
irregularly men wandered northwards now in a
climate again with a great chill upon it. But civiliza¬
tion spread on, conquering the world, slow millennium
on millennium. Boats reached the northern, as the
southern Pacific. Half a millennium in advance of the
Christian era it is possible that the first Asiatic pro¬
spectors were paddling and sailing their boats across
the narrowed passages to the now detached Aleutian
Islands, to Alaska, even making longer coastings
than that, till they touched the Californian coast.
The Polynesian was abroad in the Pacific, with the
Archaic prospectors in his midst or following at his
heels, reaching further and further from Asia, year
on year, to Hawaii, Tahiti, and Easter Island, those
furthest outposts of Oceania.
Beyond these islands lay the Americas.
iii. The Archaic Culture in Central America
At Cuicuilco, near Coyoacan, in the Valley of
Mexico, Dr. Byrom Cummings (31) in 1923 carried
D
50 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
out a series of excavations and calculations in and
regarding the remains of an ancient culture buried
there. At Cuicuilco there had occurred an extensive
inundation of molten lava, covering the original soil
from a distance of ten to fifteen feet. Underneath
this crust lay traces of an extensive settlement—
house-walls, graves, artifacts of various sorts and
conditions, all now recognized by the Americanist as
belonging to the Archaic civilization in America.
In its almost undeviating characteristics this cul¬
ture is the most widespread, as it is the most ancient,
of any on the American continent : domestic pottery
of a crude sort was made ; “ neolithic ” tools were
made; squat human figurines were modelled in clay;
basket-work was in use; and maize was planted
and cultivated.
Two things are to be noted regarding this eruption
in the hunter-and-fisher life of the Amerindians : the
uniformity of the Archaic civilization and the im¬
possibility of attempting any dating of it except in
such places as Coyoacan. There are Amazonian and
Guianan peoples who are still at the Archaic stage of
culture : but we may fairly presume that they were
by no means at that stage when the despairing in¬
habitants of Antique Cuicuilco watched the volcano
whelm their settlement. Similarly, the Mound-
Builders and pueblo-dwellers of Northern America
were at a stage of culture when the Europeans
reached America which was, for all practical
purposes, Archaic. But in their own history
and legends their cultural ancestors had come
from the south in no very remote times, bringing—
this especially marked—the practice of agriculture.
And—a third complication—the small cinerary
vessels and figurines found at various degenerate
cultural sites in Central America, products of the
descendants of a people whose ancestors had reached
a much higher command of technique, differ hardly
at all from the pottery productions of the Archaic
civilization.
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA
51
In this fine confusion of terms and appearances,
a wary scepticism of two things is necessary : the
datings applied to the Archaics; the very term
Archaic as applied to many sites.
Dr. Cummings computes the period of the
remains under the black lava flow of Coyoacan as
between 3000 and 2000 b.c. But, as we saw in the
case of Waldeck’s tree-rings, such apparently con¬
clusive calculations are apt to be quite arbitrary.
Lava is as lava does. To presume its age from the
appearance of a deposit and the calculated periods
of activity of a volcano is allowable only in dealing
with vast ranges of geologic time, when a lapse of a
few thousand years one way or the other is taken as
the ordinary possible fault of the calculation. For
calculating inside that period of pre-history which is
definitely associated with a not too remote period of
actual human history elsewhere, it is a method of
appraisal, not a factually based result. And the fact
that only discreet and disingenuous juggling with
figures based on rates of mould-deposit and the like
unchancy evidences provide the Archaic culture
elsewhere in America with an antiquity so remote,
lends considerable doubt as to the validity of Dr.
Cummings’ figures.
It is extremely improbable that the cultural de¬
posits at Coyoacan or similar sites greatly antedate
the Christian era. Culture was late in arriving in
America. The exact century of its coming, the methods
of its impingement upon the Amerindian primitive—
of these things we have as yet little or no knowledge,
despite the megaliths of Alaska and the beginnings
of building in Mexico and the Central American area.
We may picture the coming of boats and trekking
travellers amid the astounded gapings of the native
hunter, the settling of the Asiatic-Polynesian pro¬
spectors around this and that river-bed where pearls
were to be found, where gold was to be dug, the
setting up at each halting-place of those unremitting
elements of the Archaic culture so strangely twisted
52 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
and diversified and added to since they left, four
thousand years before, their home in the Nile
Valley : the dual rule, the mummification of the
dead ruler, the ceremonial revivification of that ruler.
The basis of its life was agricultural, but the basis of
its religion quite arbitrary and agriculturally un¬
warranted to the same degree in America as in
Egypt, Sumeria or India. (Dr. W. J. Perry (32) has
ably demonstrated this in his study of the religious
life of a North American tribe which late in history
absorbed mixed elements of the Archaic and Mayoid
culture.) Asia was speedily forgotten, the chance
immigrants married and interbred and founded settle¬
ments with the primitives ; and reared their idols of
stick and stone, and died and left to a mixed breed to
carry on that antique science grounded in all on fable
but for the one basic fact that drew the primitive
into these settlements—the fact of agriculture and
its yield.
Arising from a common source and method, as we
have seen, that agriculture based itself in the Old
World on whatever edible cereal was ready to hand
and cultivable. Men learned the growing of barley
from the obvious processes of Nature : they imitated
Nature. But later their eyes were sharpened to other
possibilities, they saw the possibility of moulding and
re-testing plants to make them the basis of a racial
food-life. In Crete and Asia Minor the agriculturists
long familiar with the growing of barley and millet
tested and cultivated intensely the wild plant which
became wheat—not wheat as we know it, but origin¬
ally of a much inferior quality. So in India, in China,
the rice and similar plants were taken into cultiva¬
tion, till, in a more suitable and native environment,
they rose superior to the immigrants’ plant-foods
from which the natives had learned the whole art and
mystery of agriculture. Out in the wastes of the
Pacific the Polynesians, as is proved from many
lingual and traditional evidences (33), brought with
them the knowledge of that rice-cultivation. They
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA
53
abandoned it for the easier cultivation of the bread¬
fruit : the essence was the easy growth, cultivation,
and eating, not the plant.
Beyond the furthest Polynesian isles came the new
immigrants to America—America without cultivable
bread-fruit, and consequently raising in the immi¬
grant mind hazy memories of the sowing and selection
of other seed. Agriculture was the basis and neces¬
sity of their lives, those immigrant explorers, and in
Central America their expert eyes saw possibilities
in a certain plant.
This was some species of the teosinte, or wild maize
itself, though, as Dr. Gann says, The gap between
teosinte and cultivated maize is, it must be admitted,
an exceedingly wide one.” And goes on to say :
“ And it must have taken many centuries to evolve
the one from the other ” (34).
We are justified in doubting the correctness of this
last statement, especially if the original wild maize of
Archaic times differed considerably from the wild¬
growing teosinte of to-day. But it is worth while
here noticing a remarkable fact, apparently never
apprehended by the historians of the older school,
who denied all cultural communication between Asia
and America : The teosinte, or other cultivable grasses,
grow wild and meagre heads of corn, hardly likely to
have so much as tempted the wandering hunter to
gather a handful for occasional chewing. How came
it that those hunters, unaided, un-urged by alien
thought or system, said to themselves, “ If we take
these plants and assiduously cultivate them for six
centuries—at the end of that time we will procure a
worth-while food-plant, maize” ?
It is a possibility too fantastic to need more than
passing mention. Agriculture was a science and an
art : only an adept could initiate other primitives
than the Nilotic, whom Nature herself initiated in a
peculiar and never-repeated fashion. Maize in
America was obviously taken and cultivated by the
nameless immigrants after much scrutiny and search-
54 THE conquest of THE MAYA
ing of the wild grasses of the new continent. It did
not grow wild in California or North Mexico : its
home was the Mexican plateau or Central America.
Those Asiatic prospectors to North America who came
seeking Life-Givers and bringing all the paraphernalia
of their cult, sought and found the Life-Givers and
departed, or failed to find and departed, leaving no
fixed and permanent mark on the economic life of the
natives, though much on the cultural and social.
Lack of a cultivable food-plant retarded and
probably killed the direct Asian-brought Archaic
culture in the north.
In the south it was quite otherwise. Maize was
cultivated, albeit sparsely and inefficiently: settle¬
ments, as that of Coyoacan, were reared: the
wandering groupings of hunters and fishers were
tamed to the half-practice of agriculture in the course
of another five hundred years : the search for Life-
Givers in America was intensified in a search for jade
and similar stones, with a similar appearance of life-
giving—greenness, growth. . . . And from there the
picture dims.
Doubtlessly the king-priests ruled in their little
domains, the people sweated at agriculture and
worshipped their crudely carved gods and mummified
their kings till knowledge of the practice was lost,
and became in time no more than the secure keeping
of the wampum-bundles that long figured in American
magic and mystery. The transmuted and twisted
tales of the great solar gods were treasured and told
all over Central America and a great part of Mexico ;
it was a social life and ritual that enshrined in its
tradition many an alien importation, as Mr. Donald
A. Mackenzie (35) and Mr. Wilfrid Jackson have
shown (36). It remembered milk as a divine drink,
though there were no domesticated cattle in America.
It regarded the cowrie shell, once the amulet of the
Magdalenian, as a precious symbol. It moulded its
art techniques on bone and wood and occasionally
stone ; but, compared with the civilizations that
PRE-MAYAN AMERICA
55
developed from the sweeping and breaking waves
of culture flowing in the greater spaces and
more magnanimous agricultural lands of the Old
World, it was a civilization singularly limited and
lame.
Ill
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE
i. Origins
fnr^HE Maya of to-day are a people of typical
Amerindian characteristics, though possibly
JL with a tincture of “ Caucasian ” or rather
Mediterranean blood (29) dating from pre-Columbian
times. To judge by the evidence provided by the ,
minor figures on the great stelae presently to be de¬
scribed (the lowlier priests and servants pictured on the
frescoes of Palenque for example), the modern Maya
differs but little from his remote ancestor on whose
shoulders was upbuilt the magnificence of the Maya Old
Empire. He is short and rather squat of figure, with
small hands and feet, robust and strong and untiring,
with a skin-colouring varying up the dun shades from
deep brown to a quite “ Caucasian ” whiteness. The
hair is the usual coarse black hair of the Amerindian,
a horse-like hair which nevertheless lends itself well
to the more ceremonial fashions of hairdressing.
The eyes are wide, with large pupils, are generally
brown, and have in good measure that staring vacancy
which the stelae portraits possess and which was
probably a physical characteristic of the ancient
sub-race of the Empire not merely an artistic canon.
They are a broad-headed people, and speak an
agglutinative tongue which, to judge by various
evidences, was once much more widely-spread than
it is now, as, indeed, the race itself possibly was.
This tongue possesses a variety of dialects, as the
race possesses a variety of tribes, but these appear
to be rather the differentiations and classifications
wrought by history than the condition of the people
when history opened.
Accepting the correlation of the calendar dates on
the ancient stelae as worked out by Lehmann, it may
be said that Maya written history opens with the
year a.d. 424. This is the date inscribed (a day in
Katun 6 of Baktun 8 in Maya chronology) on a small
56
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 57
greenstone figurine discovered in the vicinity of
San Andres Tuxtla in the state of Vera Cruz. The
next dated record so far discovered is that on a stela
in the great site of Uaxactun, remotely four hundred
miles to the south, and dated 168 years later.
This poses the pretty problem of the origin of the
Maya, and a few of the current theories on the subject
may be noted here—theories for the most part
attempting, with more enthusiasm than success, to
postulate the growth of Maya civilization in a section
of America remote from its efflorescence. If outside
cultural impulse is denied, this is a necessity. For in
the great area of the Maya Old Empire that civiliza¬
tion has the appearance of uprising, like Athena
from the head of Zeus, young, yet fully-grown and
equipped.
Dr. Morley (20) concludes that the Maya origina¬
tors of the Old Empire civilization were a nomadic
(hunter-and-fisher, primitives, in fact, though this
word is probably exiled from Dr. Morley’s vocabulary
as an invention of “Smith’s” [20]) tribe with its
wandering habitat the Gulf Coast plain of Mexico,
between Tuxpan and the Panuco River. Here for
long ages they lived the bare and desperate existence
of a people unacquainted with agriculture : in their
situation they were unacquainted with even the
agriculture of the old Archaic civilization.
The primitive existence was neither hard nor bare :
what led the primitive to the ready adoption of
agriculture was probably the fact that man is not
merely a flesh-eating animal, but, by structure and
intention, an omnivorous one. Dr. Morley s Maya
lacked vegetables and cereal dishes, those essential
morning delicacies of all cultural epochs in America :
there is no proof that they lacked cutlets.
Down on those lowly people, the proto-Maya of Dr.
Morley, there descended a wave of immigrants from
the highlands of Mexico, people in possession of the
Archaic culture, its arts and methods, and especially
its knowledge of agriculture. Their descent trans-
58 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
formed the hungry Maya from free hunters into unfree
land-serfs, with leisure to cultivate the sciences and
arts. This they proceeded to do. But with corn and
agricultural knowledge (to enlarge on Dr. Morley’s
thesis), population grew. Or famine appeared. Or
there was war. Or the genius of the race beheld in
a vision the Old Empire awaiting them there in the
virgin South. Gathering up such goods and chattels
as were appropriate to their time, the Maya set forth
on their trek to greatness.
En route, they invented and developed their script
and calendar. By the time they passed the neigh¬
bourhood of San Andres Tuxtla, they were carving
and inscribing greenstone figures and mislaying
them as clues for later archaeologists. Abandoning
the Tuxtla specimen, they disappeared into the wilds
of Central America, paid heed neither to the left
hand nor to the right of the many suitable and
pleasant positions for building sites that lay all around
their trek : but pushed on, and at last, in the Peten
district, coming to a site which lacked both water
and most other amenities, halted and proceeded to
develop their culture, culminating in the first of the
Old Empire cities, Uaxactun.
This remarkable theory, set forth by one of the
greatest living Americanists, requires a careful if
brief survey. Maya speech, as we have noted pre¬
viously, once extended much further abroad than the
mere region of the Old Empire. It prevailed among
the Totanac people of the province of Vera Cruz,
among the Huaxteca of the Panuco Valley in Mexico
—the people of the Tamarind Land. “ But the entire
absence, in the Totanac and Huaxtec areas, of monu¬
ments bearing inscriptions in the characteristic Maya
hieroglyphs provides evidence that these peoples
played no part in the great cultural development
[of the old Empire] ” (n).
Unfortunately, the fact that the barbarous
Huaxteca and Totanaca resided to the north of the
Old Empire area is no proof that the Old Empire
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 59
builders originated from the north, and developed
their civilization as they came south ; for to the
west and south-west of the Old Empire lay the
territory of the barbarous Quiche and Kaxchiquel,
also almost entirely lacking possession of the higher
marks of Maya civilization. If there had ever been a
civilizing southwards march of the “ Maya ” from
the north, these tribes that are later found remote in
the south must have shared it. And only racial
amnesia would explain the complete absence of its
influence in their primitive buildings and sculpture.
Further, it must be borne in mind that, if cultural
rise depends (as the more antique school of Ameri¬
canists insist) on an appropriate cultural locality, all
the “ barbarian ” tribes of Mayance blood and speech
were in a much better position to set about the
creation of a high civilization than the Old Empire
Maya, buried in densely forested land which was to
be freed from the grip of the trees and cultivated
only with labour and pain. Nor is the Tuxtla
statuette very much to the point: A Swiss watch
found in the Congo is no proof for a Central African
origin of the Swiss. It merely proves one of a dozen
things—a stray Swiss has passed through the Congo,
a purchaser of a Swiss watch has passed through the
Congo, the Congo witnessed the passing of a trader in
Swiss watches, and so forth.
Dr. Gann regards (34), or once regarded (37), the
Old Empire Maya as the actual descendants of the
Archaic peoples of the Mexican highlands. These
descended to the Panuco Valley, and there behaved
in much the same fashion as Dr. Morley’s Archaic-
influenced Maya—abandoned a warm climate, a
fertile soil, and a plentiful and easily procured food
supply,” to hasten southwards, like gangsters in a
detective story, to the conquest of the Maya Old
Empire tract, dropping en route the same clue as
before. r
Again, it is difficult to guess any reason for this
migration, or why what was (judging from their
60 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
subsequent achievements) the flower of the Proto-
Maya race should desert fertile Panuco and seek a
new home in the unhappily-forested centre of the
great antique triangle. As with Dr. Morley’s theory,
this of Dr. Gann’s is built almost entirely on the
negligible evidence of the Tuxtla statuette.
Mr. T. A. Joyce believes that the civilization of the
Old Empire was evolved in the regions where it is
found, even though there are no traces of a period
when the script and calendar were in a primitive
state. The calendar, in mathematical concept, at
least, appears as highly developed in the first
inscriptions as in the last. Other theories derive
either the Ancient Maya or the originators of the
Ancient Maya civilization from the Mound Builders
of the Mississippi (18), whose culture is undoubtedly
later in the time-scale than that of the great triangle,
and from “ Antilia ” a fragment of ruined Atlantis
which is supposed to have survived into the third
century b.c. (38). Were there any truth in this
supposition, we would surely find Yucatan the
earliest portion of Central America colonized by the
Atlantean refugees, and the West Indies with some
surviving ruins and inscriptions. ... A very com¬
plete and amusing summary of the fantastic theories
which seek to account for the rise of the Maya and
other Amerindian civilizations is set forth by
Dr. J. Imbelloni in a recent book (33).
The scientific historian, unbound by the nineteenth
century superstition of the independent evolution of
cultures, is under no necessity either to create
imaginary continents where the essentials of Maya
civilization may be brewed, or to set the Maya
nations on unlikely and fantastic marches—
marches whereon they left no other mark of their
trek than a minor statuette. Recognizing all racial
histories as the living parts of an organic whole, his
task in viewing the rise of the Maya civilization is to
seek for causes both American and extra-American,
and set forth the probable urges, native and foreign,
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 6l
which led to the great cultural flowering on the low
lands that slope from the Cordilleras.
In spite of the comparative fewness of its deposits
in the actual area, there can be little doubt but that
the great forested triangle was, from early in the
Christian era, the habitat of a number of tribes
organized according to the social customs of that
Archaic culture which circled the globe from China
to Peru: though neither of these countries was the
focal point of its origin. The forests were cleared in
mild patches for the growth of the maize plant—a
plant selected and nourished by the earliest Archaic
immigrants. The tribesmen were civilized, in the
sense that they were dwellers in villages with a definite
social organization, a cult, and doubtlessly a priest¬
hood. Nearly all of the sites are sites such as we expect
of the explorers and missionaries of the Archaic
civilization—they are near to beds of Givers of
Life, pearls in the Copan River—gold in the Peten
lands. Some of the sites, indeed, appear associated
with no “ life-giving ” deposits at all. But it
seems probable that they had been settled for
nearness to surface-workings of gold and copper
(also a Giver of Life) which speedily became
exhausted, or at least were exhausted throughout
the industrial stress of the Old Empire’s millennium
of existence.
This Archaic people, heritors of a culture stretching
from the highlands of Mexico to Bolivia in South
America, compiled from a strange medley of drift¬
age washed across the Pacific, appear to have
been, like their successors the builders of the great
monuments of the Maya sites, a people lacking
possession of metal tools. Stone was still the imple¬
ment, now polished, now a palceolith. North
of the great triangle, in Mexico, there seems little
doubt but that the Archaic culture was already
rearing primitive trilithons and making chambered
barrows for its dead; south, in the region of the
Panama neck, the Code culture marks the final
62 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
development of the Archaic as seized and trans¬
formed by native American genius (39). But the
life of the great inverted triangle was possibly a
languishing one until close upon the fifth or sixth
centuries a.d.
A description of the principal architectural and
sculptural characteristics of the Maya ruins that
survive from those centuries is a prerequisite to any
attempt at determining the origin of the architects
and sculptors. Prior to the rise of the modern
historic school of research such investigations were
apt to lead the investigator who looked beyond
America for origins into such quagmires of supposi¬
tion as speedily bogged whatever track of truth he
followed. For Sumer, Egypt, or the Polynesian
Islands to have laid directly the seeds of the Central
American civilization with their own cultural capital
only to hand, is as absurdly impossible as for the
Maya culture to have arisen, in all the glory of its
mathematical, artistic attainments, from the murky
deeps of the Archaic times.
ii. The Ancient Stone-built Sites
The most ancient of the great city-complexes so far
discovered in the Old Maya area is that of Uaxactun
in north-eastern Guatemala; or, to speak more
cautiously, it bears the earliest date of any of the
inscriptions in a Maya city which is apparently
connected with an event contemporaneous to the
sculptor who carved it.
This date is 8.14.10.13.15.8 Men 8 Kayab, accord¬
ing to that Maya calendar which awaits description
in a future section and this, according to the
correlation of Christian and Maya dates adopted
throughout this book, was on the 16th of June,
a.d. 592. It is carved on a large monolith, a much-
worn stele uprising more than nine feet above the
ground ; it stands solitarily bearing the date and the
undecipherable glyphs that companion it, a true
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 63
landmark in history, and as enigmatic as it is unique.
For these great sculptured blocks of stone were
erected in Maya cities to commemorate the passage
of certain periods in the calendar—twenty, ten, and
five “ year ” periods. The Uaxactun stela is an
exception, uneven in its numbers of days and months,
and therefore generally imagined to have been
erected to commemorate some political event of
outstanding importance.
But this is by no means certain : it may mark no
more than the end of a period of irregular datings,
the commencement of a new era of rule or com¬
putation. It is certainly not the oldest stela even
in Uaxactun, though bearing the oldest deciphered
date. Near the stela stands a circular altar roughly
hewn from the remains of an older stela, overturned,
the carved figures upon it partly obliterated in the
attempt to shape it into an altar.
Around the great abandoned site, thick and almost
impenetrable, a blue-green haze in the intenser heats
of the day, stands the forest. It is a rainless land
for the greater part of the year, and there is no
natural water-supply in the vicinity, other than a
small water-hole. This, in the rainy season, expands
into a fair-sized pond ; in the hot season it is a
discouraged, stagnant pool. No doubt in the days
when Uaxactun flourished at its apogee there were
other water-supplies, long lost to the sight of men,
perhaps several of those carved water-cellars,
chultunes, discovered elsewhere in the limestones
of the Maya area. But certainly the settlers at
Uaxactun, if an agricultural people settling in a spot
that seemed propitious for them to lead their
agricultural life, were either singularly obtuse or
singularly afflicted with ophthalmia. They settled
there, there can be little doubt, for quite other
reasons than agricultural well-being.
The architectural ruins at Uaxactun may be
divided into two main sections. The largest and
most loftily-placed, the so-called Capitol of Uaxactun,
64 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
crowns the summit of a small natural pyramid. In
the antique times this hill was doubtlessly artihcally
planed of its top and the sides cut into seemly shape.
On this summit is reared the ruins of that complex
of temples, plazas, stone long-houses miscalled
palaces, and open courts with carved stelae which
doubtlessly dominated Uaxactun both architectur¬
ally and politically in the city’s heyday. It was a
High Place in several senses. Here, to judge by the
evidences, lived their ceremonial lives the ministers
to the agricultural life which was the basis of Maya
economy—the priests, the priest-rulers, the sacrificers,
the astronomer-mathematicians, the priestly archi¬
tects and designers. In that remote heyday, with
alien strange eyes and alien strange minds (to ours)
they must have glanced up occasionally from the
busiedness of the day-to-day, when the evening
winds came, and have seen below them the lowly
thatched city of the plebs stretching around for great
distances, probably in orderly streetings, the smoke
of the evening cooking rising up still and blue in the
air and setting a haze on the bright green of the
maize plantations: plantations which possibly en¬
circled the city for many miles.
Did the members of the antique ruling caste from
their temples on the Capitol look away from the sun¬
set in those evenings, they would have seen rise to
the east the second great temple-plaza complex of
their city. Grouped around a central court, with
altars and carved and inscribed monoliths, the
temples stand on the usual pyramidal sub-structures,
now crumbling in ruin, no building still roofed, the
luxuriant vegetation twining amidst the carving and
the stones. The whole complex is oriented, with the
temples to the east and west of the central court re¬
cording the positions at which the sun rose at the
Spring and Autumn equinoxes, and at the Summer
and Winter solstices.
The three temples in a line on the eastern side of
the court were dedicated in an unmistakable manner.
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 65
Under the altars in each were found a number of
votive offerings, carved pottery, objects made from
the life-giving ” jade, and several human heads. It
is with the discovery of such objects as those heads that
the mind of the modern investigator is abruptly jolted
from the hypnosis of measuring and assessment, see¬
ing no mere vanished ancient civilization inferior to
his own, still on a line with our own. He looks
into the dark caverns of an aberrant philosophy of
long-vanished dreads and certainties.
Ihose Uaxactun buildings had no windows, no
chimneys, and apparently no doors. Certainly there
were no hinged doors. Possibly awnings of cotton or
reed-work took their place. At their best they must
have been tenebrous places, though probably light¬
ened by coatings of paint, by tapestry of feather-work
or the like. Of comfort for the theocratic inhabitants
of the long-house there could have been, according to
modern standards, little. Of their furniture directly
we know nothing, though a little we can guess
from the representations of it carved at other sites,
notably Menche-Yaxchilan. There were ornamented
couches, possibly of stone, more probably of the hard
sapote-wood. Leathers of deerskin and the like
doubtlessly softened their contours. The table was
an unknown amenity. Some kind of store-cupboards
the calculations and parchments of the priestly
astronomers and mathematicians certainly must have
required. As we shall see later in a consideration of
the Maya mastery of the technique of wood-carving,
there is no very good reason for supposing an in¬
ability to supply, at least in the religious and semi¬
religious buildings, the cruder forms of furnishings.
Uaxactun’s first date was the 16th of June, a.d.
592. The last dated inscription so far found equates
to the Christian year, a.d. 1163. Consequently,
if the dates of habitation coincided with the
dates of the inscriptions, Uaxactun was occupied
for over five hundred and seventy years. But
it is obvious, from the case of the stela made
66 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
into an altar, that it was occupied long anterior
to the period of “ recorded ” history, so to speak.
And there is the possibility that long after the cessa¬
tion of the dated inscriptions some part at least of
the antique city remained occupied.
Fifteen or sixteen miles south-west of Uaxactun,
and in the same densely-forested region, stands the
greatest in size of all the Maya cities. This is Tikal,
where the earliest date recorded is 9.0.10.0.0, or a.d.
709. From direct evidence, this would mean that
Tikal was founded just over 120 years after the
foundation of Uaxactun. But again there is the
possibility that Tikal may have been contempor¬
aneous with Uaxactun from the beginning. They
were the great Twin Cities of the triangle, perhaps
held together in that curious social condition, the
dual organization, that sprang up all the world over
in the trail of the Archaic civilization.
Tikal appears to have been definitely the senior
partner, with evidences of the greater wealth, if
wealth in any sense could have been understood in
those days and in that culture. Maya architecture
here almost outstrips its own limitations. The build¬
ings tower with serene arrogance, strongly-founded
and secure, each temple with walls of immense thick¬
ness that have resisted the encroach of time better
than those of any other site, Palenque excepted. The
city is an ordered maze of quadrangular plazas,
clustered around by temples and long-houses, each
and all of those buildings standing upon the char¬
acteristic pyramidal elevation, faced with steep—at
Tikal very steep : ascent to worship or sleep under
religious or other emotion must have been a perilous
passage—steps. The five main temple roofs are sur¬
mounted by high roof combs, hollow, forming small
chambers above the main temples, and perhaps used
for the storing of the city treasures, the temple more
esoteric apparatus, or the like. Tikal is the City of
the Three Hills, natural elevations which the ancient
builders, indefatigably sky-seeking, terraced with
TIKAL : SMALL “TEMPLE” ON CHARACTERISI K
PYRAMIDAL FOUNDATION
(Old Empire)
By permission of the trustees of the British Museum
!
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 67
stone and shore of their crowns in'order to erect on
these their great stone buildings. From those hills
in the days of the city’s greatness a wide view of the
surrounding country must have been obtained, across
the spreading streets of the common houses to the
mile on mile concentric stretches of maize cultivation.
Probably the forest hardly existed at all then : it had
been beaten back. At morning or noon, fifteen miles
away, Uaxactun’s Capitol gleamed in the rays of the
sun.
The art of wood carving appears to have been
developed at Tikal as at none of the other Old Empire
sites. Either this was through the peculiar cultural
bent of the inhabitants, or chance has preserved the
wood-work of Tikal from ruin and the white ant,
while elsewhere these two have combined to destroy
the carved lintels of sapote-wood and the beams
traced with surface incisions of gods, men, plants
and unnameable grotesqueries.
The last dated inscription found at Tikal is
10.2.000, a.d. 1133, so that, to judge by the monu¬
ments, the city was occupied for four and a quarter
centuries. But from other evidences there is good
reason to suppose that it was occupied, at least
spasmodically, for a long period after its apparent
desertion.
Round the Uaxactun-Tikal complex are a number
of small sites, extending northwards towards the
borders of Yucatan. In the region of Lake Bakhalal
lies the most curious of these, Tzibanche, discovered
by Dr. Gann, with no certain date but a most curious
architectural aberration. Maya building was always
a matter more of imposing external appearance than
comfort and commodiousness within. Here appear¬
ance has devoured commodiousness to such an extent
that some temples, immense from outward appear¬
ance, are so narrow within that two people cannot
pass abreast. This is aberration or inventive poverty
at its worst. Undated, Tzibanche is nevertheless an
obviously degenerate site, or one hastily erected
68 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
when the original cultural impulses had declined
severely.
A glance at the map will show that at the extreme
western end of the great inverted triangle lay the
city of Palenque. It contains but a single stela, or
sculptured monolith, and that with the earliest date
so far discovered at this site, 9.10.10.0.0., or a.d. 897.
If the dated inscriptions are to be trusted, it was not
occupied for at least three hundred years after the
foundation of Uaxactun. But on all evidences from
artistic criteria (doubtful aids though these may
be), it had a much earlier existence. Palenque
appears as the Athens of the Old Empire, a great
city where art flourished as now here else in the
Central Americas. Stephens and Catherwood, coming
upon it nearly a hundred years ago, stood astounded
in its courts and before its “ palace,” the great single¬
storied building standing on the summit of the usual
truncated hill. They found it, as it stands to-day, sur¬
rounded by an inner and outer gallery, and within a
maze of chambers, corridors, and open courts. Here
the Maya rulers may have known elegance and comfort
as well as grandeur : there are even slots in the stone
walls for the raising and erection of canopies against
the blaze of the sun. Between the builders of the
“ Palace ” of Palenque and the builders of Tzibanche
there is the difference between soaring imagination
and cerebral decay.
Hard by this great long-house is the famous three¬
storied tower, the only one of its kind in the Old
Empire area. What was it ? A watch-tower, an
elevation for surveying the city, an astronomer's
observatory ? There is no definite answer to these
questions, though a multitude of theories.
Round the great long-house, and each elevated on
their pyramidal structures, stand various temples, the
so-called Temples of the “ Cross ” and the ” Sun ”
the most famous of those. Stucco was the blessing
and bane of Palenque architectural decoration. The
Palenque artist moulded in stucco rather than carved
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 69
in stone. Palace and temple exterior walls and en¬
trances were set with rich friezes of robed figures—
portrait figures, they seem, doubtlessly painted and
glowing once, now greyed and faded. But the
wall-panels in the temples of the “ Cross ” and the
“ Sun,” representing sacrificing priests in the act of
adoration before an indefinite deity, show a complete
mastery in sculptural technique.
Palenque was the great city of the north-west, pos¬
sibly the outpost of the antique culture for many
centuries. The latest recorded date, 9.13.0.0.0. (a.d.
956), seems unlikely to mark the termination of the
city's occupancy. This would leave a mere sixty
years for the building and decoration of this great
complex of buildings, estimated by some observers
(for the ground has never been explored completely)
to cover a range of eight or nine square miles.
The apex of the great inverted triangle is Copan,
the third great city of the Maya Old Empire, on the
banks of the Copan River, nearly three hundred miles
due south of Uaxactun. Here it was that Stephens
and Catherwood stood astounded at such visible
marks of an Amerindian civilization ; here it is that
modern research has revealed the deeper intellectual
qualities of that civilization in the unearthing and re¬
orienting of the pointers of the giant sundial formed
by carven monoliths on the hills above the city.
The oldest date recorded on the Copanec inscrip¬
tions is 9.I.O.O.O., or a.d. 719. The temples and long-
houses have little of the state of preservation of
Uaxactun or Tikal or Palenque. They are roofless
and their walls in most cases levelled with the ground.
The great glory of the city is its series of (apparent)
portrait statues carved on and from, as technique
developed, the monoliths erected to mark the passage
of the 5, 10, and 20 “ year "-periods previously men¬
tioned. The ruins show a maze of pyramids with
great stairways leading to platforms whence the
temples have long disappeared, courts littered with
broken stelae, altars carved in andesite, apparently
70 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
with greenstone chisels, for no metal tools have ever
been discovered. At Copan more than at any other
Maya site, the progress of the technique of the
sculptor is observable. The last dated inscription is
9.18.10.00., or a.d. 1064.
Roughly within the area of this great triangle lie
all the other important sites of the Old Empire, some
older in dated inscriptions than Palenque or Copan,
none older than Tikal or Uaxactun. With exceptions
now to be noted, they repeat, in greater or lesser
degree, the features of the three principal sites.
North of Copan lies the city of Quirigua, perhaps a
cleruchy of Copan, and justly celebrated for its great
Zoomorphic monuments. It consists of the usual
plaza-centre, the city, but in Quirigua’s case of
immense range, a range of eight hundred feet by two
hundred feet. On its southern extremity rise groups
of temples, on the usual substructures ; northwards
is a single large temple ; and to east and west are
mounds of many ruins and here and there a standing
wall marking the size and importance of the site in
its heyday. Its stelae are of immense size, though not
of such fine technique as those of Copan. One is,
perhaps, thirty-five feet in height, projecting twenty-
six feet from the ground, a truly heroic statue with
its two dropping-eyed, sad-faced figures—bearded, in
ceremonial garb and attitude, bearing axe and shield.
And here, the only sculptured monolith of its kind, is
the giant Earth-monster, a solid boulder of stone, of
the estimated weight of three tons, measuring 9 feet
8 inches by 11 feet 6 inches, and 7 feet 3 inches in
height. It is carved to represent a double-head
monster familiar to other than American art, as we
shall see.
Piedras Negras stands on the Usamacintla River,
near the boundary of the Republics of Guatemala
and Mexico. The earliest date so far deciphered is
9.8.15.0.0. (a.d. 872). The usual temple-structures,
pyramided, are here, and once Piedras Negras must
have dominated the Usamacintla of that region as
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 71
Pesth the Danube. The remarkable feature of the
city, however, is its series of altars and stelae, thirty-
nine in all, recording 1^6-“ year” period-endings in
unbroken sequence. Whatever the social, political, or
economic struggles that rose and laid waste the Old
Empire elsewhere the priestly astronomers directed,
and the sculptors carved, these memorials to Time,
undisturbed, for a period thirty-nine times five
years.
A little south-west of Piedras Negras stands
Menche-Yaxchilan, built on the side of a low range
of hills, and apparently founded around the year
a.d. 921. The hills altered the usual configuration of
the temple-complexes. The highest range is crowned
by a large and small complex of temple buildings, the
ruins of twenty buildings litter the north-east slope,
six ruined structures rise midway, and the foot of this
littered Acropolis is guarded by the shells of eight
further structures. Many are almost obliterated, but
many also survive in such state of preservation that
from Menche, more than from any other source, we
obtain a notion of the sacrificial and ceremonial life V
of the caste which dominated the Maya Old Empire.
Here, on the carved stone lintels of the temples,
depicted with the utmost minuteness of detail in
regalia and arms, parade the ancient priestly rulers,
an occasional captive, an occasional tormented
prisoner. Palenque gives the idealized, the artist’s
vision of Maya life ; MenchYs sculpture has some¬
thing of the hard, bright foolish truth-to-life of
Grseco-Roman art. The site has the further remark¬
able characteristic, remarkable in a culture which
seemed to worship Time, of erecting stelae which
appear to contain no date-references.
On the Pusilha River in British Honduras stands
the site to which has been given the same name. The
earliest inscriptions record the date 97.0.0.0., or a.d.
838. Pusilha is a clumsily-built and decorated site,
needing no special mention but for the fact here was
found the underground chamber apparently used by
72 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
the ancient inhabitants as the municipal dust-bin. In
the Old Empire, where the everyday articles in
use among the ancient inhabitants have in most
cases long mouldered to powder and dust, Pusilha’s
kitchen-midden has supplied a multitude of evidences
elsewhere unobtainable. Principal among those
midden remains were the stratigraphic layers of
pottery, lovely and tastefully-made pottery frag¬
ments in great numbers, thin and porcelain-like in
texture, covered with the usual glyphs and figur-
ings, painted white, black, red, yellow, and green.
Pusilha’s notable lacks in architecture and sculpture
may be accounted for on the supposition that it was
the Pottery of the Old Empire, over-engaged in
industrial pursuits to heed to its appearance.
If this is the case, its near neighbour, Lubaantun
(probably, as Tikal to Uaxactun, the Twin City of
Pusilha), appears to have been the Spectacle City of
the southern Empire. No datings have been dis¬
covered at Lubaantun, and no buildings other than
immense pyramids, faced with blocks of cut stone.
Possibly those pyramids were the sub-structures of
wooden temples and long-houses. The lowest and
earliest series of terraces yet discovered, in excavat¬
ing the pyramids, is in megalithic style—megalithic
building is elsewhere unknown in the Old Empire.
But more remarkable still is the large, raised surface,
in appearance a rectangular arena, which is Luba-
antun’s unique feature. That it was in close
alliance, if not dependence, on Pusilh&, is shown by
the fact that both cities share almost identical re¬
mains in the matter of figurines and pottery.
This short, and by its nature somewhat arid, listing
of cities may now be closed. The reader will find
references to other sites in the subsequent text, as the
need arises, and while a general consideration of Maya
culture is passed under review and an attempt made
to trace the origins and beginnings of that culture.
But they are minor sites, some of them the merest
outposts from such giants as Uaxactun or Yax-
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 73
chilan, leading apparently a minor life, dominated by
their great and inexplicable neighbours.
It should be noted that, with the doubtful excep¬
tion of Copan, the names now applied to the ancient
sites are modern namings. Palenque is named after
the modern village which lies near the ancient ruins.
Menchk-Yaxchilan is a site to which two fanciful
names have been applied—Menche after the local
Maya tribe, Yaxchilan (“ green-stones ”) after its
supposed architectural colouring. But the names
used by the antique inhabitants have long vanished
from the memories of men.
iii. Architecture in the Ancient Sites
The main limits set on the science of the Maya
architect in the Old Empire were three in number—
lack of a knowledge of the true arch, lack of a
knowledge of the bonding of corners, and lack of
knowledge of a formula by which to lay off a right
angle.
All the stone structures of importance are built on
the top of truncated pyramids—pyramids shorn of
the apex. The pyramids are stepped, the angles
generally square. The shorn surface was levelled off
with mortar, the design of the temple, long-house,
“ palace,” or what not traced on the fresh mortar,
and the masons set to the task of erecting the walls of
the building. .
When the stone walls had reached a certain height,
the mason, to provide a roof in accordance with the
not-unvarying principles of the cantilever (corbelled,
vault, “ false ”) arch, commenced to build inwards,
each course of stones slightly overlapping that
below, till the gap was bridged by a single row of
slabs. This was a delicate and skilled operation. I he
arch stones were cut to special shapes so that gravity
would hold them in position, layer on layer, unti
bonding elements secured their tenons. Additional
weight was leant to the arch by means of a
74 THE conquest of THE MAYA
“ roof-comb/’ which was, in a sense, the only second
storey ever attempted by (or possible to) the Maya
architect.
The disadvantage of this cantilever arch is the
narrowness which it imposes upon the building,
the space below being limited to the span of the arch
above. Further, the walls of the building have to be
of immense thickness to bear the ponderous weight
of the arch. For in the cantilever arch, unlike the
true arch, where each stone is self-supporting,
the weight of each “ step ” has to be carried by the
“ step ” beneath it, finally the entire weight pressing
down upon the walls.
These walls were composed of rubble and mortar,
faced by a mosaic of small rectangular stones.
Painted and fresh, and kept in condition, the build¬
ings must have appeared of imposing solidity. In
comparison with some other American architectures,
however—that of the Andean peoples, for example—
it was a slick jerry-building.
There was certainly some definite system of
measurement in use, though its units are now un¬
known. The line and plumb-bob were used with
considerable success. With regard to the very
general affirmation that the Old Empire Maya used
stone, and stone tools only, both in rearing his
buildings and carving his sculptures, Mr. Hyatt
Verrill, speaking of a practical test conducted
personally among the ruins of the Code culture of
Panama, makes a disturbing interpellation (39) :
“ On one occasion I selected several hundred stone
tools and implements obtained from the site of the
Code temple, and, outlining a coarse, simple scroll
upon a fragment of soft stone which was a portion of
an elaborately sculptured column, I set four of my
Indians to work upon it with the prehistoric tools.
Although the four were unusually intelligent and
skilful men, and despite the fact that they worked
and laboured diligently for a week, and broke or wore
out all of the stone implements, their united efforts
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 75
failed to result in any noticeable carving or even in a
recognized pattern on the stone.”
The Old Empire builder had at hand two methods
of roofing : by means of beams and by means of the
false arch. The latter was employed in all religious
or " theocratic ” buildings. The former, possibly, was
used extensively in roofing the houses of the higher
castes of the population. The proletariat, like the
proletariat elsewhere, lived in reed huts and admired
in awe the residences of their superiors which they
themselves had upraised.
The employment of the false arch gives to Maya
buildings the deep entablature which their sculptural
artists put to such extensive and varied use. Relief
designs on this entablature were either carved on
facing blocks, or, as at Palenque, applied in stucco.
With the great stone buildings the pyramidal sub¬
structures were as invariable as the corbelled arch.
The reason for this structure the older school of
Americanists ascribed to a desire to upraise the
buildings into prominence, thus inspiring in the minds
of the populace feelings of fear and awe. Dr. T. Gann
varies this theory slightly, as does Mr. J. E. Thomp¬
son, with the notion that these elevations were a
health precaution: elevated, the priestly rulers
escaped the densest of the nightly mosquito hordes.
In the Americas the pyramidal sub-structures were
used far and wide from the Maya area, on the bleak
hills of the Andes, on the arid Mexican plateau.
The superstition of the mosquito must have spread
afar. Mr. T. A. Joyce gives a good account (u) of
the more orthodox hypothesis :
“ The practice of elevating buildings upon some
form of sub-structure (conventionally termed a
‘ pyramid ’) was common in the Mayan and Mexican
areas from the earliest times, but the American
pyramids differ from those of Egypt both in form
and function. They are not carried up to a pointed
apex, but terminate in a platform upon which a
building in stone or wood was erected. The Egyptian
76 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
pyramid was itself the building—a tomb. The
American pyramid was itself an accessory, a plat¬
form on which to erect a building or an altar.”
Apart from the square-foundationed Tower of
Palenque, buildings of more than one storey are
unknown. .Pilasters do not occur until the New
Empire—evidently a Toltec importation. At
Palenque, for example, they are merely squared wall-
sections. The temples and religious buildings vary
in size from one, two, and four-chambered structures
up to the immense complexity of rooms in the
Palenque “ Palace.”
Such are the main characteristics of the ancient
architecture, and, as the reader will have noted, there
are a number of incongruous features. The mathe¬
maticians who could calculate to a nicety immense
passages of time were incapable of applied mathemat¬
ics, not only for the construction of the true arch, but
for laying off a right angle in simple building. This
argues not. only a divorcement of theoretical and
practical science, but an entire lack of any such thing
as a corpus of science. Whatever the examples of
such in the Old World (Hero's theoretical steam-
engine, incapable of practical execution in his
world, is the best known), there are no such apparent
divergences in the cultural life of any other race as
in that of the Ancient Maya. Architectural science, so
far from appearing to have a spontaneous rise and
generation, has every appearance of a bold, skilful,
but fundamentally unintelligent imitativeness. This
is not to deny its achievements along lines that did
not require purely intellectual research : but it is to
deny that the architect found his science a living one,
part of the general cultural life of his people, growing
and spreading and developing. This fact is so
obscured in the multitude of publications on Maya
art and architecture that it needs repeating that,
accepting the datings of the various sites, it is the
later and minor sites that show crudity in their
architecture, as at Pusilha, and sometimes positive
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 77
unintelligent aberration, as at Tzibanchk. From
study of various examples of sculpture, mostly
stel£e and mostly at Copan, Dr. S. G. Morley (20) has
classified their execution into an Early, Middle, and
Great period. No such classification seems possible
in the case of the architecture. It springs full-blown,
and is presently over-blown.
Its essential basis, the pyramidal sub-structure, is
known the world over. It is true, as Mr. T. A. Joyce
points out, that the use and purpose of the Egyptian
and Mayan buildings are very different. But the
Egyptian was not the only form of pyramid known
to the Old World : it was merely the fons et origo of
all Old World pyramidal buildings. The next in age,
and that which spread abroad the ancient world,
down through India, into Indo-China, into the
Oceanic islands, was the ziggurat, the terraced
pyramid, which, in Asia as in America, was not “the
building,” but an accessory. The Mesopotamian
ziggurat was built on the same pattern and for the
same purpose as the Mayan. In the words of Layard :
“It is highly probable that one uniform system of
building was adopted in the East for sacred purposes,
and that these ascending and receding platforms
form the general type of the Chaldean and Assyrian
pyramid temples.”
They formed the general type, as modern research
shows, over a much more extensive area. “ We
have already seen the way in which India received
the elements of Western culture both by land and
sea. The type of civilization that developed in
Southern India exhibits many marks of an original
Egyptian inspiration, although the Egyptian ele¬
ments are intimately interwoven with others of
Mesopotamian origin. Long before these Western
elements were completely assimilated and had a
distinctively Indian character, the stream of cultural
diffusion had passed farther East to Burma, Siam,
and Cambodia, and the Malay Archipelago ” (40).
At Angkor and Angkor-Vat, in Cambodia, the
78 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
traveller appears to be in cities that might have been
transported from Central America. The Khmer
pyramidal sub-structure is also the ziggurat Remote
in the Pacific, the ziggurat was reared in XahitTof
earth, into the seventeenth century. It was the
ground-work of a wooden temple.
Mesopotamian, Cambodian, Tahitian, Mayan
pyramidal sub-structures are too definitely of a
type, in building and orientation, to leave doubt of
THE “FALSE ARCH” IN THE “FALSE ARCH” IN
TARENTUM PALENQUE
(Italy.) (Old Empire.)
the common inspiration of the architects. This is
not to say that they repeat each detail with exacti¬
tude, so that the sub-structures of Palenque are
exactly those of Babylonia. Each race or nation
made its variations according to its tools, its needs,
its building material, the size of population yielding
a large or small quantity of unskilled but subservient
labour. Even so, there are remarkable similarities
in detail on detail, similarities which suggest that the
Totonac pyramid, reared by the “ barbarous ” Maya
at Papantla, might have been built by the same
architect who reared that of the Fimeanacas at
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 79
Angkor. The analogy of conception and execution
even in minor matters seems conclusive.
The corbelled arch, as we have seen, was the only
arch known to the early Maya. By the time they
were rearing their greatest temples, Africa and Asia
were both long and well acquainted with the true
arch. But, as we have seen in the case of the
pyramidal sub-structure, there is no reason for
presuming that Oceania, with a haughty exclusive¬
ness, refused to accept the lessons of pyramid¬
building which flowed down from the East Indies,
disregarded the lessons, turned its back, and built
pyramids of its own design—of exactly the same
design. Nor is there any reason for imagining that
the architects of the Papantlan and Cambodian
pyramids were each suddenly, in the dead of night,
visited by exactly the same vision of a pyramidal
form, and duly put it in execution, each racially
ignorant of the cultural existence of the other. So
with the case of the cantilever arch, once apparently
a fairly widely-spread feature of palace building in
the Mediterranean, and of tomb-architecture _ in
ancient Sumer (where, however, the building material,
of light brick-work, hastened the discovery of the
principles of the true arch). But in the Old World
cultural details flowed and eddied, east and west,
in a fusion and confusion, as we see in India. The
detail of the corbelled arch passed lightly across the
Old World scene, hardly halted in Further Asia, and,
far from the Argolid structures, found new builders
of heavy stone in the Central American clearings.
For nine hundred years those same builders used that
arch : there was no evolution, there was no progress,
as presently that original culture stream dried up :
in the great spaces of the Old World culture waves
flowed to and fro from innumerable points, focal
points, now that the inspiration was common to all.
In the restricted cultural area of America the alien
importation of architectural science never took deep
theoretical root: it imitated, in essentials, to the end.
80 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
iv. Sculptural Art in the Ancient Sites
The sculpture of the ruined cities of the great
triangle was concerned primarily with the carving and
embellishment of the stelae set up to mark the passage
of certain periods of time, the adornment of the
exterior of temples, and the portrayal in relief, as at
Palenque, of scenes of a religious or ceremonial
significance.
Limestone was the characteristic stone over a
great portion of the area, though sandstone and
conglomerate were worked in at Quirigua, and
andesite at Copan. The carving of figures in dioritic
stone was as successfully carried out as in South
America, apparently with the aid of stone tools only
in the Central American cities, though an admixture
of copper and tin, producing bronze, is now admitted
for the higher Peruvian cultures.
The commonly accepted stylistic classification of
the sculptured stelae, the most important of all the
Old Empire sculptures, those monuments to Time
and debatable gods or their servitors, divides them
into works of the Early Period, up to 9.10.0.0.0.
(a.d. 897), the Middle Period, up to 9.15.0.0.0.
(a.d. 995), and the Great Period, to the end of the
art efflorescence in the Old Empire (a.d. 1163).
Copan illustrates this growth of the sculptor’s
technique in the fullest way. A Middle Period stela,
Stela P at Copan, is separated by a stretch of some
160 years of cultural history from Stela H, and the
sculptor’s progress in that period is sure and definite.
Stela P is a relief framed in a pillar, it is a statue
carved by an artist still insufficiently sure of his art
to desert the basic block of the stone. In Stela H
that fear is almost gone : the statue almost walks
forth from the block, it commands and dominates
the stone. Nevertheless, it is still tied to the stela.
In the first stela there is a certain crudeness, and
uncertainty, if also a dark, surgent life : the face has
a brooding humility that is strangely effective.
MONOLITHIC SCULPTURE : THE “ ARCHAIC PHASE ” AT COPAN
(Old Empire)
By permission of the trustees of the British Museum
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 81
Lacking in technical execution though it is, it is by
no means the first attempt in stone of a sculptor
climbing the rungs of progress unaided. The concept
is mature, quite as mature as the concept in Stela H.
Of the portraits themselves one is cold humility,
one is cold and magnificent arrogance. They pos¬
sibly shrine a great political change as well as show
a great artistic advance. But they do not show
any such advance in concept as that which lies
between the finest productions of Archaic art and
the earliest stelae themselves.
Sometimes the great stelae are sculptured on only
one side, sometimes on two alternate faces. What¬
ever the sculpture, the glyphic explanatory matter
is never absent, even in the magnificence of Stela H.
The glyphs were the important things, one guesses,
the portrayed gods or priests fitted the event for
which the date required inscription.
Stela H measures 12 feet in height, by 3 feet
3 inches in breadth, heroic proportions of a heroic
figure. The “ statue/' the colossal figure which
actually seems to bear the stela, though the reverse
is of course the case, occupies the front of the
block, with a heavy, un-Mayan face, broad-browed,
full-cheeked, thick-lipped, with rounded chin and
wide, cold eyes. It is a powerful and haughty face.
The ears are distended to receive great plugs,
the ear-plugs of the Americas, and the figure is
richly clad in a full-skirt, belted and tasselled
and decorated in what appears a bewildering com¬
plexity of detail. But the essentials of belt, skirt,
and “ sporran ” may be made out with careful
scrutiny, as indeed they can be made out on every
other stela. The sporrans of the stelae are of par¬
ticular interest—with the appearance of small
pouches, the flaps decorated by grotesque heads. The
sides of Stela H are deeply carved, and with con¬
summate skill, bearing a sprawl of subsidiary figures.
From the high and elaborate head-dress the fringing
feather tassels fall down the sides and back. At the
82 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
rear is a mask with the Kin-sign on its forehead—a
mask bearing a striking resemblance to that of the
rear figure in the double-headed Earth-Monster at
Quirigua. Over the mask is poised that strange
commingling of antique monster and decorative
design which is generally referred to as the Serpent-
Bird, the mark of the God Quetzalcoatl. The
inscription in glyphs, towards the foot of the stela,
gives a date regarding which there is considerable
uncertainty, for it lacks Introductory Glyph or
Initial Date. But it is probably 9.17.12.9.9. 4 Ahau,
18 Muan (a.d. 778).
The bewildering complexity of ornamentation, the
superabundance of detail on this masterpiece of
Ancient American statuary, is characteristic. Design
and spacing and execution are admirable : but there
is too much design. It is an effloration of the
sculptor’s mastery of technique. But it must be
borne in mind that most of the stelae were probably
painted, as were the temples, and in varying colours,
so that in the days following its execution Stela H
must have dominated its plaza in Copan, with the
great central figure not fading back in the wilderness,
the stone jungle of accessory details, but standing
out in bold relief from a colourful and unconfusing
background.
This fact complicates a consideration of the Maya
sculptor’s technique. Nevertheless, at its best, it
was probably unsurpassed anywhere else in the
world with regard to purity of line. To desert the
stelae and note the best example in low relief, as
opposed to the high relief of the statues, is to travel
from Copan to the North-western corner of the
triangle, to the co-called “ Temple of the Sun ” at
Palenque. This relief, as previously mentioned, shows
two sacrificing priests on either side of a spear-slung
emblem, apparently the face of the Gorgon-like sun-
god. The carving of these figures, representational
of the human figure in a three-quarters posture, is
triumphantly done. The right-hand priest has as
MONOLITHIC SCULPTCRE : THE “ FORMAL PHASE ” AT
CO PAN. STELA P.
(Old Empire)
By permission of the trustees of the British Museum
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 83
perfect a figure as is to be found in antique American
sculpture, as perfect as anything contemporaneous
in Asia. Each sacrificing priest stands on the
crouched back of a slave or servitor : two more of
these alien inferiors support the decorated platform
on which rest the spears that uphold the emblem of
the god. They also are carved with fine power,
minutely, grotesquely decorated, no mere con¬
ventionalisation of a scene, as may be seen in the
half-upraised slave under the feet of the minor priest
while the other lies crushed almost flat under the
heels of the stalwart principal. Here, with perfect
figures (and, it may be added, the faces of devils),
we have apparent portrayal of members of the con¬
temporary theocracy. (Vide Frontispiece.)
It is at first almost unbelievable that these
individuals can belong to the same race as those
represented at Copan, on such sculptures as Stela H.
Nor, as we shall subsequently see, is it necessary to
accept this belief, in spite of the fact that the
technique has obviously the same groundwork, the
glyphs are the same, both Palenque and Copan
the products of a common American culture.
Sculpture in the true round is less common. This
for a number of reasons—that the statues, life size,
have in many cases been destroyed or are so defaced
that it is impossible to judge the degree of skill with
which they are executed. But from Copan comes
the statue, full and complete, absorbed in or detached
(as you please) from its stone, the figure generally
described as that of the Maize God. Attitude,
appearance, and decoration have a startling
familiarity for those even meagrely acquainted with
extra-American sculpture. For this reason, it is
amusing to note, the Maize God receives somewhat
curt and shabby treatment from the older school of
Americanists, as does the statue from Palenque which
Stephens found so uncomfortably resembling those
of Ancient Egypt.
More, perhaps, than in anything else, the Old
84 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Empire sculptor excelled in miniature sculpture.
The much and justly quoted examples are the date-
symbols on the rear of Stela D at Copan. As a rule
such numerals are expressed by a series of grotesque
heads ; but in this case the heads have been supplied
with complete human figures, each symbolically
burdened with captive macaws, with a captive
earth-monster, with simple human captives, each
no doubt relating symbolically to the cognate time-
period. Here the work is executed with skill and
delicacy : the artist had a supreme command of his
chisel, greenstone, copper, or the much-disputed
nameless metal which he used. Here also is well
illustrated that purity of line which the Maya
sculptor could achieve on surfaces large and small,
and in the motif-treatment of feathers especially.
Animals on the whole fared poorly at the hands
of the Old Empire sculptor: the Earth-monster has
already been noted and will be noted again. Copan
has its carved ocelot-head, treated with a kind of
hollow strength : the decorative monkey-heads are
amusing, but little more. The birds recognizable as
of a definite species, macaws and perhaps an
occasional vulture, are made, for religious reasons,
figures more horrendous than representational. The
snake is already a favourite subject : it was to grow
and flourish on the Maya imagination in the period
of the New Empire.
Allied to the temple as it was, Maya sculpture is
obviously greatly subordinated to religious purpose.
But this is not invariably the case. The life-like
figures discovered by Blom and Le Farge (41) in the
underground chamber near Comalcalco are obviously
neither gods nor mythological figures : they are indi¬
viduals, highly individualized, portraits of the artist’s
contemporaries. Now, portraiture has been generally
denied to the more well-known figures on Maya
statuary—a denial obviously made without pro¬
longed objective scrutiny of the stelae at such sites as
Copan, the panels at Menche, and the stuccos of
MONOLITHIC SCULPTURE : THE “CLASSIC PHASE” AT COPAN
(Old Empire)
By permission of the trustees of the British Museum
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 85
Palenque. The Copanec figures are certainly not (as
we understand the term) gods : they seem to vary
between contemporary portraits and portraits of
idealized or legendary beings. Between these two
there is no sharp dividing line. The being who
dominates Stela H so magnificently probably never
walked the soil of the Americas, with his unwrinkled
brow, but certainly a sneer of cold command. Yet
this Mayan Ozymandias has his individuality
stamped upon him in a very complete and unmis¬
takable fashion—in brow and lip and the lidless
stare of the wide eyes. Compared with the still,
brooding figure on Stela P or the giant stelae of
Quirigua, this is a remembered or legendary over-
lord of whose characteristics the sculptor had heard
much. Again, it is only the heaven that lies about
the childhood of research that would find a stiff, uni¬
form sameness in the brooding Titans of Quirigua.
With sites like Menche-Yaxchilan and Piedras Negras
we are confronted with obvious portraits, executed
with a kind of fioriferous, haunting clumsiness.
Old Empire architecture, we concluded, was sub¬
stantially founded on a few principal designs which
arose remote in Mediterranean and Mesopotamian
countries and passed across the world, eastward, in
ebbing circles of various speeds and reach. Maya
sculpture, as we have seen, was predominantly a
temple sculpture. It is therefore of interest to con¬
sider its relation with the sculpture of the Old World.
First, it reproduces, in innumerable details now
seldom denied, the sculpture of Angkor-Vat and
other sites in Cambodia. It reproduces, again and
again, details of that more eastward sculpture. Its
method of treatment is largely its own, but there is
again and again an obvious similarity of both tech¬
nique and subject. This extends to matters reaching
back to the parent culture of Indo-China : the great
earth-monster of Quirigua, for example, is obviously
the makara, the legendary beast, part crocodile, part
elephant, of India and its cultural dependencies. In
86 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
its jaws squats the figure of the Indian Indra, com¬
plete in too many details of attitude and dress to be
mistaken for other than he is. Yet this monster that
long irritated the Asiatic imagination has been
solemnly declared a turtle by the older school of
Americanist, though no turtle was ever so shaped.
Similarly with the Egyptian-like figure of Stephens
found at Palenque : it is not only Egyptian-like,
it is, one might say, Egyptian at one remove, and
probably of much more ancient carving than any
other sculpture at Palenque.
Again, and again to quote Stephens, whose eyes
were fresh to such sights, and not to begin with
blinded by preconceived theories of the Monroe
doctrine in American archaeology (he is describing an
exploration of the main temple at the minor site of
Ocosingo) : “In the back wall of the central chamber
was a doorway of the same size with that in front,
which led to an apartment without any partitions,
but in the centre was an oblong enclosure eighteen
feet by eleven, which was manifestly intended as the
most important part of the edifice. The door was
choked up with ruins to within a few feet of the top,
but over it, and extending along the whole front of
the structure, was a large stucco ornament which at
first impressed us most forcibly by its striking re¬
semblance to the winged globe over the doors of
Egyptian temples. [But] it differs in detail from the
winged globe. The wings are reversed ; there is a
fragment of a circular ornament which may have
been intended for a globe, but there are no remains of
serpents entwining it ” (3).
Stephens was already in retreat, and found comfort
in the lack of serpents. Therefore it was not Egyp¬
tian. Such a modern investigator as Dr. J. Imbelloni,
on the other hand, proves conclusively that the
design is overlaid and elaborately and principally
serpent. Therefore it is not Egyptian (33).
Nor, indeed, we may presume, is it: the winged
globe travelled far from Egypt and suffered a series
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 87
of sea-changes in Babylonia, in India, in Indo-China.
But it is still the winged globe, a design not to be
mistaken in Ocosingo or Persia, and one extremely
unlikely to occur as sculptural motif, over and over
again, invented carefully and sedulously apart from
its previous representations.
The most famous sculptural detail in the Old Maya
region, however, is that at Copan—the famous, or
rather infamous, elephants at Copan. Maudslay was
among the first to come on those unchancy beasts :
THE WINGED DISC
sculptured over a doorway at Ocosingo. (Palenque.)
[After Catherwood, in J. L. Stephens’ “ Travels")
they tower in the details above the head of Stela B,
giant elephant-heads with curling trunks, heads
somewhat distorted with ornamentation, with an
apparent slit half-way up the trunk, but still recog¬
nizably heads : and, further, the flattened head of
the Indian elephant.
Americanists for the last fifty years have been
constantly vexed by those elephants. For there
is no elephant in America. So the beasts have been
disposed of as macaws, as alligators, as tapirs, and
finally, in a desperate attempt to turn the tables
upon the elephants, as elephas Americana, the long-
extinct American elephant, vanished from the
88 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
American Continent thousands of years before the
rise of the Maya culture. Nevertheless, they are
unmistakably Indian elephants, surmounted by ma¬
houts, complete with turbans and goads : they are
FULL VIEW OF THE UPPER PART OF STELA B AT
COPAN
(Reproduced front “ The Diffusion of Culture," by courtesy of Professor
G. Elliot Smith.)
the beasts as a sculptor, who had never seen them in
the dun flesh, might record from legend.
(They are—or rather, they were. For the blot has
been removed from the family escutcheon: the
elephant-decoration on Stela B has been badly
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 89
mutilated, in recent years, by “bandits.” Is it too
much to suspect that the “ bandits,” refreshed by
this exercise, have now returned to their more
orthodox and respectable archaeological pursuits ?)
One might travel far outside the Maya region in
America and find other architectural and sculptural
representations of the elephant—at Huaycama, on
the mounds of Wisconsin, on the famous pipes of
Iowa. All are obvious representations of an animal
never seen by the sculptors, a legendary beast, the
tale of him travelling up from the far Pacific coasts
where doubtlessly there ground the boats of the
culture-bringers who brought alike him, the Indra-
Ganesha cult, the makara who made the Earth-
Monster, and more anciently the technical inspira¬
tion that carved the great Egyptian-like statue at
Palenque and the winged disc over the lintel at
Ocosingo. The Maya artist, we may assume from these
evidences, received a cultural beginning on which he
worked, confusedly, on a confused wash and flow of
cultural driftage across the Pacific : the elephant, the
makara, the winged disc, the bearded priest, the
obvious Buddhist with begging-bowl who is one of
the finest statues in the round at Copan,—all these
details came to him and confusedly he told their story
in stone, intermingling with that story the rise of his
own city states, the being and appearance of the great
gods who presently flowered so rankly in the Central
Americas, the everyday life of the civilization that
sprang, thus strangely manured, from five thousand
years and sources.
v. Painting, Pottery, and the Minor Arts
The Goth, the Christian, Time, war, flood and fire
have all dealt unkindly with the actual paintings in
the Maya sites. Apparently the ancient civilization
dealt lavishly in colour for purposes of complementary
decoration : sculptures in high as well as low relief
were painted in varying and various colours, temple-
go THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
walls, stelse, and lintel ornaments. But except in little
cracks and shaded portions, these colours have long
vanished.
The principal colours used appear to have been red,
black, blue, and the “ life-giving ” yellows and
greens. All these are obtained from ochreous earths.
Scarlet cochineal was obtained from ground insects,
purple from the immemorial purpura, used for ob¬
taining such dye the civilized world over since the
days of Tyre. This last dye was brought from the
Pacific coasts.
Even the New Empire monuments, somewhat more
recent in erection and sculpture than the Old Empire,
bear little trace of the painting which doubtless as
much enhanced their appearance as concealed the
technical deficiencies of architect and sculptor. In
its heyday such a site as Palenque must have glowed
and shone with that fine crudity of colouring much
beloved of inheriting civilizations : Copan one can
imagine a grave city of dazzling statues, not the dead
and rather wearied-eyed titans who now look forth
from the monuments, but startlingly alive and
life-like. Representationalism probably reached its
apogee, with painting and sculpture combined, at the
beginning of that epoch classified by Dr. S. G. Morley
as the “ Great Period.”
Neither do any fresco paintings survive from the
Old Empire times—at least, none that have been so
far discovered. There are fresco-paintings at Tuluum,
in Yucatan, a site occupied at times contemporaneous
with the early Old Empire. But the frescoes themselves
are not contemporaneous, they are comparatively
modern work. Only on pottery, the rare complete
specimens from Nebaj and such-like centres, and the
broken fragments from Pusilha, may the paintings of
the ancient artists be studied with some degree of satis¬
faction. Even so, it may be said that painting was
never an art of its own : it was allied to sculpture, to
pottery, to astronomy, to the calendar, to the script,
an accessory always.
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE QI
As elsewhere in America at the time of the arrival
of the Europeans, the potter’s wheel was unknown in
the Maya New Empire area. Probably it was never
known, in the Old Empire or elsewhere. As a result
the pottery, even the finest, lacks that complete and
symmetrical finish which the revolving wheel under
the potter’s hand gives to his pot as can no use of
mould or accurate and loving hand-smoothing. Maya
pottery has beauty and the charm of all purely handi¬
craft productions. It lacks, however, the glowing
shape and delight of such productions as those of
ancient Greece, and has been zealously overpraised
for a purity of line it cannot, in the nature of things,
possess.
The wheel apart, the Ancient Maya appears to have
had no lack of technical resources. He has left jars,
beakers, and bowls, tripod bowls with cascabel feet,
which may have been either modelled, built, or
moulded, simply or in combination. Decoration is
applied in relief, by incision or engraving or even by
the impress of moulds—a kind of printing. Some¬
times the specimens are glazed, whether accidentally
or not is uncertain ; so is the actual method of baking
the pottery. Some kiln-method appears to have been
used in producing the finer specimens for religious
and ceremonial purposes. But ordinary household
pottery was doubtlessly, in the Old Empire as in the
later New, baked in the open air under a heap of
glowing charcoal. Various kinds and qualities of
paste were in use—an extremely gritty variety for
the simplest domestic utensils, finer for the cere¬
monial bowls, the two categories roughly correspond¬
ing to the probable methods of firing. Apparently
the great pottery region of the Old Empire was
Pusilha, where, as previously noted, fine pottery has
been found in great quantities in a site with crudely
and carelessly built temples and “ palaces.” Indus¬
trialism even in a minor form knows no ruth.
The general colour of the pots varies from red to
pale yellow. Brown in its varying shades occurs,
92 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
black is rare, blue and green unknown. And upon
these surfaces, turning from the religious complexi¬
ties of existence, the Maya painter and sculptor and
potter—possibly in some instances the same person,
probably in others three different craftsmen—re¬
corded with a considerable degree of representa¬
tional skill the everyday life of his time. A cylindrical
and almost perfectly-preserved vase from Nebaj is
justly famous. Figures in breech clouts and cere¬
monial hats stand and squat in black outline, with
explanatory glyphs that unfortunately to us explain
nothing. One figure with folded arms records antique
Maya scepticism in a pleasing and effective way. In
an art and culture that set its face towards recording
fear and the more horrific emotions, humour never, and
complete human dignity only at Copan and Quirigua,
this ironical scepticism is as pleasing as would be the
never-discovered smile. The body colours are in red
and yellow, and perspective is conveyed not by
shading, but by line alone, and with a considerable
success.
If literature is an art, we can say nothing of its
quality in the Old Empire. Probably it was confined
to the purpose of sheer record of fact. Pottery apart
(rated here as an art for the purpose of considering it
in alliance with painting), the ancient sites have left
few impressive examples of the minor arts. They
were accessories : and time has shorn away the
accessories. In a consideration of the practical
sciences the reader must turn to filling in the outline
around that shadowy and uncertain theme, the life of
the man of the Old Empire.
vi. The Sciences in the Ancient Sites
The most outstanding scientific achievements of
the Old Empire Maya, as the monuments record
them, were in astronomy, and, in a related degree, in
mathematics. To this achievement a subsequent
section is devoted, for it may be said with great truth
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 93
that Maya intellectual life was the Calendar: what¬
ever its original inspirations and divergences, on that
calendar ultimately all the intellectual energies of the
race appears to have been narrowed. If sculpture
and painting and architecture were all handmaids of
religion, religion itself was little more than a decora¬
tive fringe on the calendrical codices, even as that
calendar itself found practical foundation and reason,
there is no doubt, in the science of agriculture. This
was its expression not only in the lives of the common
people, but in that of the ruling-caste, which, of
course, depended for its existence on an ever-more
certain supply of cultivated foodstuffs.
But of that agricultural method and science we
know nothing directly, unless through a few doubtful
glimpses on lintels or painted potsherds. The forests
have crept up over the great clearings that once sur¬
rounded the cities and have long devoured all traces
of the giant maize plantations that must have kept
these centres in being. Throughout this considera¬
tion of the cultural life of the Old Empire Maya the
attempt has been made, as far as possible, to dispense
with unreliable analogies from the life of the New
Empire Maya. But it is necessary to note now the
agricultural method practised in Yucatan at the time
of the arrival of the Spaniards, and, indeed, practised
extensively in that area even to-day.
This was crude and simple in the extreme. The
same piece of land was cultivated for only two or
three years on end : at the end of that period it
either became exhausted or the growth of thorny
scrub made it extremely difficult to re-clear for a
fourth annual sowing. Accordingly, a new piece of
ground might be chosen, or one which had lain fallow
long enough to have recaptured its ancient virtues.
The Mayas then banded themselves in groups of
twenty or so and set to clearing a patch for each
individual in the group. First the minor trees,
bushes, and the like were cut down and gathered in
heaps. Large trees were partly burned as they stood,
94 THE conquest of THE MAYA
and then felled. As soon as one patch of ground was
thus perfunctorily cleared, the farmers passed to
another patch, finishing operations by mid-March or
thereabouts. By this time the felled jungle was
crackling dry and ready to be burned. This was done
in early and mid-April.
By the end of April, as the calendrical accounts
foretold, the rains came. Prior to their coming the
clearings were ploughed and sown. The term plough¬
ing is euphemistic. The farmer plodded back and
forwards the clearing with a bag of maize and a
primitive hoe—generally a stick, sharp, with its head
hardened in fire, or occasionally made of stone or
copper. This he inserted and twirled in the ground
at fairly close intervals, and into the hole strewed
from the sack a few grains of maize. There was no
harrowing. The farmer, in the method of a dog with
a bone, covered the seed by tamping over the hole in
the. earth with his foot. When harvest came the
grain heads were plucked and carried away in
baskets.
This is agriculture at its simplest—the method still
used not only by the Santa Cruz Indians but those
Amerindians with clearings in the Amazon forests.
It is probably the agricultural method of the Archaic
men of America. The Question of how far it repre¬
sents agricultural science in the Old Empire will never
be settled. First analogies suggest the impossibility
of such method, without any other fashion of turning
the earth, without any method of manuring it apart
from the. detritus of the annual fires, as being im¬
possible in some Old Empire sites. Uaxactun and
Tikal, to judge by their appearance, had at their
apogee each a population of a million or so grouped
round the great temple-complexes. Palenque, if there
is truth in its nine-miles area of ruins, may have had
half a million inhabitants. With the agricultural
method described, the maize plantations would not
merely have surrounded the cities : they would have
made of the ancient site one gigantic plantation, tree-
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 95
less, pushing its milpas into the sea and across the
Tehuantepec neck. Further, in the area round Tikal
we must picture not a planned growth, but a strag¬
gling waste of primary and secondary fields, half
under new jungle, half cleared and sown.
It seems improbable that the ruling caste laboured
to such extent to perfect the most gigantic farmer’s
almanac ever in use for an agriculture capable of no
more than this. The mountain laboured and pro¬
duced a furtively under-nourished mouse.
But we have seen already that there is a consider¬
able divergence between the Maya’s apparent ability
in mathematics pure and mathematics applied. This
is true of architecture and perhaps was true of agri¬
culture. Chichen Itza, when the Spaniards landed in
Yucatan, is reputed to have had a population of a
quarter of a million. Even allowing for the usual
exaggerations, it had possibly one of a hundred
thousand. Yet there is no record of this gigantic
city, or the large cities in the vicinity, being fed by
other means than those described. Exhaustion of the
soil through this wasteful method of husbandry is, as
we shall see, one of the theories advanced to account
for the “ desertion ” of the Old Empire, when the
dated inscriptions ceased on the monuments.
Maize was doubtlessly the groundwork of economic
life. Wheat, oats, barley, rice, were unknown in the
New Empire region, and possibly (though not
certainly in the case of rice) unknown in the Old
Empire. This American staff of life was gathered
from the fields and stored in huts, possibly stone-
built ones in the Old Empire. As each quantity was
required it was shelled, and then soaked in a solution
of water and lime, rinsed in clear water, and ground
in a stone mortar with a primitive stone pestle, or
rather roller, rounded in the middle, tapering at the
ends. In the process, as mortar and pestle were of
comparatively soft stone, much grit must have
become mixed with the paste : dentistry in neither
New nor Old Empire was probably entirely decorative
g6 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
in consequence. From the ground maize a dough
was produced, and the cook might then enter upon
an exhibition of his or her culinary skill. Pots and
a griddle were the sole cooking utensils. Fermented,
maize also made a strong intoxicant.
Next in importance came cacao, the ancient
chocolate, sedulously if inefficiently grown in the
plantations, the beans roasted and mixed with condi¬
ments to make the ancient sustaining drink. In the
New Empire these beans served as money. Other
beans and a fair list of vegetables were also grown,
sweet potatoes and tomatoes, and numerous fruits
had been more or less domesticated, plums, pears,
papaya.
But apart from representations of the maize plant
and the so-called water-plant, the Old Empire sites
are silent on these matters. The technique may
well have been higher : it certainly could not have
been lower. Cotton, the agave Americana, must
have been grown in plantations outsizing those of
the maize, for this is the obvious ground-fabric of
the many decorated dresses. The gorgeous feather-
work mantles and head-dresses of the rulers argue
the domestication of the macaw, the quetzal. It
was certainly domesticated later. Maize and plant-
food apart, the ancient Maya no doubt hunted deer,
perhaps kept them domesticated. If so, it was their
only domesticated animal, apart from the dog.
Dogs, bred, fattened, and gelded, were greatly prized
food-dishes among the New Empire Maya.
Dr. Gann has advanced the theory that there was
probably intensive cultivation around the ancient
sites. If this means that the cultivation methods were
on a higher plane of technical efficiency than those
of later and modern days, he is at divergence with
most contemporary Americanists ; and it is difficult
to understand how any advance above the primitive
methods of the Archaic men could ever have been
mislaid, whatever degeneration set in. On the other
hand, it is possible that some series of rotation of
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 97
crop—maize one year, mandioc another in the same
patch, may actually have been worked. Confirma¬
tion of such a theory would go far to explain the
mystery of how the ancient cities were fed, and for so
long as in the Peten region—resisted with apparent
success the wordy theories of “ soil-exhaustion ”
which have been so sedulously foisted upon them.
Architectural science has already been dealt with,
in a consideration of Old Empire art. Their other
feats of what may be described as civil engineering
have vanished from sight under the forest detritus.
Pusilha is an exception. There still stand the stone
abutments of a bridge over the Pusilha River, raised
by the ancient inhabitants. Abutments are in a
good state of preservation : the bridge itself has
vanished. Probably it was of the same order as the
Incaic—-grass and fibre slung between stone supports,
a dizzying and harrowing method of passage from
a modern view-point. But the antique Maya were
probably an unqueasy people. No roadways such
as those in Peru, or that which stretches from Coba
to Chichen Itza in the New Empire, exist, though both
of these are contemporaneous with the Old Empire
in dating. Probably the Coba-Chichen road was
an exceptional feat, like the stone monster of Quirigua
or the stucco decoration of Palenque, and a source of
pride to the two municipalities. The great towns of
the triangle, so far as they communicated, may have
done so largely by canoe or merely by forest tracks.
Cotton growing and the elaborate dresses repre¬
sented in the statuary and the wall-panels have
already been referred to. Wool, of course, was un¬
known, so the dresses must have been made, as they
appear to have been made, from cotton or the fibre
of cactus and aloe, gathered wild. It has been
suggested that much of the material of the loom was
fibre from the perennial tree-cotton. Messrs. Blom
and Le Farge in their 1926 expedition into Central
America, discovered in the cave near Comalcalco the
only fragments of Old Empire textiles so far recovered.
gB THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
They are of a coarse cotton cloth—apparently
cultivated cotton.
Spindle whorls, of pottery, have been recovered
from the excavations, and presumably the loom was
as simple as the spindle, and of the same character as
that employed in later times. It was of horizontal
pattern, one end of the warp secured to an upright of
convenient height from the ground, and the other to a
belt on the body of the weaver himself. From this
simple frame it is probable that the magnificent
tapestry-like ceremonial robes of the Old Empire
were produced, if not in blood, at least in much sweat,
for the cloth-strips could but rarely have had a
breadth much over a foot, and in the case of giant or
intricate patterns the problem of weaving the pattern
on several strips, to dovetail when sewn, must have
required considerable ability and concentration.
Maize may have been kept in great pottery jars,
as in the later Yucatecan cities, or in baskets : some
of the stelae suggest an intimate knowledge of basket-
work, if not of baskets. (The sculptor of the intricate
pattern on Stela J at Copan was surely acquainted
with basketwork, and saw that his women were
acquainted with it also. But here again is the
possibility that the design was as ceremonial in
significance, and as lacking in applicable relevancy
to his actual everyday life, as the rites connected with
the divine drink of milk practised by several North
Amerindian peoples.)
Stone carving and stone working are inseparable
in consideration. Constant mention has been made
of the generally accepted fact that the architectural
building and the sculptural efforts were carried out
with the aid of stone tools only. This, as Mr. Hyatt
Verrill has made clear, is open to doubt through the
best test of all. Stone tools, nevertheless, were ob¬
viously greatly in use. The sculptures themselves
when they represent weapons seem almost invariably
to represent stone weapons.
The heads of the spear-shafts which uplift the
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE gg
head of the Gorgon in the “ Temple of the Sun ” at
Palenque are obvious flint heads. And from the
excavations a multitude of stone implements, of
various styles and degrees of technique, have been
recovered. 1 he victim’s heart at sacrifice was ripped
from his chest with a Solutrean blade. Neoliths and
palseoliths of almost every conceived technique
exist, in flint and obsidian : conceived, not con¬
ceivable. There is nothing that might not be paral¬
leled in the stonework of Asia or Europe a score of
times, in spite of the multitude of ways in which
flint and chert may be worked.
The chert was possibly the secret of the Old
Empire’s lack of metals. For the ruins have a
supreme lack. Only two or three copper implements
have been discovered, and these of negligible size or
utility. The Old Empire Maya had apparently the
technique of copper production at hand : he laid it
and its laboriousness aside in favour of the plentiful
chert for weapons and the like, greenstone for chisels
and mauls. Obsidian (volcanic glass) also provides,
by pressure, long flakes, thin and narrow, making
excellent skewers, knives, and what not. Maya
domestic table-ware was no doubt of this material,
excellently adapted for dealing vigorously with his
victuals when one of the antique priests sat down to
a meal of hot dog.
The ruins say nothing of any other type of metal¬
work, unless the ear-plugs of the great figures of the
statues were of copper, as no doubt they occasionally
were. Copper and bronze as material for the making
of knives, axes, and chisels became common in the
New Empire at a date only (there is good reason to
believe) a century or so after the datings on the Old
Empire stelae had ceased.
vii. Script and Calendar in the Ancient Sites
In 196 b.c., Ptolemy Epiphanes, the ruler of
Egypt, promulgated at Memphis a decree which
100 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
was no doubt extensively copied in various materials.
Unlike any other decree of which we have knowledge,
however, this at Rosetta was inscribed on a slab of
basalt trilingually. The topmost inscription is in
hieratic characters, the old, priestly hieroglyphic
writing of Egypt; the middle inscription is in
demotic or enchorial writing, the modification of the
hieratic in use among the laity; and the lowermost
legend is in uncial Greek. Time passed. The
Rosetta Stone was buried from the sight of men. The
centuries smoothed away from the face of Egypt all
knowledge of how to read the antique characters
inscribed on the walls of tombs and the surviving
papyri. A multitude of theories flowered, urging this
and that method of reading the hieroglyphics, urging
them as unreadable, until, in 1799, Champollion
discovered the trilingual basalt slab now in the
British Museum. With this complete, or almost
complete key, the science of Egyptology may be
said to have secured a firm foundation.
Mayology has no such concrete basis in its inter¬
pretation of the Mayan script, the calculiform glyphs.
It is generally denied, in spite of the deposition of
Bishop Landa and others, that the glyphs conveyed
more than items of calendrical or mathematical fact.
About half of the known inscriptions on the monu¬
ments can now be translated, and that half is ex¬
clusively concerned with the permutations of the
calendar and its marching adjuncts of gods, rites, or
simple religious ideas. But of the remainder of the
inscriptions, in spite of confident assertions to the
contrary, it seems unlikely that the majority are
calendrical.
They possibly name, with the brevity of the
Chilan Balaam records, this and that event or
happening of importance which took place within
the time-period commemorated. Some of them (the
“ cartouche ” calculiforms) are almost certainly
personal names, on the analogy of the much cruder
script of Ancient Mexico. Indeed, most of the
101
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE
glyphs appear to have been ideographic : they por¬
trayed an idea, directly, not through the medium
of a number of arbitrary signs, as with an alphabet.
But it is also obvious, as careful scrutiny has revealed
to many scholars, that phonetic-writing and rebus¬
writing enters into the script. It is a medley: it
probably conveyed little more than hard fact, and
that with great brevity. And from first to last, to
judge both by the monuments of the ancient triangle
and of Yucatan, it did not advance from that picture¬
writing, semi-phonetic phase. It flowered: and
the flower remained and bloomed, and finally died,
leaving no seed of a more comely or vigorous offspring
in methods of communication.
Landa's Relacion, as stated in the introductory
sections of this book, supplied the key to the inter¬
pretation of the calendrical sections on the monu¬
ments. With the beginnings of that interpretation it
was discovered that the civilized inhabitants of the
great triangle had in their possession one of the most
remarkable mental instruments ever fashioned. In less
florid language, they were the possessors and manipu¬
lators of a remarkable farmers' almanac. That the
measure of this achievement was greatly exaggerated,
and continues to be exaggerated, by Americanists, is
understandable. Assuming its growth from a culture
which was autochthonous, as they believed, yet so
sadly lacking in many of the essentials of a homo¬
geneous civilization, its effect upon students of
American antiquities was unbalancing. Even to-day
such statements as that the Maya were the first to
invent a sign for " zero ” continue to be made. The
Maya invented no such thing. But they built up
from very mixed origins a system of notation clumsily
efficient, and a system of daily, seasonal, and yearly
calculation to which the same term may be applied.
The sign for zero and the principle of varying the
value of the numeral according to its position was in
use in India as early as a.d. 500 (42)- The actual
figures are many centuries older, descendants of the
102 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
famous “ cave-numerals/’ which supplanted the
more antique arbitrary signs in which perpendicular
and horizontal strokes were employed, in clumsy fore¬
running of our present shapely notation.
Maya numerals were expressed on the monumental
inscriptions by three different series of glyphs:
Normal glyphs, the current method of computation,
a kind of demotic ; Face glyphs, arbitrary heads
of gods or mythical beings, a priestly hieratic;
and Figure glyphs, with bodies attached to the Face
glyphs—hieratic itself in feather-hat and priestly
vestments. In the Normal numerals, 5 was expressed
by a horizontal line, units below 5, or above one or
more multiples of 5, by single dots. Owing to the
peculiarities of Maya dating presently to be explained
the highest numeral on the inscriptions is 19—three
horizontal lines and four dots. The figure o, the
much-praised Zero, occurs as a coefficient to month-
signs and in the various periods of the Long Count of
the Calendar, and is expressed by means of at least
three grotesque symbols, neither Normal nor Face
numerals, the grotesque head held in an open hand
being the most common. To represent the numbers
11 to 19 in the Face count, a fleshless jaw, the symbol
for 10, is added to the numbers 1 to 9.
As ours is the decimal, the Maya was a vigesimal
system, the same in essentials as that prevalent in
various regions of Eastern Asia. This fact domi¬
nated its calendrical calculations. That calendar,
a gigantic almanac for agricultural purposes, not
only made clear the recurrences of times of sowing
and reaping and worship, but dealt with a vast and
elaborate structure of superstitious astrology imposed
upon the agricultural life of the great cities.
There were two Maya years, running concurrently,
a ceremonial year of obscure origin and of 260 days,
and a “ normal ” year of 365. The ceremonial
Tzolkin was composed of twenty day names, the days
combined with the numbers 1 to 13. These days
and numbers marched side by side, in uninterrupted
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 103
procession, returning to their beginnings at the end
of their rounds of 20 and 13 respectively. This gives
the root essential of the 260-day calendar: the lowest
common multiple of 20 and 13 being 260, the same
name and number might commence the concurrent
run over again only at the end of this period. Thus:
Names of days Cycle of thirteen
in 20-day month numbers
Imix .... 1
Ik .... 2
Akbal .... 3
Kan .... 4
Chicchan ... 5
Cimi .... 6
Manik .... 7
Lamat ... 8
Muluc .... 9
Oc . . . .10
Chuen . . . .11
Eb . . . .12
Ben . . . .13
lx . . . . 1
Men .... 2
Cib . . . . 3
Caban .... 4
Eznab .... 5
Cauac .... 6
Ahau .... 7
Imix .... 8
Ik .... 9
and so on, the 20 days of the “ month ” continuing
to overlap their numerical attachments. A remote
analogy to the Tzolkin is the Gregorian 52-week
calendar, each week with seven days, each unit of
the week identified by a distinctive name, Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, etc. But the advantage of the
Tzolkin was that a number accompanied each day-
sign which definitely placed that day in some position
in the “ year ” of 260 days.
104
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
The Tzolkin has, of course, little relation to solar
time. This was supplied by the Haab, the year of
365 days which ran concurrently with the short
divinatory calendar. The days of the Haab were
divided into eighteen named sections, of 20 days each,
and one section of 5 days. This last was (in Yucatan
and later in Mexico) the famous “ unlucky ” five
days. In accordance with the whole bent of Maya
chronology, which dealt with only elapsed time, the
twenty days of each of these sections were numbered
not from 1 to 20, but from 0 to 19—the unlucky five-
day period o to 4. The names of the eighteen
period “ months ” in the Haab were :
Pop
Uo
Zip
Zotz
Tzec
Xul
Zac
Ceh
Mac
Kankin
Muan
Pax
Kayab
Cumhu
Uayeb (the‘'un-
Yaxkin
Mol
Chen
Yax
lucky ” five days.)
Haab and Tzolkin, as has been said, ran concur¬
rently. But the Haab contains 105 days more than
the “ sacred Tzolkin.” Therefore the positions of
the days in the Tzolkin were each year a hundred
and five positions further in advance than those in
the Haab. As 5 is the highest common factor of
Haab and Tzolkin, the same combination of day
number, day name, period number, and period name
can only return after 52 years of 365 days. This
fifty-two year period, the calendar-round or lesser
cycle, appears to have played much the same staple
in Old Empire chronology as the century in the
Gregorian.
But in order to distinguish one day from another
over very long periods, for the calculations they
considered necessary to set the date on any of their
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE
105
monuments, the Old Empire Maya reckoned onwards
from a day 4 Ahau, 8 Cumhu, remotely 4000 years
(in our chronology) before the birth of Christ.
Setting up a stela and dating it, or the event of
importance which the setting-up commemorated,
the Maya calculated forward the number of days
from that remote 4 Ahau 8 Cumhu. These elapsed
days in long periods were divided thus (Kin being
the word for day and also for sun) :
20 Kins
18 Uinals
20 Tuns
20 Katuns
20 Baktuns
1 Uinal
1 Tun
1 Katun
1 Baktun
1 Pictun
A little calculation will show that a Pictun num¬
bered 2,880,000 days, over 7000 years. Naturally,
datings employing the Pictun seldom occur, the
initial date referring to some remote mythological
event analogous to the Mosaic creation of the world.
This was the Maya long count, and Mr. T. A. Joyce
gives a clear explanation of how it was employed on
the monuments :
“ In a Maya time count, it must be remembered,
the unit was the single day, and any complex numeral
represented a sum of days grouped in periods corre¬
sponding to the numerical system above described
[the vigesimal system] . . . Consequently, a Maya
day count, expressed in a Maya ‘ Initial Series . . .
in the terms 9 cycles [Baktun], 14 Katun, 19 Tun,
8 Uinal, o Kin (usually written for convenience
9.14.19.8.0.) as on Stela A at Copan is worked out as
follows :
9
14
19
8
o
X
X
X
X
X
144,000
7,200
360
20
1,296,000
100,800
6,840
l60
1,403,800
106 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
a total of just under 3846 of our solar years with their
recurrent ‘ leap-year ’ days.
“ This was the so-called ‘ Long Count ’ of the
Maya, and such an Initial Series was invariably
followed by a day and month [period] sign with their
accompanying numerals. Thus, in the instance of the
particular inscription cited, the count is followed
by the calendar-round date 12 Ahau, 18 Cumhu ” (n).
Nor did this play of days into cycles and great
cycles exhaust the Maya fertility in calculating
calendrical time. Lunar and Venus counts were also
employed. For example, were the current moon four
days old on the day the inscription commemorated,
this was stated, also the moon’s position in a five-
or six-month period, and the details of whether this
current moon were of 28 or 29 days duration. The
Venus count came from observation of the synodical
revolution of that planet—the period elapsing
between its successive reappearances above the
horizon as the morning star. This period is the
length of the Venus year, but it is improbable that
the Maya, calculating that period with great accuracy
as 584 days (it is really 583.92), realized the fact: it
is extremely improbable that they had any know¬
ledge of the planetary motions round the sun. Once
in 104 years the Venus count of 584 days, the
calendar-round count, and the Haab count coincided to
a day, thus forming an effective check on the ^terres¬
trial ” calculations. Neither fractions nor (naturally)
decimals were known to the vigesimal system of the
Maya, or at least they appear to make no use of such
on the inscriptions, and the error accumulated by
using a 584 day period for the Venus count, when it
was actually a 583.92 period (as they were evidently
aware in some measure, though not in these terms),
was corrected by omitting four days at the end of
every sixty-one year grouping of Venus years, and
eight at the end of every three hundred and one
Venus years.
Besides sun, moon, and planet, it is possible that
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE IO7
the Maya further checked their calculations by
observation of the fixed stars, and that further
elucidation of the glyphs will give proof of this. The
Haab is only 365 days in length, therefore the Maya
system, having no leap-year, gradually crept ahead
of the true year. But the Maya mathematician-
astronomers were aware of the fact, and calculated
the error by making use of the coincidences of the
moon with the tropical year over long periods. For
very long any knowledge of intercalcation was
denied to the Amerindian civilizations, but the
researches of Dr. John Teeple (42a) in particular have
put the fact beyond doubt.
In the majority of monumental inscriptions the
initial dates recorded are even Katun endings, or
fractions of a Katun, Lahuntuns (10-Tun period)
and Hotuns (5-Tun period). This is because of the
system, particularly noted at Piedras Negras, of
recording the passage of every Hotun with a monu¬
ment. When the initial date does not record an
even Hotun, the inscription is carried forward by
additions to the Hotun that marks the date of the
dedication of the monument, as in that cited from
Copan.
The question of the correlation of Mayan and
Christian (Gregorian) chronology has never been
settled satisfactorily, and is too long and complicated
to be posed afresh in such outline as this. . As we
shall see when we deal with the New Empire, the
authenticity of the various “ Katun counts in the
Books of Chilan Balaam is exeedingly doubtful,
and it is on calculations from the “ counts in one
or other of these Books that most modern systems of
calculation are based. I he Bowditch, Spinden, and
Goodman correlations respectively equate q.o.o^o.o.
with 94 b.c., a.d. 176, and a.d. 436. All three
correlations rear up, like inverted pyramids, from
different and disputed points in Late Maya chron-
oloev and all three rather shadow than lighten the
Maya scene. Throughout this book the system
108 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
followed is that first suggested by W. Lehmann
(43), one of the most skilled and competent of
Americanists, whose correlation would lead to the
tentative equation of 9.0.0.0.0. with a.d. 700.
This brief account of the complicated and inter¬
locking systems of calculation used on the ancient
monuments^ is, so far as the names for the days and
° month ” signs are concerned, based on those sup¬
plied by Landa’s Relacion. As yet research has been
over-busy in disentangling the calendar meanings
themselves from the inscriptions to attempt disen¬
tangling their origins. And, in spite of much facile
affirmation to the effect that the Maya recorded these
innumerable calendrical inscriptions for religious
reasons and agricultural reasons, it is difficult to see
how either religion or agriculture called for such
immense outlay of intellectual and physical labour.
The Tzolkin, as we shall see later in our account of
New. Empire life and customs, was certainly a cere¬
monial calendar, it revolved with lists of feasts and
fasts, planting times and reaping times, through the
lives of the people even as it revolved through the
52-year Calendar round. To check its aberrant
revolutions, the 365-day year, the Haab, was an
elementary necessity of a primitive agricultural
people. Observations of the sky, the sun, the moon,
even of Venus, were no doubt good and fairly simple
and obvious checks for the Mayas to use upon the
Haab. But the immense and ponderous super¬
structures of cycles and great cycles and great-great-
cycles, the practice of erecting every five or ten
years a stone to commemorate the passage of that
period, has no obvious relevance to any agricultural
or economic necessity.
Had the Maya civilization grown up alone and
apart from the civilizations of the rest of the world,
had it even had an initial impetus from another
civilization and then proceeded itself to " climb the
ladder of culture/’ either the calendar would have
remained at the level of the economic necessities of
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE
109
the time, or calendar and economic life would have
ascended together. But it is evident from many
evidences already cited that there were a multitude
of unassimilated strands of culture in the Old
Empire civilization. Of these the calendar is the
most strange. Its essentials are simple : its ampli¬
fications are closely paralleled, up to the system of
the calendar round, by the “cycles” of time
in use in Eastern Asia, as Humboldt discovered
long ago in his study of the kindred Aztec
Calendar (44). Time cycles seized on the imagina¬
tions of many peoples, from the Greeks to the
ancient Hindus : they were, once the uses of the
economic life were satisfied, the natural surge of
wonder in a people finding themselves in the posses¬
sion of an exhilarating mental instrument. Never¬
theless, there is nowhere such apparent divorce
between the physical groundwork of his civilization
and the theoretical attainments of his mathematics
as there is in the case of the Maya.
There is no good reason to suppose that the
“ evolution ” of this calendar required the centuries,
or even thousands of years, which some Americanists
ascribe to it. Agriculture learned or assumed, the
Haab is inevitable. Peculiar local conditions create
the Tzolkin, unless it also is imported. Certainly we
can assume that the vigesimal system, together with
the elements of notation, came from the same
trans-Pacific source as supplied the esse^.tials °
architecture and much of the sculpture-motif.
“ cave-calendars ” of India place this beyond much
doubt. Contrary to a very general assumption, it
is also probable that the Haab was the earlier time
measurement: the Tzolkin most likely came out out
of the seas with a later incursion of immigrants
A curious light is thrown upon the life of the times
when the great monuments were erected by the fa
that many miscalculations, inside the framework of
Maya chronology, are recorded on the monu^^s*
These miscalculations, obvious to our eyes, sugg
no
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
several interesting possibilities. First, that the
sculptor who carved the inscriptions had generally
no knowledge of their meaning: he was no more
than a labourer, in spite of his excellent technique,
probably copying from a manuscript prepared by
the priestly astronomer-mathematicians. On the
other hand, in Eastern Asia, and all the lands
influenced by the religious thought of India, there
is fear of the perfect creation exciting the jealousy
of the gods. One makes a mistake as one makes a
libation, a mark of human inferiority and fear. Both
explanations of the mistakes are probably true, and
both are unfortunate witnesses against the autoch¬
thonous origins of Maya culture.
. Dr- Joh.n Teeple’s researches in the matter of
mtercalcation have already been noted. In studying
the hieroglyphics of the lunar count, he finds that
there was, in early times, a diversity of method in
writing these glyphs. The sculptor carved the same
glyph, but with a recognizable individuality in each
city. Like the Amerindian artists who have carved
the elephant from hearsay, the early sculptors of
inscriptions all sought to carve the same symbols,
but did it without a commonly accepted standard
ot size and twist and height for the symbol. But
later there followed a Period of Unity in the ancient
sites, when the supplementary glyphs were carved,
Irom Palenque to Copan, Copan to Uaxactun, in
exactly the same fashion. Later still, in what
Dr. Teeple calls the Period of Revolt, the supple¬
mentary glyphs again show a diversity of method in
the various sites.
Further intensive research along the lines followed
by Dr. Teeple may result in throwing some light on
the history of that period which brought to an end
the dating of the monuments, and possibly—though
not probably an end to most of the intellectual
activity in the great sites.
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE
III
viii. Religion in the Ancient Sites
Culminatingly, in this outline of the cultural
elements which comprised the civilization of the dwel¬
lers in the Maya Old Empire, their religion as recorded
by the monuments and the temple-walls requires a
short description. Nothing whatever is known directly
about either their gods or their religious system, though
details of apparent rites of sacrifice and propitiation
are met with from the dedicated altars of Uaxactun
to the wall-plaques in Palenque’s Temples of the
“ Sun ” and “ Cross.” All the names applied to the
gods are either names used by the New Empire Maya
for their deities, or such clumsy christenings as those
which modern students apply to figures on the monu¬
ments and codices—the long-nosed God, the death-
God, God B, and what not. This is to recall by a
shadowy burlesque that pantheon of beings which
doubtlessly moved, terrified, or inspired the antique
Maya.
Their civilization was based on that agricultural
system and ritual which had risen in America with
the coming of the Archaic explorers. It is reasonable
to assume that the basis of Maya religious life was
concern with the crops and seasons, and with the
deities which controlled them. Principal of those
deities, as elsewhere the world over, was the Sun.
But intermingled with that inter-continental sun-cult
were Earth Gods and Fertility Gods and their
worship, a wash of reminiscence and legend of the
life, the fate and activities of the First Irrigator on
the Nile, and the rites which had been celebrated to
revivify him and pass on his revivifying power to a
successor of his blood. Upon this structure, largely
the rite of inducing divinity upon an earthly king
that he in turn might bring divine magic to bear upon
the fields and bring them to yielding, all Archaic
religion was up-built. In each new country of Asia
and Europe the essential rites came in time to be
overlaid with a multitude of new ceremonies, there
112 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
was a weeding and transplanting and re-naming, a
dividing or coalescing of celestial attributes. New
civilizations uprose upon the Archaic foundation and
spread their influences far and wide.
Yet in the Asiatic and European countries the rise
and ebb of the new culture-waves observed a certain
time sequence. The Pacific knew no such law. It was
the final receptacle of hosts of gods, yet alive and
strong as they breasted its waves, but forgotten
shadows in the lands of their origin. With obtrusive
details of sculpture and architecture we saw that the
area of the great triangle contained the Babylonian
ziggurat, the Indian makara, and the winged disc of
Ancient Egypt. Those fantasies and imaginings of the
mind of the Old World were separated in conception
and birth by great stretches of time : but in the
triangle of the Old Empire they seemed capable of
life in cities and sites contemporaneous one with the
other. So it seems to have been with the gods and
the religious systems.
On the monuments are carved certain figures
(generally as decorative adjuncts, forming portions
of glyphic blocks and so forth), which, from their
likeness to figures protrayed in the Dresden Codex of
the New Empire, are labelled “ gods ” by the modern
investigator. This is to miss out the ingenious
theorizings regarding the great statue-like figures
which dominate some stelae, like that of the famous
H at Copan.
A predominant figure on the monuments is that
being whom modern investigators call variously the
Long-nosed God, the Rain-and-Earth God, and Chac
(from Yucatecan tradition). With some reason he is
compared to Tlaloc, the Rain God of the Mexicans,
who had a similar lengthy nose. He emerges from a
convoluting overlay of symbols as a hideous figure—
with few exceptions the deities of the monuments, if
deities they be, are unhandsome figures—with a
curved and pendant nose, a protruding tongue, and
vigorously gesticulating hands and arms. In the
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE
113
Dresden Codex he walks with a thunder-bolt in his
hand. Uningenuous commentators of the older
school, alarmed at the length of this god’s snout, so
suggestive of an elephant’s trunk, suggested it was
modelled on the trunk of the tapir. But tapirs
possess no special
ferocity, such as
this God obviously
does: neither have
they the remotest
connection with
agriculture. The
long-nosed God
has a very close
connection, an
interesting meta¬
morphosis for the
son of Shiva.
For a comparison
of the attributes
and appearances
of the Indian god
and the Mayan
can leave but little
doubt that the
latter is at least
the stepson of the
former. Elephant¬
headed Ganesha or
Gana-pati, the Son
of the Destroyer,
that stout and
malignant being
who ruled over the demon-kingdom and all its
malignantly stirring inhabitants has here, across the
Pacific, very naturally changed into the Rain God.
It is an understandable and uncomplex meta¬
morphosis. Controlling the celestial demons, Gane¬
sha, in his journeyings across the Pacific, came quite
naturally to control the results of the playful celestial
THE
ELEPHANT-HEADED GOD
CHAO
(Indra-Ganesha.)
(From the Dresden Codex.)
H
114 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
activities of these beings. Were all other of the dark
Maya gods and dark Maya historical epochs as easy
of elucidation, Mayology would be robbed of half its
excitement.
Nor need there be much difficulty in identifying the
bright Maize Spirit, of whom a statue comes from
Copan, and who is represented elsewhere and numer¬
ously as a young and
commanding pre¬
sence, with the early
Indra of Hindu
mythology, the
conserver before he
became the philo¬
sophical destroyer.
That he represented
for the Old Empire
Maya the maize god
is by no means
certain, but he may
well have done so,
through an inter¬
linkage of a cause
and effect clear
enough. Another
deity with a fairly
clear paternity is
the monkey-faced
God. Who has not
met him in the
Hindu Hanuman?
To a half-dozen more deities of the monuments no
such clear ancestral origin can be traced. The Sun-
god, so called, the Gorgon-like grinning face with the
filed teeth and lolling tongue, is a frequent figure on
the monuments, owing for one reason to the fact that
his head is a variant for the single-day period—the Kin
sign. He it is who is portrayed on the shield before
which stand the sacrificing priests in Palenque’s Temple
of the “ Sun.” An heritage of an older and darker era
THE HINDU MONKEY-GOD HANU¬
MAN AS A MAYA DEITY
(From the Dresden Codex.)
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 115
than that of specifically Indian influence, he was yet
to remain bright in the minds of the Maya, when
other and more ephemeral gods had faded or were
sternly tamed to mundane affairs. Among the more
obvious and recognizable of the other deities is the
death-god, also nameless, a grinning skull, a malignant
skulk
The rites of the Old Empire theocracy appear to
have included a provision of skulls to the gods. For
long it was denied that the Maya had indulged in
human sacrifice, at least in the Old Empire ; and this
unpleasant custom was blamed upon the later Toltec
who, as we shall see, invaded the New Empire. This
denial was based upon a misconception of the purpose
of sacrifice, or the degree of culture at which a people
acquired or shed the rite. It was no necessary sign of
barbarism. And it was closely linked with agri¬
culture, the propitiation of the sun and earth gods by
means of blood. From that connection it naturally
spread out and presently blossomed into a necessary
rite at multitudes of celebrations, feasts, fasts, com¬
memorations, and what not. Ultimately, in Aztec
Mexico, long after the heyday of the Old Empire
Maya, it led to such gruesome holocausts as the
sacrifice of 70,000 captives at the dedication of a
single temple. . „
It seems improbable that Old Empire human sacri¬
fice ever approached, in number of those sacrificed,
such proportions as Aztec. But it is evident, in the
skulls recovered from the hollow altars in the city 01
Uaxactun, that there also temples were dedicated
with sacrifice. An altar at Tikal is carved with a
design of human heads in bowls—heads of miniature
Ganeshas, as the sacrifices assumed the divinity of
the god. And at Piedras Negras there is a stela which
bears a representation of the actual rite of human
sacrifice—the victim stretched across a sacrificial
block, his chest expanded, and blood fountainmg in
the gash from which the heart has been plucked.
Again, the commonest of glyphs—those of the Full
Il6 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Figure numerals, for example—show various bodies
in tormented situations and positions.. Agony was
the tribute that humankind paid to divinity.
One of the lintels at Menche-Yaxchilan shows a
corpulent and richly-dressed figure kneeling in front
of an even more podgy individual who bears in his
hands a foliated staff with which he may be either
threatening or blessing the kneeling figure. The
surrounding glyphs give no clue, for they are un¬
interpreted. The kneeling figure grasps in his two
hands a cord, or rather, a rope, set with thorns, and
protrudes his tongue. Through a hole in his tongue
he is drawing this cord, presumably as an act of
sacrifice or penitence. It is a grisly scene, such as
suddenly bares again the grinning face of the death-
god behind the fine pomp of ceremony exhibited on
the Copanec altars or the stuccoes of Palenque.
ix. Origins Reconsidered
A summary of the evidence of the monuments of
London or New York in ruins would possibly supply
an investigator with exceedingly erroneous views on
many matters of Atlantic culture : it would certainly
supply him with little insight into the lives of the vast
mass of the people who inhabited these cities, or,
apart from their ceremonial appearances, the lives
of the priests, scientists, and rulers. Indeed, an
irreverent side-glance upon the results of such an
investigation might find the figures on a frieze, in
conventional Graeco-Roman costume, described as
representative of the London or New York prole¬
tariat, and the unauthentic togas and sandals as the
dress of these days! Least of all would our monu¬
ments tell definitely of the racial origins of the people
who reared them.
In considering the monuments of such a civiliza¬
tion as that of the Old Empire Maya, however,
the case is fortunately narrowed, together with the
margin of error. It had complexities enough,
BAS-RELIEF FROM MENCHE—YAXCHILAN.
DRAWING A THORN-SET CORD THROUGH
(Old Empire)
A PENITENT
HIS TONGUE
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 117
but its sculptors seldom appear to have been called
upon to portray more than three types which can be
definitely regarded as representative of three distinct
and different races.
These three racial types seem portrayed (i) as the
tall, handsome, undeformed, haughty, or pensive
rulers on the stelae at Copan and Quirigua; (ii) as the
ordinary, dominant individuals, with deformed heads,
on the stelae and stucco of all the other sites; (iii) as
the minor, serf type, also, though not always,
addicted to head-malformation—a type already in¬
stanced as the human supports for the feet of the
sacrificing priests in Palenque’s so-called Temple of
the “ Sun,” and to be found elsewhere in crouching
and subject attitudes on the sculptured monuments
over the entire area.
As seen from the preliminary survey of the theories
which seek to trace the origins of the Maya people,
nearly all the theorizers identify the Maya people
with the Maya civilization. But the evidence we
have adduced from the sites demonstrates that a
large part of this civilization, all its important
cultural basis and many entirely decorative ad¬
juncts, was imported from Asia and Oceania. What¬
ever the origin of the Maya people of the Old Empire,
that origin is connected only remotely with the origin
of the area's antique civilizers.
So far from forming peculiar pockets in the Mexican
territory to the north, and occupying the Central
Americas only with a solid majority, it seems possible
that most of Southern Mexico as well as Central
America was originally inhabited by tribes of Mayance
blood and speech. At least, there are legends of origin
for all Mexican tribes but the Totonac, the Zapotec, and
the Huaxtec—the first and the second of whom are
“ Mayoid.” All other peoples in Mexico of non-Maya
speech had definite legends of migration from the
north. None of these migrations appear to have
taken place much before the sixth or seventh Christian
centuries, and possibly most of them took place much
Il8 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
later. Therefore, accepting the correlation of Chris¬
tian and Mayan calendar entertained in this book, we
must conclude that at the time of the rise of the Maya
civilization (from the beginning of the 8th cycle on¬
wards), Maya tribes had settled the country from the
Panuco Valley to the borders of the present Republic
of Honduras—all tribes in the Archaic state of
culture. Individuals of those tribes very possibly
bore a close resemblance to category (iii) of the types
depicted on the monuments, and also, though in a
lesser degree, to Type (ii).
Somewhere early in the 8th Cycle or late in the
7th, incursions of explorers, and finally definite pro¬
spectors and colonizers, began to enter the Central
Mayan area, in search of the surface gold so thickly
scattered in the Peten and Usamacintla area, in
search of pearls and precious stones. These new¬
comers found many settled sites, and settled there
themselves or reared fresh settlements and set up the
marks of their characteristic civilization. They were
full-blooded Asiatics, small in numbers; they bred
and intermarried with the native population till, in
a generation or so, they disappeared as a type. But
they were remembered (or fresh comings supplied the
models) and stand portrayed on the Copan and
Quirigua statues as the racial aliens they were.
This, of course, is supposition. The monuments,
having awakened our curiosity, are as silent on this
matter, in the way of interpreted inscription, as on
most others which we would like them to treat con¬
clusively. No one, however, can resist the conclusion
that the prevailing types at Palenque and Copan were
racially alien to each other. Further, there is a differ¬
ence in dress and accoutrements, in Copan and Quirigua
the head-dress has the flowing uniformity of a people
concerned greatly with seemliness of line. In Yaxchilan
and Palenque head-dress and dress sprout in a florifera-
tion of unattached and uncomely feather-work. Both
these northern sites, as we saw, are later in the time-
scale than Copan, though not than Quirigua, which
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE
119
may well have been a cleruchy of Copan. That they
were sites imitative of Copan, though developing their
own characteristic art-forms, is a conclusion forced
upon one ; just as is the supplementary conclusion
that the alien civilizers had died out, or become
merged in the higher strata of the native population,
before these northward emigrations were attempted.
The Archaic civilization which the new-comers
supplanted and transformed in such degree, had,
nevertheless, we must assume, its own theocracy and
civic rulers, its own Children of the Sun regarded as
divine. With these the new-comers would naturally
have interbred j to these they would have imparted
fresh tales and legends of the world beyond the Pacific,
the stories of the great Brahman gods, the stories of
the makara and the serpent-bird ; these they would
have initiated into the mysteries of temple-building
on gigantic scale, perhaps even attempting the true
arch, and themselves passing, leaving the native
architects to the simplicity of the corbelled ; m con¬
junction with these they worked out a native record-
script and a native calendar, even as did Hindu
colonizers in conjunction with native ruling castes in
many a tract of Indo-China and many an island ot
Indonesia. This is the ordinary method of script-
creation, and went on in post-Columbian days. A
Cheroki Indian in North America, who had seen the
books of the white man, was led thereby to devise
an elaborate mode of writing for his own country¬
men, and the curious syllabary invented by the Vei
negroes by one of their own tribe had the same
In other words, the founding of the Maya Old
Empire was not the work of the ancestors of the
present-day Maya, either of the old triangle or of
Yucatan. It was an alien importation from that
ferment of cultural activity which reared the palaces
and temples of the Chams an^Khl7ers/vCamR?1H1nr
which inspired the Buddhist Temple of Voro-Budur
in Java and the Temple of Kalasan.
120 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
It is interesting to note the why and how of these
trans-Pacific influences reaching ancient America at
the time they did. About the middle of the fourth
Christian era one of those great cultural renaissances,
founded on economic change and prosperity, came
into being in India, the inauguration of the Gupta
epoch. In the words of Professor G. Elliot Smith,
" The Gupta period witnessed the highest expression
of art in India. Its influence spread far afield, to
Ceylon and Burma, to Siam and Cambodia, to China
and Japan. . . . This great wave of cultural renais¬
sance swept not only along the whole Eastern littoral
of Asia, but also passed by way of the islands of the
Malay Archipelago (in particular Java) into the wide
spaces of the Pacific Ocean. The small islands of
Micronesia, Melanesia, and Polynesia were able to
seize and retain only a small contribution from the
rich stream that flowed across Oceania. But that
stream carried to Central America, Mexico, and the
Pacific coast of South America the inspiration for the
marvellous civilization of the Mayas and Incas, which
reached their fullest expression between the sixth and
twelfth centuries a.d ” (40).
Diffusion of Indian culture (intermixed with other
elements) into Cambodia between the third and
twelfth centuries awoke a native art and civilization
into being. For example, inscriptions for long were
made in Sanscrit; presently these gave place to in¬
scriptions in the native Khmer, just as, remote in
Indonesia, on the verge of Micronesia, the Indian
systems of writings stimulated the creation of native
scripts, such as the Battak, even among the antique
peoples but slightly affected by the passing of the
great culture wave. In Cambodia the immigrant
Hindu mythology suffered certain changes : the in¬
scribed memorials and monuments make it clear that
Ganesha, the elephant-headed god, was regarded as
the chief of the pantheon, though Vishnu was also
highly venerated. Angkor Thom and Angkor Wat
were dedicated to Vishnu in a.d. 825. Beyond
The Gorgon’s Head, Athens (Greece)
The Gorgon’s Head, Syracuse (Sicily)
TRANSPACIFIC DIFFUSION OF A SCULPTURAL MOTIF BASED
ON A GREEK MYTH
(After Imbelloni)
RISE OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 121
further India, in Indonesia, there were early two
religions in being—the Brahman system and the
Buddhist, here and there allying into and degenerat¬
ing into a single system. Brahman was the earlier,
and its cultural influences the earlier that flowed out
into the Islands and the dark continents beyond.
A fine dark confusion of influences must be noted,
though it is impossible
here to do more than note
them. But they prove
how valueless is the
criticism that the civil¬
ization of the antique
Maya cannot be wholly
Cambodian in origin
(which has never been
claimed) because it fails
to reproduce the Cam¬
bodian civilization, art,
and architecture in every
feature. It might be
urged similarly that
Cambodian cannot be
Indian in origin because
of the fact that Cam¬
bodia was not a minor
India. But, “ at the
time when the early ex¬
ponents of Brahmanism
advanced to China,
Buddhism had also taken
root in their native land, being then considered
merely a special variant of the belief in the old
gods. Hence, with the transmission of Brahmanism,
the seeds of Buddhism were undoubtedly sown in
Indo-China. As Buddha himself was received into
the cult of Vishnu as being the incarnation of this
god, so, during the flourishing period of Brahmanism
in Champa and Cambodia, his images were erected
and worshipped within the temples dedicated to Siva
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE
ELEPHANT-HEAD DECORA¬
TION ON STELA B AT COPAN
(After Maudslay and Elliot Smith.)
122 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
and Vishnu. Buddhism advanced to Indo-China
by two routes. The first of these lead straight from
India and Ceylon to the opposite coast. . . . Sub¬
sequently, however, the Northern or Sanscrit develop¬
ments of Buddhism had advanced to further India
by way of Central and Eastern Asia ” (46).
Even greater was the intermixture and counter¬
mixture in Indonesia and Micronesia, their fusion
sweeping eastwards before it in a tidal flood even
older elements of culture, Persian, Babylonian,
Egyptian, till it broke in successive waves on the
coasts of the Central Americas.
IV
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD
EMPIRE
i. The Dated Inscriptions Cease
IT is now necessary to set down a short summary
of all the evidence that bears upon the life and
fate of that civilization that came to being in
the Central American jungles over a thousand years
ago. For this purpose it seems legitimate to abandon
the practice of calling in only the evidence of the
monuments, and to presume that the records and
traditions of the Maya New Empire of Yucatan, as
well as those of the Quiche and Kaxchiquel of
Guatemala, bear intimately upon at least final
phases in Old Empire history. But it is also well
to reiterate that the Old Empire itself, in its
records that stand imperishable in stone, tells us
nothing whatever directly about its history. No
Old Empire Herodotus, far less an Old Empire
Thucydides, tells of the play of the usual trilogy of
battle, murder, and sudden death in the great
triangle, or if tells he does on some stela inscriptions,
it is in a barbaric utterance to which our ears are still
unattuned.
To return to the witness of the ruined cities: if we
are to accept the history of each site as beginning
and ceasing with first and final dated inscriptions,
some fine confused history results. Some of these
results have already been noted: others must now
be tabulated.
Put briefly, Uaxactun, the oldest site, founded in
8.14.19.13.15., 8 Men 8 Kayab (a.d. 592), was deser¬
ted 571 years later in a.d. 1163. Tikal, its Twin City,
founded 9.0.10.0.0. (a.d. 709) was deserted 424 years
later, in 10.2.0.0.0. (a.d. 1133). Copan was founded
in 9.1.0.0.0. and deserted in 9.18.10.0.0. (a.d. 719-
1064). Palenque was founded in 9.10.10.0.0. (a.d.
897) and extinguished a little over half a century
later, in 9.13.0.0.0. (a.d. 956). Inside the great
123
124 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
triangle the multitude of sites had an exceedingly
haphazard longevity according to the evidence of
the inscriptions. They need not be pursued in the
figures of Maya chronology. Ocosingo was occupied
for 260 years, Piedras Negras for 187, Mench^-Yax-
chilan, (no inscriptions) 140 years, Quirigua 65 years,
Seibal 118 years, Benque Viejo 20 years, Flores 40
years, Quen Santo 5 years.
By 10.4.0.0.0. the area of the Maya Old Empire
was apparently completely deserted.
Humanity loves tragic effects in reading of the
history of antique peoples. Archaeologists and
historians share the common passion. In spite of the
fact that they constantly reiterate that there is no
very obvious connection between the dates on the
monuments and the actual dates when the cities
were abandoned, every writer on the subject assumes
that, more or less, abandoned they were around the
time when the dated inscriptions cease. A good
example of this romantic-historical obsession is shown
in a paper written some time ago by the present
writer:
“ In 9.19.0.0.0., Piedras Negras in the north,
Uaxactun in the east, and Quirigua in the south,
separated by almost the entire surviving stretch of
Old Empire territory, the guardians of the surviving
triangle, were extinguished. Naranjo went next, in
9.19.10.0.0. Of the whole Empire only Seibal and
Tikal were left. . . .
" This list of dates, the hour-strokes for the death
of the great pre-Columbian culture, is amplified by
no direct historic data whatever. But by 10.2.10.0.0.
. . , the entire Old Empire territory had presumably
been depopulated ” (47).
The present writer then went on to consider the
question of why this depopulation took place, coming
to the tentative conclusion that there were two
distinct races in the Old Empire territory, and that
one overthrew the other. He romanticized in good
company. Dr. S. G. Morley (20) believes that the
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 125
entire Old Empire stretch was abandoned, and left so
abandoned, for eight hundred years. Dr. T. Gann sees
a wholesale exodus of the population, obeying the
commands of their priests. Mr. T. A. Joyce (17) is the
tentative protagonist of a<f Toltec ” invasion, driving
the Old Empire citizens from their homes. A general
assumption of desertion of sites contemporaneous
more or less with the cessation of dated inscriptions
breaks through the gravest and most cautious
statements of the older school of Americanists.
This, as has been said, is natural: it has a fine,
tenebrous glow, this picture of the hasting exodus of
a nation from its antique habitat, driven into the
wilds of Yucatan to found the lesser New Empire.
But, as such sites as Copan and Palenque had
obviously a long history prior to the earliest dated
inscriptions discovered, there is good reason to
suppose that some, if not all of the sites had a fairly
lengthy history after the inscriptions cease. Graffiti,
long post-dating the last inscriptions, on walls at
Tikal confirm this. Piedras Negras’ florid sculpture
suggests it. And, as we shall see, other historic evi¬
dences appear to demonstrate the fact that such a
site as Copan may have endured, in a minor way,
until the coming of the Spaniards to America.
But a consideration of the theories which would
explain the romantic abandonment is fruitful, if
only as psychological insight on their various authors.
Dr. H. J. Spinden is explicit:
“ The explanation of the eclipse of all that was
finest in the Maya civilization is not far to seek. Any
long-continued period of communal brilliance under¬
mines morals and religion, and saps the nerves and
muscles of the people as a whole. Extravagance
runs before decadence and civil and foreign war
frequently hasten the inevitable end" (19).
Professor Konrad Haebler appears to agree with
the dread effects wrought by " communal brilliance ” :
“ But prosperity was fatal to the nation. . . . And
so it is intelligible that they went down before an
126 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
external shock, though it was the shock of an
enemy which was by no means of overpowering
strength” (46).
Dr. S. G. Morley more cheerfully disagrees with
the effects that Drs. Spinden and Haebler see in
“ communal brilliance ” :
“ While it is undoubtedly true that flamboyancy
in decorative motives increases steadily during the
Great Period, reaching on the last monuments at the
different cities to an almost bewildering ramification
of detail, it does not follow that the Maya could not
have carried out this extravagance of design even
further if they had had more time in which to do so ;
and, so far as technique, treatment, and the like are
concerned, the latest monument in each city is
technically the best, showing no loss in skill and
proficiency in technical processes to the very
end ” (20).
While the Spinden-Haebler theories may be dis¬
missed as vague fore-mutters in the dawn of the day
which had yet to hear the full-throated bellow of
Dr. Oswald Spengler, assiduously devasting the
planet with theories of cyclic catastrophe, the belief
of Dr. Morley himself on this subject of the desertion
of the sites calls for more attention. He believes, as
do a large number of students of American history,
that the cities of the great triangle were deserted
through the failure of the Mayas’ agricultural system
to feed and support the great populations. Further,
the method, probably as primitive and wasteful
among the antique Maya as among their modern
descendants in Yucatan, gradually exhausted the
land surrounding each city. Populations multiplied,
and the circles of cultivation grew tough mats of
grass and weed impossible for the Maya hoeing-stick
to penetrate. Farmers had to push further and
further out into the jungle bush, bringing more
plantation stretches under cultivation, and in time
finding those stretches also grow barren in their
hands. Ultimately, huge concentric rings of un-
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 127
productive grassland surrounded each city, and
civilization broke down on the problem of trans¬
porting, without the aid of domestic animals, the
produce of the leagues-distant plantations to the
teeming centres. The populations therefore aban¬
doned the cities—the oldest sites earliest since these
were surrounded by the widest circles of unproductive
land—and drifted eastward into Yucatan in search
of virgin territory.
There are certain serious drawbacks to the accep¬
tance of this theory. Firstly, we know nothing directly
of the methods of agriculture in the Old Empire. Dr.
Gann’s Maya, with some knowledge of intensive agri¬
culture, seem much more probable inhabitants than
the plantation serfs digging with the primitive hoe
in the fashion common to later Yucatan. More
seriously, the respective ages of the cities are far from
supporting the theories of soil exhaustion. Palenque,
according to the catastrophic interpretation of the
inscriptions, was abandoned after a bare sixty years
of occupation, Quirigua after eighty-five, Ixkun after
thirty. And, all differences of soil taken into con¬
sideration, it is impossible that that surrounding the
Uaxactun-Tikal Twin Cities remained productive
for four or five hundred years, while that surrounding
Benque Viejo became exhausted in twenty.
Dr. Gann once leant to the belief that the Old
Empire Maya abandoned their homes and set out on
this stupendous eastward and northward exodus at
the command of their priests, and in the fulfilment
of “ ancient prophecies.” He cites, as analogous,
instances of modern Maya tribes suddenly abandon¬
ing prosperous regions for obscure religious motives
and also quotes what has long been thought to be the
classic New Empire example of the “ abandonment-
complex ”—the desertion of the great metropolis of
Uxmal by the Tutuli Xiu, who decamped overnight
to the miserable nearby townlet of Mani. But it is
safe to assume that no people abandons such habitat
as the Old Empire, hallowed as it must have been
138 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
with memories of the greatest triumphs, at least for
the ruling caste, under such compulsion as “ priestly
prophecy.” The priests themselves, town-dwellers to
a man, would have been the first to suffer in such a
migration.
The pestilence theory to account for the supposed
depopulation of the Old Empire with the cessation
of the inscriptions is no longer seriously entertained.
It, also, fails to explain why the cities appear to
have been neither suddenly nor progressively aban¬
doned, but given up haphazard, without regard to
grouping or position. A great pestilence would
hardly have taken a hundred and fifty years, from
9.13.0.0.0. onwards, to sweep the country.
Dr. Ellsworth Huntington (48) is the originator of
a theory of depopulation which also has found con¬
siderable favour among those who see the cities
deserted at the same time as the dated inscriptions
cease. To give this theory effect it is first necessary
to accept the system of correlation of Maya and
Gregorian dates favoured by Spinden, Morley, and
Gann—a system which places the founding of Uaxac-
tun in a.d. 68 and the abandonment of Tikal in a.d.
609. This assumed, Dr. Huntington's climatic hypo¬
theses bear upon the presumed “ abandonment.” F01
he sees, as does Mr. Julian Huxley, solar and sea
changes about a.d. 600 beginning to bring an extreme
of moisture upon the area of the great triangle. Year
by year the rainy season grew longer and the rains
descended in greater torrents. Under these condi¬
tions of extreme wetness the primitive Maya agri¬
cultural system creaked and then collapsed.
This, of course, is a variation of the abandonment
for reasons of soil exhaustion—an apparent reversion
of the first theory, though really complementary to it.
In the first case the soil became too poor, in the
second it became too luxuriant in its growth of jungle
bush. But, accepting the abandonment, as is done
for the purpose in this section, Dr. Huntington is no
more convincing than the champions of the first
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 12Q
theory. There is a difference of some 524 years
between the Spinden system and the system of cor¬
relation adopted throughout this book. The Maya Old
Empire appears to have arisen, not collapsed, at the
time of Dr. Huntington’s supposed climatic changes.
And if the degree of rainfall now is the same as that
in a.d. 600 then the numerous milpas of the present-
day inhabitants ought to be impossible agricultural
feats ; if the degree has reverted to that familiar
before the catastrophic climatic change, then the
once-fertile Peten site of the great Twin-Cities
suffered no more and no less than from present-day
disabilities. One might argue, from the parched sur¬
roundings of Uaxactun, that an entire failure of the
water-supply is more likely than a sudden increase in
the rainfall.
Among other causes used by modern enquirers to de¬
populate the unfortunate area of the Maya Old Empire
are earthquakes, in an area singularly free of them.
For though the Quiche inhabited a portion of the
Cordilleras earthquake belt, the Old Empire Maya
appear to have avoided it deliberately. One may
assume that the alien culture-bringers from Asia and
Indonesia were aware of the effect of earthquake
shocks upon colossal architectural schemes, and
speedily abandoned, or failed to settle in, regions so
affected.
As we shall see, there is no good reason to suppose
any abandonment of the Old Empire territory for at
least three hundred years after the dated inscriptions
had ceased to appear on the monuments. Not only was
there not a great lapse of time—Dr. Morley’s “ 800
years ”—between the abandonment and reoccupa¬
tion of the area, but at the utmost only a hundred
years or so of degeneration and conflict with external
and internal human enemies prior to the coming of
the Spaniards.
130
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
ii. War oy Peace ?
Early students of the monuments, after their re¬
discovery in the forests of Chiapas, Guatemala, and
Honduras, were fond of stating that the Early Maya
was one of the most peaceful of races, and of pictur¬
ing the Old Empire as secure from warfare and its
attendant evils and stimulants. Under the unlimited
power of a theocracy—and theocracies are almost
always peaceful—the Maya civilization climbed the
heights, unique in its progress, carving on its monu¬
ments only matters of scientific import, or unarmed
rulers, or memorials of such congresses of scientists as
were assembled in Copan to alter the great sun-dial
there.
Because this statement is still repeated occasion¬
ally in a loose manner, it might be well to state
that the monuments bear witness to no such peaceful
habits. If the weapons carried by the Copanec
statues were symbolic, we have no knowledge of the
fact. To call them “ ceremonial bars ” is as ade¬
quately explanatory, and about as justified, as to
suggest they were primitive cigar-holders. They
appear to have been weapons.
In Piedras Negras and Menche-Yaxchilan especi¬
ally monuments are to be found of bound and captive
warriors—unpleasantly bound and unpleasantly
treated. These are northern outposts, and probably
mark the occasional raiding and subjugation of un-
Mayan enemies. On the other hand, Palenque and
Ocosingo, lying further to the north and west, and
more open to the attack of enemies emerging through
the Tehuantepec neck, bear no such obtrusive marks
of delight in battle and conquest as the two central
sites.
The belief in the Mayas’ un-warlike qualities was
bound up w th another exploded belief—that they
did not indulge in the rite of human sacrifice. As we
have seen, both monuments and direct discoveries
under altars in the sites completely disprove this.
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 131
One of the great Americanist mysteries, indeed, is
how even the most simple-minded student, far more
the simple-minded archaeologist making a direct
study, could ever have gathered these humanitarian
notions of Maya culture. It was largely a civilization
of fear, a fearful civilization, in many respects an
aberrant civilization.
The Archaic civilizations of the Old World were for
long peaceful civilizations. Organized warfare rose
with the rise of powerful groups of nobility inside the
framework of the state who came to resent the central
power of Sun King and Sun King’s priests. Or it
rose through contact of the Archaic civilizations with
outer fringings of peoples whom they neither subdued
nor civilized, but raided and despoiled. In time these
outer peoples retaliated by arming themselves with
the weapons and methods of the civilized Archaics,
and triumphantly invading their territory, as the
Celts fell on Archaic (“ Neolithic ”) Europe. Victims
in the human sacrifices were infrequently at first
captives of war: they were selected and honoured
members of each individual community.
To come upon evidences of human sacrifice, there¬
fore, is not to come upon conclusive evidence that the
sacrificers were members of a warlike race, capturing
and sacrificing slaves. Yet (such being the shrinking
of human flesh, antique or modern, from personal
pain or agony inflicted on those intimate to one) this
sacrifice of slaves or the lowly in place of the semi¬
divine sun-children was a natural growth. Warfare
helped it or caused it.
Which species of sacrifice was employed in the
Maya Old Empire ?
To begin with, the Maya Old Empire was well
beyond the culture of the Archaic horizon, as the
new historian applies that term to the Old World.
Though of mixed origin, a fusion of many Asiatic
and African and Indonesian strains, the civili¬
zation that washed against Central American
shores in the early part of the sixth Christian
132 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
century, and penetrated in search of metals and
power into the Central American triangle, was
mature and probably blase in many ways. Warfare
was known to the civilizers : gods who delighted in it
and in sacrifice (substitute-sacrifice) they had brought
with them from Cambodia and Java and the lesser
islands. If ever there was an early cohesion, pre¬
dating the monuments, among the Old Empire cities,
it probably fell to pieces very quickly. By the time
the theocracy of mixed invader and Maya chiefly-
breed was raising the stelae and altars and decorating
the panels and lintels, the period which Dr. John
Teeple calls the Period of Independence had set in.
Later followed a Period of Unity, and finally, towards
the end of the recorded inscriptions, a Period of
Revolt.
This suggests that the sacrificed heads under the
Uaxactun altars, for instance, were the heads of
captives from rival cities, just as it suggests that the
captives depicted at Piedras Negras may well have
been raided from Palenque or Menche-Yaxchilan.
Certainly all such captives are of Maya stock, with
the head characteristically deformed. The Tikal altar
carved with a design of heads in bowls may have been
an altar actually in use for the sacrifice of enemies—
perhaps from the Twin-City which apparently
founded Tikal.
Even so, a final conclusion eludes us. As we saw,
one of the predominant Maya deities was a Mayaized
Ganesha, the Elephant-Headed God who in Hindu
mythology was the son of Shiva the Destroyer, and
who in Cambodia and other of his eastward halts in
his journeying half round the earth appears to have
acquired many of his father’s characteristics. Now,
the heads in bowls on the Tikal altar have Ganesha’s
features, suggesting that the sacrifice was made in
honour of that tenebrous God, whose parent in his
native home appears represented circled and draped
with skulls. But these skulls, in India, further-
India or the Islands, were by the sixth century merely
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 133
symbolic, and human sacrifice as an actual rite laid
by. Apart from the actual pitiful heads excavated
from under the Uaxactun altars, a great deal of the
sacrificial sculptures may represent merely symbolic
acts.
Still, the Maya encountered by the Spaniards in
Yucatan used living and concrete symbols and carried
out rites bloody and realistic enough. Were these
rites and customs, which necessitated the seizure of
captives in war, inherited from the Old Empire un¬
changed, or were they the degeneration, from symbol¬
ism into bloody practice, of the religious customs of
a people ?
Though such question remains perforce unsettled,
the weight of evidence seems to conjure up a picture
of an Empire in its early phases an Empire only
culturally: politically, it was divided into many
small states ; later still these states may have been
united, forcibly united, under some central power,
perhaps a league of the Peten cities. Later still, that
league fell apart, and political hegemony ceased
around the time when the dated inscriptions also
ceased to be carved.
iii. Old Empire Historical Fiction
Mendacity is not only the child of research, but (to
mix the metaphor) the cement of history. The
imaginative interpretation of puzzling, dazzling, or
inexplicable personalities or epochs in history by
poets and story-tellers is both legitimate and useful,
as much for the light it throws on the psychology of
the artist as for the fresh light his mendacity throws
upon history. Early fiction of a historic type, indeed,
seems to have been of serious grain and intent: the
story-teller either believed implicitly in the child of
his imagination, or conceived that this child would
add moral or other benefits to the particular com¬
munity in which he told the story. This may be seen
134 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
in the semi-sacred literature of Greece, Egypt, India,
Sumer, Samoa, and the Maya New Empire.
Historic fiction with a bearing on the life and
history of the Old Empire is practically non-existent.
Nothing comes from that area—at least, as yet
nothing, though future research among the modern
Lacandone and Mopan Indians may alter this. But
the barbarous Maya tribes in the highlands of Guate¬
mala, the Quiche, and, to a less extent, the Kaxchi-
quel, preserved various legends and traditions which
at one point—the mention of the kingdom of Xibalba
—may touch upon the Maya Old Empire.
The Quiche were subdued in 1524 by Cortes’ lieu¬
tenant, Alvarado. They possessed a close kingship,
some architectural science, religious practices analo¬
gous to those of both their Nahua neighbours and
their distant New Empire relations. But they pos¬
sessed neither the script nor the calendar of the Old
and New Empire civilizations. There is therefore
warrant for believing that such high elements of
culture as they possessed were either a driftage and
seepage from the Maya Old Empire, or original
elements left in the passage through their country,
gold-seeking, of the Asiatic civilizers who built that
Empire.
Shortly after the Spanish Conquest a Quiche Maya
wrote in Latin lettering, but in his own language, a
collection of legends and traditional histories which
he called the Popol Vuh—The Book of the People.
Undergoing various vicissitudes, and, like Landa’s
Relacion for a time lost to the sight of men, the
Popul Vuh was translated into various European
languages and the information contained in it
extensively used as a tool to interpret the life and
manners of the antique peoples.
The larger part of the earlier portions of the
narrative may be passed over here. The creation
story, decorated and elaborated, is that creation
story common to all the ancient world of the Archaic
civilization, with deliberating gods, with wicked or
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE I35
unsatisfactory humankind, with avenging floods and
new creations. At the end of these numerous celestial
experimentings, the sun rises at last upon a world
which had been in complete darkness. This is, one
recognizes, the coming of the culture of the sun-god.
Most of the minor details of this creation story can
be paralleled the world over, and merely add fresh
proof to the evidence already gathered of the common
cultural basis of the Old and New Worlds. For these
creation legends (almost the same creation legends)
were found in antique America from the borders of
Chili to the borders of Wisconsin—wherever the
antique rites, and with them agriculture, had spread.
But the more interesting portions of the narrative
are concerned with the fabulous adventures of two
brothers, Hunhunahpu and Vukub Hunahpu, and the
former’s sons, respectively Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
Hunhunahpu and Vukub are experts at the ball-
game presently to be described in another chapter.
So are the rulers of the Kingdom of Xibalba. This
kingdom is spoken of as a remote and gloomy place,
the abode of the dead ; or perhaps only the abode of
dread. Those rulers invite the two elder brothers to
play a match at the ball-game. The two brothers
accept the challenge, set out, and in time come within
the gloomy borders of Xibalba.
Here (somewhat surprisingly), once they have
entered the dark palace of the Xibalban rulers, they
are put to a series of unkind tests which appear to
have little relation to the proposed ball-game. But
the two brothers are unsurprised. Sport pastimes
called for endurance in those days. The Xibalban
hosts appear and invite them to be seated. The
brothers sit down, apparently on benches, and dis¬
cover that these are red-hot stones. Surviving this
somewhat unsettling reception, they proceed onwards
into a further chamber, the Tenebrous Place. Here
the Xibalbans follow up their inhospitable reception
by seizing the two brothers and slaughtering them,
decapitating them, and burying the bodies.
136 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Hunhunahpu’s head is depended from the stem of
a calabash tree. In that gloomy world of Xibalba
one is apt to make visual mistakes. The hanging
head resembles a gourd, and the strolling Xibalbans
will assemble under it unwitting the dead, but still
sentient, Hunhunahpu overhead. At last, some time
after the killing of the two brothers, a daughter of
one of the Xibalban rulers rests under the tree.
Casting its eyes upon the woman, Hunhunahpu’s
head expectorates in her hand. Expectoration was
always one of the favourite pastimes of the Americas.
But the action of the head of Hunhunahpu was
not one of contempt. Shortly afterwards the Xibal¬
ban woman finds herself pregnant. Death will
await her if that interesting physiological state, then
as now apparently called her “ condition,” is dis¬
covered. She decides to escape from Xibalba and
carries out her escape, emerging from the gloomy
kingdom into the bright “ land of the living.”
Arrived at the home of Hunhunahpu and Vukub,
she discovers the mother of the presumptive father
of her children still alive. In that home she presently
gives birth to twins, Hunahpu (who lacks a syllable
of his father’s name and is not to be confused with
him), and Xbalanque.
The twins grow up, as mischievous and daring as
are most heroic children in antique legend. The
world is by then afflicted by three earthquake gods,
giants, whom Hunahpu and Xbalanque overcome
through the force of their superior magic. But one
day they hear the story of the end of their father
in the Gloomy Land of Xibalba. They also discover
some discarded ball-game equipment which had
belonged to Hunhunahpu and Vukub, and practise
assiduously until they are experts. So qualified,
they set out for Xibalba to revenge the deaths of
the two elder brothers.
In the entrance hall of the Xibalban palace are
seated a variety of figures, some made of wood,
some human beings. The Xibalbans are evidently
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE I37
aware of their coming, and the test is that they
must know which figures are alive, and which in¬
animate. This they discover by despatching an ant
which stings each of the figures in succession. Stung,
those animate cry out; those inanimate preserved,
presumably, a wooden silence.
Next, they are ordered by the Xibalbans to gather
great blossoms protected by heights and thorn-
brakes. Again they summon the ants to their aid,
leaf-cutting ants which bring them the blossoms.
Test number two also has been passed triumphantly.
The third is one which jolts the modern imagination.
They are each given a cigar, and told they must pass
the night in smoking, but in the morning still have
the cigar alight.
This difficult feat the twins perform by catching
fireflies during the night and attaching them to the
ends of their cigars. Seeing the glow, the Xibalbans
conclude that the cigars are alight. In the morning,
when they come to inspect the results of the test,
they find the cigars still satisfactorily unconsumed.
They accordingly institute a fourth test: this is for
the twins to pass the night in a horrific residence,
“ The Long House of Bats.”
This Longhouse was inhabited by a species of
bat of peculiar ferocity. They destroy any human
being who enters the portals of the gloomy mansion.
The story conveys an eerie enough atmosphere here :
it is a macabre gem. At first the twins save them¬
selves by hiding in their blow-pipes—either reducing
their size by magic before seeking such refuge, or else
by being bearers of extraordinary pipes. But after
the long hours of the night, Hunahpu tires of the
vigil and pokes out his head from his blowpipe
to see if there is any sign of the dawn. Thereat a bat
swoops down and slices off his head with a despatch
similar to that of the blackbird which assailed so
grievously the maid hanging out the clothes in the
garden of European fairy-tale.
The consequences were more grievous for Hunahpu.
138 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
But the resources of the twins are still unexhausted.
Xbalanque secures a tortoise shell, affixes it on his
brother’s shoulders, thus presumably stopping the
blood-flow. Leaving the semi-dead Hunahpu, he
goes forth from the Longhouse of Bats to engage the
Xibalbans in the ball-game.
But before setting out, we are told that Xbalanque
has arranged for a rabbit to assist. Where the rabbit
comes from is not mentioned: it was probably the
usual conjurer’s rabbit. In the ball-court the rabbit
conceals itself in a crevice near the far end;
Xbalanque strikes the ball in that direction, an
amazing blow; for it shoots down to the far end
of the court. But this was only in appearance. The
scudding dot was the rabbit. The Xibalbans pursue
the rabbit, believing it the ball. While they are
engaged in this, Xbalanque, again inexplicably,
secures the head of Hunahpu which the bats had
carried away.
The twins now escape from Xibalba, and project
new plans for the destruction of its rulers. They
assume the guise of wandering clowns and contor¬
tionists, and gain admittance to Xibalba to entertain
the rulers. By their magic in the subsequent enter¬
tainment, they kill and revive themselves several
times. The Xibalbans become intrigued as to how
this is done. They allow themselves to be killed on
the understanding that they will be revived again.
But the twins, after making the slaughter, refuse the
revivification.
Ultimately, Hunahpu and Xbalanque ascend to the
sky and become the sun and moon.
Even in the simplified version recounted here,
several things are obvious. First, the story contains
many details of the wandering of the dead soul in
the after-life which are paralleled in Hindu mytho¬
logy '> secondly, the story has gathered many
accretions upon its original version, possibly Christian
accretions as well as others. This is obvious from
the fact of Hunahpu and Xbalanque awaiting the
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 139
dawn in a period when no dawn is possible, for the
sun had not yet been created; and thirdly, the
adventures of Xbalanque and Hunahpu are in many
ways a re-enactment of the oldest drama in the world,
especially the incidents in the ball-court. That
drama is the fight for and recovery of the body of
Osiris in Egyptian mythology. It was the foundation
of all drama. In later ages and other countries the
body was dispensed with and a symbol of the head
used instead. From this arose all the early ball-
games. Xbalanque, though the story does not state
so, in recovering his brother’s head during the ball-
game, recovered the ball. High tragedy in the first
settlements of the antique Nile was re-enacted five
thousand years later in the cities of Central America.
But what, if any, light do the fantastic adven¬
tures of the two sets of twins throw upon the history
of the Old Empire ?
Nunez de la Vega states that the Quiche were in
the habit of sending their offspring to the Maya
cities to be “ knighted.” Possibly there was some
such system of training the sons of barbaric chiefs
in the great sites. If this was so, it is not impossible
to see in “ Xibalba” either the Old Empire itself, or
one of its states. It is fairly obvious from the general
context of the story that it is the Kingdom of the
Dead only in a symbolical way—it was a terrifying
place of great buildings, wonder-working magicians,
and giant statues of lifelike proportions and appear¬
ance. Here, possibly, the sons of the barbarian
chiefs had in their training to pass a species of
initiation. Sometimes they failed and sometimes
they rebelled ; in their own country they returned
with stories of their prowess, how they had overcome
the terrible Xibalbans in their own mysteries.
Barbarian boasting may lie at the root of the tale,
but there may yet be a substratum of fact.
In all ages and climes the daughters of ruling
castes in civilized countries and cities have upon
occasion taken barbarian lovers: all ancient romance
14° THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
is founded on such happenings. It is possible that
Hunhunahpu’s paternity was accomplished in an
orthodox manner, and his guilty partner fled the city
to the barbarian hinterlands to give birth to actual
twins,. while the father himself was sacrificed with
such rites as were common to the Old Empire area,
and his head hung up as a warning.
But a great deal more intensive research in the
elements of the Popul Vuh is required before we
can be sure of its origins and references. And even
when these references are historic, one must admit
that they throw but little light on the history and
fate of the Old Empire, unless we are to take the
destruction of the Xibalbans by the twins as the
story of a great raid upon some Old Empire city.
This seems improbable enough. The Xibalbaii
references, if. they apply at all to the Old Empire,
throw some little light on its customs, the ball-game
for instance, and on the power and terror of its name.
iv. The Straying* of the “ Toltec ” Xiu
Reference has already been made to the so-called
Books of Chilan Balaam—the Books of the Tiger
Priests, written in literary Yucatecan (Zuyua), but
in Latin characters. These books were apparently,
in most cases, translated after the Spanish Conquest
of Yucatan from narratives set forth on the papyrus
of the Agave Americana, and in Maya hieroglyphics.
This translation work appears to have been carried
out by priests of the old faith who had learned a new,
if but little more humane and cultured, one : these
converts had command of both scripts, and un¬
fortunately left no account of their methods of
translation.
The celebrated Books came to light in the course
of the nineteenth century, with the general archseo-
logical wakening of interest in the Mayas. They are
not a series of books of one place or library, but
separate and divided and finely confused accounts
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 141
of astronomical datings and tribal history. The one
which enshrines the history of that remarkable family
of rulers, the “ Toltec ” Xiu, is the one with which
this section is concerned. This is the Mani Book.
It opens with the statement that (in the simplified,
if not degenerate form of the old Calendar used by the
Maya of the New Empire) in Katun 8 Ahau the
Tutul Xiu, under the leadership of Holon Chantepeuh,
set out from Nonoual, “ to the west of Zuiva and in
the land of Tulapan.”
If we extend Lehmann’s correlation to the Katun
count, yet take into consideration the numerous
factors weighing against anything more than a
tentative reliance in the “ Katun ” datings, we may
approximate this date to a.d. 700. In other words,
the “ Toltec ” Xiu set out on their march a little
before the first dated inscription was carved at the
city of Tikal.
Nonoual, Zuiva, and Tulapan have been identified
with various portions of the New World. The Abbe
Brasseur de Bourbourg would have Nonoual in
Oaxaca, Toltec territory, and sees Holon Chante-
peuh’s exodus as a drifting raid of aliens into Maya
territory. Such modern scholars as MM. Genet and
Chelbatz substantially agree with their countryman,
but place Nonoual in Acallan, west of the Laguna
de Terminos. Mr. T. A. Joyce, on the other hand,
finds it “ at present unidentified, but almost certainly
somewhere in the Central Maya area.”
The Abb6, believing in a Nahua origin for the
Xiu, concluded that Tutul meant Toltec. It is
certain that long years afterwards the enemies of
the Xiu, the Cocomes and Itzas, in the happy days
of the New Empire with which we have yet to deal,
were in the habit of dubbing the Xiu “ strangers ”
in the sense of the Greek ” barbaroi.” Also, the
later Xiu notabilities themselves seem to have
religiously eschewed the ” Tutul ” from their per¬
sonal names, e.g. Nachelxiu.
But this may no more than refer to the fact that
142 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
the Xius came from the northern portion of the Old
Empire territory. They may have been exiles driven
forth when the early Period of Independence came
to an end in the northern Old Empire. In the New
Empire, as we shall see, the term “ Toltec ” was a
natural term of abuse to apply to an enemy : it was
what Toltecs and enemies were for.
About eighty years after setting out from Nonoual
they settled in Chacnouitan.
Where was Nonoual, in the light of such re-orienta¬
tion of Maya history as this outline has attempted ?
It was probably some northern city, Comalcalco,
Palenque, Ocosingo. As we have seen, the inscribed
datings appear to bear little relation to the actual
date of a city’s founding, and Palenque—say—may
have been founded long before a.d. 897. Then a
Period of Unity set in throughout the Old Empire—
political, perhaps, as well as artistic. If the Xiu were
a group driven forth, or voluntarily going forth from
Palenque, it is safe to presume that they would have
found little lodgment in Maya territory; and the
Chacnouitan in which they settled was possibly one
of the new Maya cleruchies beginning to dot the
Rio Hondo and its confluents. Possibly it was
Tzibanche.
Two hundred years or so after its foundation, the
Tutul Xiu abandoned Chacnouitan. Possibly the
Period of Disunity was returning, and the datings of
inscriptions already ceasing—again a reflex of politi¬
cal change. Of these things the Tutul Xiu records
say nothing. They bring their protagonists out of
the darkness of another 197 years or so with the
laconic statement that the Tutul Xiu “ discovered
[and presumably settled in] Zian Caan ”—another
name for Bakhalal in southern Yucatan.
They then retire the Xiu into darkness again with
a morose brevity. Still marching morosely, we shall
encounter them in the New Empire.
This, if it shines at all on Old Maya history, shines
with a feeble glimmer indeed. But it suggests the
RUINS OF A MAYA “ COLLEGE ’’—THE AKAT ’CIB AT CHICKEN ITZA
(New Empire)
By permission of the trustees of the British Museum
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 143
Old Empire, if not in the travail of catastrophe, at
least sending out new colonizing expeditions. It
suggests, as we have hinted, some connection between
the exodus of the Tutul Xiu and the new period of
Disunity which arose in the calendrical datings in
the cities. Also, that system of dating was nearing its
end. Dating by the short count, the Katun count,
was coming into Maya life.
Further, one gathers the picture of Holon Chante-
peuh as a warrior, a leader of men, the captain of his
tribe. This is no priestly attribute. Did the exodus
of the Xiu, from whatever part of the ancient Maya
territory they came, mark the period of civil warfare ?
Or did possessors of the secular and theocratic
power reign side by side throughout the Old Empire,
the theocrats having full power in decoration of
temples and the like, and so leaving modern investi¬
gators with a notion of an all-powerful priesthood,
which may, indeed, have been never all-powerful,
but severely under the control of a kingly or noble
class ?
v. The End of the Maya Old Empire
Any account of Mayan history and civilization
divides itself naturally into an Old Empire and a
New Empire section. Until lately the terms “ Old ”
and “ New ” were believed to have direct bearing
on the respective ages of the two “ Empires ” (for
the New Empire at least was an Empire only cultur¬
ally, and the Old Empire a political Empire for
possibly only a short period in its history). It was
believed that the Maya civilization arose originally
inside the great triangle. There it blossomed and
grew and developed its culture. Then catastrophe
smote it. By 10.4.0.0.0. all the ancient sites were
deserted. The inhabitants, or the survivors of the
great Old Empire civilization, fled east and west, the
greater body fleeing into the barren peninsula of
Yucatan, as was proved by dates at Chichen Itza and
144 ™E CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Tuluum in the middle of the third Katun of Baktun
ten. Some refugees founded the site of Quen Santo,
remotely in the west, where they lived a precarious
life of five years, until their city was extinguished in
10.2.10.9.0. (a.d. 1143).
The reasons once given for the precipitate flight of
a nation from its early
habitat are, as we saw
in a former section,
entirely inadequate.
There is no evidence
to the effect that
either the agricultural
system failed, the land
was overtaken by
seasons of singular
wetness, depopulating
epidemics raged, or
that the Maya choked
to death of a surfeit of
their own imaginings,
as Dr. Spinden would
have them do. There
is no evidence of a
heart-broken trek into
the wilds of Yucatan,
bearing their gods and
goods and leaving the
great triangle to the
THE so-called maya prowling jaguar for a
“death-god” romantic eight hun-
(Fremti,.D.«tec.to.) dred years.” The Old
Empire Maya merely
ceased to erect dated monuments.
For it is not by any means clear that they ever
ceased to record the dates of the hotun-endings.
These may have been inscribed on the temple walls
in a subject more perishable than stone : Maya
painting has almost entirely vanished from the build¬
ings, except in cracks and crevices. Those great
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 145
blank wall-spaces on the exterior of the Maya temples
may well have recorded the passing of many a time-
period in a manner less arduous, if still as useful or
useless calendrically.
But even this seems largely an unnecessary sup¬
position from what we now know of New Empire
history. Excavation has made short work of the
hypothesis that the New Empire long post-dated the
Old Empire in antiquity. At Ichpaatun in Chetemal
Bay is a stela dated 9.8.0.0.0. (a.d. 857) • Coba in the
north of Yucatan was founded about the same time.
Both were anterior to such Old Empire sites of shin¬
ing fame as either Palenque or Piedras Negras. The
peninsula of Yucatan was not during the Old Empire s
heyday a barren waste : it was probably as thickly
peopled as the great triangle. From stylistic evi¬
dences the eastern section around Coba, Tu uum,
Chichen Itza, was in close cultural relations with the
great Peten cities.
Now, these Yucatecan sites also ceased to date
their monuments about the beginning of the twelfth
century. But the theory cannot be entertained that
because this happened the inhabitants of Yucatan
loaded themselves with their goods and creeds, and,
led by their priests in the fulfilment of ancient
prophecies, fled precipitately from the land (into the
sea, perhaps), leaving Yucatan a desolate waste where
only the cry of the moan-b\xd was to be heard at
night in the great temples, and snakes laired where
priests had pondered. For when the Spaniards
arrived in the country in 1517 they found it thickly
peopled, especially around such sites as Tuluum,
Chichen Itza, and Coba.
Old and New Empire appear to have been almost
contemporaneous, with perhaps the Old Empire’s sites
in the Peten region possessing the claim to the greater
antiquity. And almost simultaneously (or rather, in a
simultaneous haphazard fashion, the fashion spreading
spasmodically from site to site), the Maya cities from
Copan to Coba ceased to erect dated monuments.
K
146 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Mr. T. A. Joyce explains succinctly : “ A feature
of the Old Empire, as remarked above, was the Long-
Count system of recording dates. A distinguishing
feature of the New Empire is the Katun Count. The
latter was a simplification of the former, and the
transition from one system to the other, though
apparently abrupt, was not clean-cut. Clear signs of
dating by the terminal day of the current Katun
make their appearance upon the later monuments of
the Old Empire, and the Long-Count system survived
into the New Empire” (11).
But the most striking feature about this change
over in calendar computation in the New Empire was
the fact that with the short Katun count few dated
monuments were erected. It is a degenerate method
of time computation when compared with the great
mathematical feats of the Long Count. But it is just
as likely to have become the widespread method of
time computation in the Old Empire as in the
New, especially with the evidence that late monu¬
ments bear of its coming. There was no flight of
a distraught populace : they merely changed their
calendars.
Nor, as the New Empire was almost contempo¬
raneous in founding with the Old Empire, does that
Old Empire appear to have been extinguished long
centuries before the New. It probably survived (some
of its cities) for almost three centuries after it ceased
to date its monuments. It is probable that it joined
its cities together to resist vigorously, and with con¬
siderable success, the invasion of the great Toltec
general Axcitl Topiltzin Quetzalcoatl, whom we have
yet to encounter in the outline of New Empire civili¬
zation. Copan has direct mention in the history of
the Spanish Conquest. The region was subdued by
Alvarado round about the year 1524. Six years later
the Maya revolted, led by a ruler Copan Calel, of the
city of Copan. Hernandez de Chaves was sent against
him, besieged Copan, and took it, scattering the Maya
army. Doubt has been thrown on this fragment of
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA OLD EMPIRE 147
history by the assertion that Copan had been deserted
long before the coming of the Spaniards, and that
Chaves’s Copan must have been another and inferior
settlement; further, that the Indians who led Cortes
on his famous march from Mexico to Honduras must
have passed close to the city and yet make no mention
of it. It seems improbable that they would ; and all
Spanish history of the occupation of the region of
the great triangle is fragmentary and elusive. The
Spaniards had none of the feelings of wonder and
curiosity that assail us in looking on these antique
remains. They were in search of treasure of another
kind.
So we close with a picture, tenebrous still, as of a
country and a long historic epoch barely glimpsed,
yet continuous : afflicted perhaps with such epi¬
demics as scourged the New Empire: knowing
periods of unity, knowing wars, the rise and fall of
dynasties, secular-priestly conflicts; knowing, per¬
haps, a gradual decay of astronomical and mathe¬
matical ability, as the abandonment of the Long
Count suggests : but living on side by side and in
fairly constant communication with that region of
Maya history we call the New Empire.
V
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA
i. Footnotes to Caution
BEFORE turning to the New Empire’s cities and
civilization, its stormy years of history, and
its final subjugation by the “ scum from the
sea,” one may pause to seek an answer for the
question which backgrounds like a continuous refrain
all research in the histories of antique time : “ What
did it feel like to be alive in those days ? ”
W. H. Prescott declared that such speculations are
outside the historian’s province. They impair his
dignity, or the dignity of his task. But indeed, they
are his one authentic warrant. How did men and
women live then and die then ? How did they eat
and fear and hope and hate, what did they laugh over,
what did they wear, did a Mayan high priest hold his
jaw and swear in the agonies of toothache or dance
with rage when he dropped a mallet upon his toes ?
Was there fun in the conceiving and begetting of
children, and did the local guard at the local long-
house ever kiss the cook at the back-door ?
Now, to ask these questions is not by any means
to pose unjustifiably and flippantly contemporary
figures and queries against an alien background. The
older school of historians would indeed have con¬
sidered it unjustifiable. Mr. H. G. Wells (49), one
of their most characteristic representatives in the
popularizing class, puts their case succinctly, though
in another instance than dealing with the history of
other times :
“ I have no strong feeling for the horrors and dis¬
comforts . . . sensibilities can be hardened to endure
the life led by the Romans in Dartmoor jail a
hundred years ago, or softened to detect the crumpled
rose-leaf. . . . My ‘ inferiors,’judged by the common
social standards, seem indeed intellectually more
limited than I and with a narrower outlook ; they
are often dirtier and more driven, more under the
148
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA I49
stress of hunger and animal appetites ; but, on the
other hand, have they not more vigorous sensations
than I, and, through sheer coarsening and hardening
of fibre, the power to do more toilsome things and
sustain intenser sensations than I could endure ?
In other words, there is no norm of human sensi¬
tivity and behaviour. The Maya of history were
indeed members of the species Homo Sapiens : but
their thoughts, their endurances, their delights were
not ours. They are figures on a painted frieze,
figures we need neither enjoy nor pity.
It is curious how this shallowest of all forms of
reasoning has held the minds of historians during the
last hundred and fifty years. But the rise of the
historical school of historians has put an end to
these sham-scientific theorizings. No student who
has investigated the innumerable travellers’ accounts
of life among the primitives who still survive on this
planet, or survived until recently (29), can fail to be
struck by the fact that these descendants of ancient
peoples, living still the life led by our own remote
fathers twenty thousand years ago, are singularly
and intimately akin to us in their norm of behaviour.
There is the same standard of love and hate, things
hurtful and un-hurtful, a blow still a blow, pain still
pain, beauty in love, subjective, and beauty in love,
objective. For six thousand years the greater mass
of the human race has dreamed and adventured in
the mazes of civilization, and garnered intellectual
wisdom and much of experience and belief and dis¬
belief. But we are still the essential primitives. The
sacrificers who ripped the hearts from the victims on
the Tikal altars or the legionaries who drove the nails
through the hands and feet of the Spartacist slaves
by the Appian Way are not remote and freakish
aliens, beasts and strange monsters normal to their
day, doing normal acts, abnormalities we have passed
beyond. They were merely, as we are, primitives
enlightened, darkened, upraised or bedevilled by the
codes and circumstances of a civilization.
150 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
The Mayan in an ancient Mayan city was in essen¬
tials the clerk, the labourer, the architect, the
merchant, the clergyman of a modern American or
European city. But from birth to death he was
under the wash of influences and circumstances
differing from those that we and our contemporaries
endure.
Before we seek to build up from these references
in sculpture and script some image of the life that
an Ancient Mayan led, it is interesting to note the
fundamental divergences in material culture between
that possessed by the Mayan of the year a.d. iooo,
and that possessed by ourselves. Firstly, there was
no supply of milk from domestic animals. This bore
upon the Mayan, as, indeed, upon all the peoples of
the American continent and all primitives who
have failed to domesticate cattle, very intimately in
his early life. Apart from breast-nourishment, the
child had no other milk. He passed in early stages
direct to the normal food of adults—generally a hard
and unsoothing food. As a consequence, infant
mortality was probably enormously high. There is
no other lack in Mayan civilization that is so im¬
pressive. To bridge that gap between early mam¬
malian feeding and the food of an adult was the first
feat a young Mayan was called upon to perform—a
rigorous test that neither the child of a slave nor the
child of a noble might evade. Or, if evade it they
did, it led to such curious anomalies (as among the
Keshwas in the Andes), of children being suckled
until the age of five or six, with consequent curious
reactions upon the health of the mother and the
psychology of the child.
The Mayan had no wheeled vehicles, he had no
beasts of burden. All loads were carried by slaves or
servitors or other lowly inferiors. As a consequence,
except when waterways could be called to help, all
journeys were long and toilsome, all matters of
transport of building material or harvest supplies a
crushing burden upon the economic life of a com-
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA 151
munity. To picture the slaves bringing in the grain
to such centres as Tikal is to picture a continuous
and ant-like crawl in the harvesting months.
He had no corpus of medical knowledge in which
to seek refuge or sustenance in times of stress, bodily
or mental. This aspect of life in ancient times is
very generally lost sight of in the. presumption,
inherited from the older school of historians, that
peoples of those times were in some fashion “ differ¬
ent/’ they endured pain better, or they had not
those pains to endure. But indeed that is the purest
fantasy. The Mayan, as recovered skulls and
skeletons show, suffered severely from caries and
rickets. Toothache, what of the staple in his diet—
maize ground in soft-stone mortars with a resultant
spray of grit—must have haunted his life. There
was no relief from it. A thorn entered his foot, and
sank too far in to be recovered by elementary
manipulations. The foot swelled and blood-poisoning
set in. There was no relief, no possibility of operation,
no knowledge that an operation was necessary. So
with a multitude of the accidental injuries inevitable
in human life. And to suppose the Mayan, like
other imaginary ancient, free of diseases to a
great measure is again to enter the kingdom of
fantasy : as we shall see in our survey of New
Empire History, at least one great epidemic swept
Yucatan disastrously. Indeed, one may say that
epidemics were inevitable, for, allied to a complete
lack of knowledge of surgery or medicine, was a lack
of knowledge of even elementary sanitation.
These three essential lacks postulate innumerable
others. But these three were essential: they are
warning footnotes below the feathery splendour of
the priests who parade the stuccos of Palenque.
ii. Morning
From tower and roof-comb of dazzling stucco,
from painted ku and painted pyramid, the sunlight
152 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
dances ceaselessly. Here and there, high against
the sky, rises the smoke from the undying sacrificial
fires, thin pencil-tracings in the windless dawn. It
is the year equating in Christian chronology with
a.d. iooo, the Old Empire is still a political as well as
a cultural hegemony, and the city is Palenque, or
Tikal, Copan or Coba, Chichen or Piedras Negras.
Over all that wide triangle and the adjacent penin¬
sula, the morning has come, a flame and flow over
the irregularly forested lowlands and the bleak-
hilled peninsula, a morning waking the Maya cities to
another day of life.
Round the central complex of palaces and temples,
long-houses and granaries, built of stone and carved
and sculptured, radiate in long, narrow streets the
flat-roofed huts of artisans and slaves, peasants and
lesser folk of the city. Further off still, under the
coming of the sun, plantations of maize, cacao, and
cotton stretch mile-deep to the edges of the forests.
The city lies defenceless, unwalled; only one city
in the whole of the Empire is walled. And now, with
the coming of the sun, from high up on a temple-
pyramid there breaks a monotonous beating on
turtle carapaces, the beginning of the services of the
Gods.
Soon the remote ways shine black with helots
moving out towards the plantations. They are men
and boys, drifting, chattering gangs, descendants of
the folk who crossed the thin land-bridges of the
Behring Straits ten thousand years before. Now,
after a thousand years of civilization, they pass by,
with that thousand years impressed on their faces.
And they are monstrous faces, the heads sloped
and deformed so that the brow is in a straight line
with the nose, the hair shaved or burned off, but for a
scalp-lock, the faces of the men beardless, for they
are of a race that has little facial hair, and when it
appears is scalded off with hot cloths. Some are
yawning, widely and profoundly, some are bright,
these the young, and some, the old, plod on dusty
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA 153
brown feet with tired shoulders, and peering eyes,
the immemorial attitude and plod of the peasant.
And some, the drunkards from the night before,
walk blearily and with splitting headaches.
Each of the men wears a loin-cloth, the ends pass¬
ing and knotting between the legs, and no other
garment at all. For one thing, it is a land where more
clothes are impossible, especially in the morning and
the month of the heats. For another, those folk
wakened to life a moment on the painted frieze of
history, are the serfs and helots. Not for them the
feathered head-dresses of the Masters, the Real Men,
now wakening back there in the long-houses, but
under no compulsion, except the sacrificers, to fare
out into the early chill of the morning.
Remote in the plantations, the maize heads fling
a copper radiance into the sky.
The men have gone. The women in the huts are
pounding maize and suckling their children. The hut
is a single-roofed, earth-floored erection. In this one
a child, three days of age, is about to be initiated to
the first canons of his culture—the creation of that
type of beauty beloved of his civilization. His mother
is laying him face downwards in a lattice-work
basket, and he weeks faintly, like a kitten. So lying,
a board is tied to his forehead, another to the back
of his head, and the two lashed tightly together. The
child begins to scream. It hurts. The mother
soothes it, turning it, and plods on with the work of
the day. That screaming will be almost unceasing
for many months, while the head of the child changes
contour and shape, growing upwards in the prized
sugar-loaf shape. The air in the hut is a thick fug,
the woman and the child smell stalely.
Here is a girl, nearly twelve years old, to-day an
exciting day for her. It is baptism day for herself
and a two-score more, girls and boys, the day when
they enter manhood and womanhood. Her eyes
gleam brightly under her deformed head as she sets
out to the chultune that provides the water-supply
154 THE conquest of THE MAYA
of her section, jar on her head, her body naked but
for one curious adornment. This is a large, open
shell in front of her sexual organs, the ceremonial
shell worn from the age of three until this day shall
be over. After that 
She is nearing the chultune, the underground
water-reservoir, her heels raising a little shower of
dust in the roadway. In front towers the Lesser Ku,
crowned with its temple. Behind that temple rises
now a loud whining and snarling : one of the chac-
priests is feeding the dogs of the Godmen. The girl
comes to the chultune, descends its steps, fills her
jar, and re-ascends. Then, being young, and this her
special day, she loiters, peering towards the Great
Houses at the town centre.
The day warmth is already stifling. The heat
waves dance against the pyramid stair of the Temple
of the Sun. Part of it is still in the process of com¬
pletion, that new rebuilding of a wing which the
Godmen ordered five years before. The girl can see
the brown bodies of the gangs of labourers strung out
like spiders on the topmost steps as they heave at the
great ropes attached to a gigantic block of stone in
the plaza below. That plaza is rapidly thronging
with men and women in this hasting coming of the
sun.
Hunters, armed with flint-tipped spears, pass out
towards the eastward forest, some singly, with nets
flung over their shoulders, and going at a steady trot,
others under the command of a headman. Burdened
porters are already trooping in from the plantations,
bringing the day’s provisions to the long-houses of
the nobles, the house colleges of the Godmen. Loads
of maize and aloe-roots, fruit, and cacao, are borne
in coarse sacks of cotton or packs of deer-hide. Two
of the porters pass the girl. One winks and pointedly
regards her shell-shield, then glances up at the sun.
He knows her and knows of to-day’s ceremony. She
giggles. Her hands grow a little warm in the palms,
looking after him.
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA 155
Shouting and straining, a party of slaves drags a
great block of stone from the quarries across the
plaza to the uncompleted portion of the Sun Pyramid.
They are thin and under-nourished, the slaves, some
of them elderly war-captives, too mean to sacrifice,
some of them Mayas whose creditors have sold them
into temple-slavery. The great stone block is pro¬
pelled forward on rollers formed by tree-trunks
placed in the path of the block—rollers continually
moved and replaced by the more agile of the slaves.
Two Godmen accompany the gang, armed with long
whips of deer-hide. An elderly slave, with an un¬
deformed, outland head, sprawls as he tugs and
strains, and a whip raises a fine blue weal on his skin
with a snick and a crack in the warm air.
The girl’s skin crawls in sympathy.
A merchant is making his way towards the plaza,
accompanied by his two sons and two slaves. They
have come from far, they are dusty and ragged, with
the bales of their merchandise on their shoulders.
Not a man of the city, the merchant, a foreigner you
can tell by his funny tattooing and the whine of his
voice as he swears at one of the slaves who has
allowed the content of his bale to draggle in the dust.
The girl giggles again. The merchant scowls at her.
But suddenly life around and in the plaza almost
ceases.
The merchant and his slaves prostrate themselves.
So do the hunters. The girl, caught, tries to shrink
back into the chultune entrance. Too late. She goes
down flat in the roadway, her shell tinkling. Only
the tugging, panting slaves at the rollers pay no heed
as the sound of the flutes and drums breaks out and
the morning procession of the sacrificing Godmen,
nacons and chacs, marches from the low-roofed
college at the other side of the plaza and climbs the
steps of sixty-feet pyramid of the Sun Temple.
The girl peers at them through her hands. They
are lovely and terrible, the Godmen, painted and
gilded till they seem like moving Gods. They wear
156 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
masks and garments artificially bloated; from the
hair of the chacs, never washed, is wafted the holy
odour of decay, the excrement of the Gods. Some of
the Godmen beat or blow on instruments, others
chant on a high note that verges rhythmically on a
ceremonial hysteria. In front of the procession plods
the Nacon. Ceremonially drunk on balche the night
before, the Godman leader of the Militia, his eyes
and his steps are uncertain. His body is painted
black, his hands hold the sacrificial knife of flaked
chert : he is facing muzzily the lower steps now. The
girl giggles in the dust. If he missed his footing and
rolled off! . . . Behind him two of the Godmen are
leading a dog, bloated, waddling, hairless, for
sacrifice to the God. Dog is very good eating, but
the Gods have said that only the Masters and God¬
men may eat of it, except at the great sacrifices.
Nice to be a Godman.
The sunlight on the painted temples and colleges is
quite blinding. The girl has gone back to her mother,
now spinning in the hut. Below the steps of the Sun
Pyramid a group of idlers and sight-seers loiter, sons
of the Real Men, out of the long-house, the bachelors’
college of the nobles, haughty young men, laughing
and splendid, in fine-cotton loin-cloths and sandals,
their heads crowned with panaches. They are sup¬
posed to be immersed in their studies at this hour,
training for the militia or the service of the Gods.
But instead they frolic about and raise the devil all
over the city.
One trips up a passing slave. He sprawls in the
dust, then gets up, patiently, and resumes his burden.
The young men cackle shrilly, then turn their atten¬
tion to the waddling procession now reaching the top
of the Sun Temple steps. Time there was a new
Nacon, not that old fool: he has never taken the
field in his life, never taken a single captive. The
young men are tired and bored with the long days of
their lives, and a storm is brewing against the cities
of the south. Why pay tribute to the Real Men at
FRONT OF THE SO-CALLED HOUSE OF THE GOVERNOR, UXMAL
Note geometrical motifs of facade-decoration
(New Empire)
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA 157
the Capital ? The city is ours, the sons of the Real Men
who first broke the power of the Godmen who had ruled
the country since the coming of the Sun Children. . . .
All around the top of the pyramid-platform is a
bustle of activity in the hot weather. Sometimes a
sweating mason stops and wipes his face and glances
across the flicker of the sunshine to the plantations.
The roughly-squared oblongs of stone, dragged up
the stairs the previous day, are now being flaked,
polished, and shaped for setting in the entablature of
the walls. Before other blocks, already set in those
walls, stand or squat absorbed sculptors or painters,
wielding the tools of their craft: knives of exqui¬
sitely hard obsidian, chisels of stone, flint borers,
wooden mallets, and here and there one of the new,
unchancy bronze instruments that have come down
from the North. These men are members of the
Guilds of Artificers, neither helots, slaves, nor God-
men ; their power and presumption has been growing
for years. A chac-priest passes through their midst
and is greeted with a scowl and a laugh. Stinking
little butcher.
A mason blinks and curses as his mallet descends
on his thumb. Too much of that pulque in the feast¬
drinking last night.
One of the Guildsmen is carving in stucco a scene
depicting the Head of the Godmen, the Ahkin Mai,
seated on his ocelot-couch, in full regalia, his mouth
opened in speech, his hand extended in the imme¬
morial gesture of benediction. It is a portrait, and
the sculptor treats it with care, he is white-coated
with dust from his work, he is very absorbed. So,
there he sits, the great Godman. Terrible. Godmen
are terrible, though you laugh at the chacs. Now for
the glyphs.
Pegged to the wall beside the Guildsman is a paint¬
ing on agave-leaf of those glyphs and how he must
carve them. He scowls at the painting in deep
thought. That glyph he has often done before, and
that one, and that. Not the next. He has only a
158 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
hazy notion of their meanings. The Godmen demand
that these things be carved, even as the Gods, the
Fathers, demand that you put a left arm here where
it should be a right. Terrible, the Gods, as all men
agree, except that fool, the painter over to the right,
who says that the Godmen invented Gods for their
own purposes.
But that is only because his daughter had such a
red end in the Skinning Time last month.
The harvest had looked bad then, rain so scarce.
The Godmen had called for four virgin sacrifices—
one from the nobles and one from the helots and one
from the slaves and one from the Guildsmen. The
Real Man s daughter should have been one, but was
not. They dressed up a slave to look like her. The
others could get no substitutes, and the daughter of
the painter was the choice as the Guildsmen’s sacri¬
fice. Gods, how she screamed, as the chacs held her
down and the Nacon’s knives ripped down her sides
to take the skin off. A little Godman had worn the
skin for a week after that: the painter had been sick
every time he saw him, with the hands and feet of his
daughter still hanging on the shrivelling skin and
flapping from the Godman’s shoulders. But such
were the ways of the Gods : the world would end if
sacrifices were refused them.
Remote from the altar inside the temple comes an
increase in the ceremonial wailing. The dog whines
loudly and then howls, and then is silent as it is
sacrificed and the blood smeared on the face of the
idol. The Nacon yawns. The head chilan, the inter¬
preter of the Gods, stares in the idol’s face and
murmurs the words of sacrifice. He is a tall and thin
figure, with an impassive face, crowned with the great
basket-work head-dress, the loin-cloth in his case a
gay garment reaching to his throat and down to his
knees, with buskins on his feet and a little decorated
axe in his hands. Turning round from the altar, he
makes his way down the stairs and passes across the
plaza to the College of the Inscriptions.
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA 159
He has to climb a wide flight of painted steps before
he gains the college frontage, set with innumerable
doorways over which hang great sun-curtains raised
and lowered by means of ropes passing through slits
in the walls. The floor he treads is of smooth mortar.
Entering one of the doors, the chilan finds himself in
a small chamber, walls painted red and yellow, its air
heavy with a drifting incense from adjacent rooms,
the incense of copal gum. In this room are three
others of his caste and rank, seated, squatted on
small stools or the floor, bending to work on frames
wherein are clamped sheets of the agave paper. The
chilan squats down by a fourth easel. He has arrived
at his office desk.
From a box he brings out three small pots, filled
with different-coloured paints. A wooden stylus, a
stone scraper, a handful of brushes of human and
deer hair are at hand. He makes selections and turns
towards his easel with a sigh. Gods, how bored he is,
how bored ! How bored with the temple mummery,
the smearing of blood and the half-witted chants.
Quite definitely, he makes up his mind as he stares at
the blanks of parchment, he will throw in his lot with
the plots of the young Real Men, for disunion from
the Confederation. That will mean War, perhaps.
And perhaps it may mean a new Ahkin Mai.
He is a Godman astronomer, a Recorder of the
Skies, one of the several keepers of time-count in the
city. He had been engaged half the previous night
in observation of the moon and Venus from the city
star-tower. Now he has come to record the results
of those observations : another sheet of the endless
record which a slave will presently sew to its fellows
and bind in great volumes with wooden covers for
storage in the library of the College.
Squatting and painting, left elbow on knee, right
wrist in the grasp of his left hand, he is at once author
and illustrator. The involved symbolism of the
heavenly system demands the record of his observation
to display Venus and the moon as anthropomorphic
100 the CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
°n marc^' in gesticulating
attitudes. Accompanying these pictures stream the
ines of glyphs, the writing: horned snout and
stooping helot, closing fist and distorted face, dot
and bar and flowing cartouche, phallic symbols and
vaginal symbols, snake and beast and crowing bird.
The art of the rebus is
beginning to displace
the plain pictographs
of antique time. The
chilan is hampered by
lack of a dictionary,
or anything equiv¬
alent to it, though he
is unaware of the
lack. Apart from the
simple learning-glyphs
used by the priest-
teachers, textbooks of
the glyphs do not
exist. When in doubt,
or unaware of the
shape of the requisite
symbol, the penman
constructs a new one
on his own initiative
—a “ polysyllable ”
glyph decipherable
only to the highly
initiated, and that
after a complex
process of deduction
i . anc* elucidation.
1 hese elucidations are among the highest intellectual
exercises of the literati,—these, and conning the
scripts of the Godmen of antique time, who them¬
selves saw the Gods descend from the Sun.
The chilans work. A continual sniffling whine
comes from beyond the Sun temple. Those damned
dogs.
A GOD
Possibly a war-god.
(From the Dresden Codex.)
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA l6l
Yells from the ball-court beyond the college. Here
two schools of the sons of the Real Men, under the
guidance of two chilans who have their instruction
and care in hand, are exercising their pupils in the
ball-game. The pupils pant and sweat. The court
is a hundred yards long and twenty wide, high-
walled. High in the middle of each of the side walls
are set two rings in stone. The pupils are divided
into two teams, in the middle of the court is placed a
ball, and the task of the opposing teams is to send
the hard indiarubber sphere as often as possible
through one or other of the wall-rings. This is where
skill is needed, for neither the hands must propel the
ball, nor yet the feet. The players have boards
strapped on their hips and as the ball bounces to¬
wards one he half-swivels about, exposes an inviting
posterior to the ball, meets its rise by leaping in the
air and sends the ball high up towards the ancient
stone ring. It is the head of the god, this ball. Next
month they must play this game with solemnity,
at the great feast. Now they are practising, laughing,
and cursing, while the chilans watch and gossip.
Through ! One of the pupils has flung it through
the ring. The Godmen, sotto voce, start to bet on the
matter. They are both notorious gamblers in a race
of gamblers.
A vulture sails overhead.
The twelve-year old girl has met a friend, the
daughter of a helot, like herself. They creep away
from the urgencies of hut and work, weaving and
maize-grinding, and slip round the edge of the plaza,
two dusty, nude figures. Midway the plaza a post is
fixed in the ground, a post six feet or so in height,
with thongs set in staples. It is curiously covered
with red stains, blood stains, and scraps of hair and
skin. The two girls eye it and giggle.
He had looked funny, that man last week at the
time of the Sacrifice. He had been taken in a skirmish
against the north Cities by the militia, and brought
back in time for the feast. How he had wriggled
162
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
when he was tied to the post and the militia danced
round in a circle, with bows and spear-throwers !
Then the nacons and holpop had begun to beat the
drums and each of the soldiers loosed an arrow at
the circle painted on the breast of the sacrifice. You
grew excited, wondering if they would hit, though
the grown-up folk were moaning and singing, not
enjoying it at all, there was nothing enjoyable in it
it was a sacrifice to the Gods. But he had taken very
long to die, and round about, on the crowded stairs
the helots as well as the Real Men had begun to bet
on whether the sun would be down before he died.
It had just gone down when he did.
Round this corner, so. No guards about. Under
the wall by the College of Inscriptions are the cages
for the sacrifices. There are only four victims in
them three men and a woman, being fattened on
maize for the sacrifice next month. One is prowling
to and fro the wicker-work walls of his cage : he is
getting very fat. The girls giggle as his lack-lustre
eyes turn on them. The woman lies prostrate : she
also is fat: the chilans will keep her hands and feet
at the sacrifice, they always keep the best bits.
One of the girls pokes the woman with a stick
through the slats of the cage. She gives a groan
The girls giggle, a little frightened. They must bring
some others to try this game.
The second girl has a clay bead hung in front of
her eyes, depending from a band round her head.
She has had the bead for years, to induce a squint.
The squint has come, in both eyes, a special mark of
beauty, and the first girl regards it enviously.
They glance upwards, and scurry home. It is
nearly noon. The sun stands almost overhead.
iii. Evening
The ceremony of the rebirth is finished, the mothers
have removed the shells from the bodies of the girls
the Godmen have cut the squinting stones depending
INNER DOORWAY OF THE GREAT BALL COURT, CHICKEN ITZA
(New Empire)
By permission of the trustees of the British Museum
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA 163
from the foreheads of the boys. They are now men
and women, the girls free to be given to a man and
the care of his hnt, the helot boys plantation hands
from to-morrow. The girl who had gone to the
chultune in the early dawn trips through the dust of
evening again, in pik and huipil now, going slowly,
at the chultune leaning over to watch herself in the
water. It is close to sunset.
Behind the courtyard of the Sun Temple the dogs
are whining again in expectation of a meal, or in
fright over the noises at the rear of their hut. For
behind it is the Temple of Sacrifices, a small building,
and to-day was the Sacrifice of the Old Men. Round
the temple courtyard, row on row they had gathered,
the old men of the city, Real Men and nacons and
chilans, even some Guildsmen, with sloping heads
and aged limbs, and decayed teeth, in their finest
loincloths, to watch the sacrifice for rejuvenation.
Presently the courtyard had begun to reek of blood
and excrement from the caterwauling beasts led up
in front of the image of the God and there despatched.
Pumas and ocelots had been led in, even one jaguar,
snarling, its head bound with ropes. Squabbling
turkeys had fluttered and chirawked and added to
the din, while the old men sat and watched the blood
of the vigorous fauna of the forest offered up to stave
off human decay and death.
The chilan descends from the College and climbs
to the Temple of Inscriptions, where the records
are kept. On the way he stops and looks at one of
the ancient stelae, set up and carved three hundred
years before. Its crudity is showing under its fresh
coat of paint. It is time it was broken up and added
to the base of the new round temple, the Caracol of
the city. He reads the brief inscription on the crude
outlines of the glyphic writing, glances indifferently
at the carved face of the God or Godman—the stelae
do not say which—which decorates the front of the
stela, and ascends to the Records Temple.
The boredom of the morning has not subsided. He
164 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
knows much of gods and cares little for any: the
Sun God, malignant and toothless, or his bearded
rival, Kinich Ahau, with filed teeth and scalp-
lock gathered in grotesque knots; Ah Puch, the
Death God, the black Captain, a crouching skeleton
with tattered fragments of flesh ; the Monkey-God,
the God of revelry and mirth, mysteriously also the
God of the North Star ; Great Chac, the God of the
Rains, most antique of Gods, whom the Sun-Men
brought; Yum Kaax, the Maize-God ; Exchuah, the
Guardian of travellers who heeds to the exile in lost
lands; Ixtubtin, Goddess of weaving and pottery
and the domestic hearth; Ixchel, Goddess of the
Rainbow, Goddess of childbirth, Goddess of suicides.
She is much worshipped, and with reason, Ixchel.
He ascends the ancient, narrow, three-storied
tower. Round towers, the Phallic Towers, are taking
their place in many cities, and soon in this, in the
likeness of the organ of generation and fresh vigour.
A slave helping him, the chilan climbs the winding
stair to the roof of the tower, there to take his
evening observations. Below him, hazy in evening
smoke from the cooking fires, lies the city. Venus
has not yet risen, and he lays aside the forked wand he
has brought and looks down on the City of the Snake.
The air is filled with the cou-cou-cou of pigeons
returning to their cotes. Dim blue figures move
against the distant plantation stretches, and the
straw roofs of the far off store-houses shine golden.
To the right, high on its pyramid, in front of the un¬
completed Sun Temple, glows the altar fire. The
evening sacrifice is in progress, the priests facing
westward in ancient ceremonial gesture, lamenting
the death of the God, even as to-morrow they will
hymn his resurrection.
The city-roads on the outskirts are black with
returning helots, sweating, begrimed, tramping in on
naked feet from the labour of the day, each to his
hut, the elders, the young to the common long-house.
Hunters have come in as well, the keepers of bees,
SCULPTURED MONOLITHS OF THE SO-CALLED TEMPLE OF THE TABLES, CHICKEN ITZA
(New Empire)
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA 165
many scores of keepers of bees, and the shepherds
of the great deer-herds kept in the valley on the
forest fringe, so apt and handy in providing fresh
meat for the service of the Gods and the Real Men.
The night is coming very swiftly.
The chilan faces about, to the east, and sees the
winding flow of the river that drives away into other
lands and the foreign cities the merchants tell of,
to the Great City itself, where the tribute goes. There
are paintings and tales of those cities : the great
Twin Cities of the Peten lands, eternally in alliance,
eternally at war ; Quirigua, where the Monster lairs
in stone and the Stones are carved with the messages
of antique time and the faces of ancestors of all God-
men ; Palenque, where the Godmen, the chilans of
the Godmen, alone rule; Copan of the great Sun¬
dial, the great City of the South, where a nacon went
from each city many years ago to the rectification
of Pop, to setting the calendar in order. . . . Many
cities, a weariness of cities repeated one upon the
other to the edge of the barbarian lands whence come
the Nam slaves, the barbaroi.
The chilan turns to the sunset glow. . Amidst that
glow Venus has arisen. He heeds to his slow calcu¬
lations, bending his bird-like face over the antique
instruments. It is now quite dark.
Far off and below in the quarters of the Guildsmen,
the mourners, silent all day according to law, now
keen for their dead with the coming of the night. A
cooking fire gives the only light to the hut where the
two children and the brother and wife and mother
of the dead man wail. They have fasted three days,
covered with soot. Under the floor of the hut the
dead man lies with his mouth stuffed with maize,
and a dog bought from the temple lying by his side,
and a calabash of food and a broken spear to help
him in reaching the abode of dead, Metnal, there to
wander long ages in a tenebrous half-life.
The mourners wail ceremonially, all but the wife
of the dead man.
166 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
The temple sacrifices being fattened on maize are
newly fed. They move eagerly, with the custom
grown upon them, to the food flung in. They do not
know how many days it will be before they are taken
out, stripped of their clothing, and painted blue by
the hands of the chacs; before in the sight of the
waiting throng of helots they are urged up the steps
of the Sun Temple to the altar where the Nacon
stands with the sacrificial knife, the chilans beside
him to read the portents, the curved block of lime¬
stone waiting; before they are stretched out and
held on the block, and the knife comes down and the
rest of it they will never know, though they know it
often, enough now in dreams, or unsleeping through
the nights—the heart torn out of the chest and flung
in a dish to beat, smeared on the idol’s face, as a man
smears sweat from a sweating face, then the body
rolled down the steps of the pyramid to a surge and
rush of the waiting helots, each to hack off a slice
of the flesh with a flint, and take home to cook and
eat. . . .
They eat in the dark and forget.
His observations completed, the chilan descends
into the city darkness. The tower walls are a-crawl
with strange, moving candles, the fireflies. The fires
of the temples on the great kus now flame as skyey
islands in the darkness ; through the half-curtained
doorways in the houses of the Real Men surrounding
the plazas comes a flicker of light from lamp and
candle ; but in the huts of the helots and slaves out
towards the plantations is complete darkness, for the
fields will call awake all that sleeping labour early
enough on the morrow.
The guests are assembling in the house of the
Nacon, in the light of small torches. No women
are present, and the light falls on the faces of a
throng of Godmen and slaves. One or two of
the nobles, the Real Men, have also dropped in :
they are all much of one caste now, Real Men and
Godmen, though crude illiterates, most of the Real
LIFE IN A CITY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA 167
Men, forever talking of wars and land-rights and
gaming away their women when drunk.
In the light the chilan from the tower shows up as
5 feet 6 inches in height, with a nightmare face, fore¬
headless and chinless. From the brow ridges,
whence the hair has been burned, the head slants
back in a level line to the crown. As a result, the
nose, curved and slightly hooked, juts out like the
beak of a bird. In this mask-like face the eyes show
very dark and unemotional. The septum of the nose
is pierced with a thin, j adeite plug. In his ears, greatly
distended and low-hanging almost to his shoulders,
are affixed plugs of painted wood. His body is
covered with a complicated tatu in green ink, adding
to his bird-like appearance, transforming him in the
light of the lamps to the likeness of a faintly-glowing
macaw.
The feasters are mostly occupied in discussing the
suicide of a chilan—the third to die by his own hand
that month. The chorus of praise over his act is
conventional, but sincere. To all of them the gods of
life are evil, and to break their power and escape into
death, not under the hand of either Ah Puch, God of
violent extinction, or Hin Ahau, deity of slow decay,
is a cunning and meritorious act.
Course succeeds course—messes of venison, turkey,
maize, and cacao, maize mixed with the white of
eggs, and pulque, the national intoxicant. The food
is brought in on wide leaves from which the guests
help themselves with their hands. All are much of
the appearance of the chilan. Outside, the night
is silent about the painted walls of the interior
city. A beast is baying far off on the edge of the
forest.
The drinking continues far into the night. Cere¬
monial pipes are passed from lip to lip among the
guests, for smoking has religious sanctions. Dancers
come to entertain. Dignity is slowly mislaid by the
painted, bird-like men who stare from their tortured
masks of faces. Far up on the ku of the Sun Temple
i68
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
a priest frowns down at the noise that comes on the
wind.
. Long after midnight the chilan-astronomer, sway-
mg uncertainly out of the guest-room into the street,
finds his wife and slaves awaiting him. They have
awaited him for several hours. Laid in a litter, he
is carried to his home nearby, the feet of slaves
stirring up the dust in the darkness as he passes
from sight.
Behind his departure the wearied slaves of the
host put out the torches, leaving darkness ; and the
sun comes up a thousand years later, with the trees
sprouting through the walls of college and long-
house, the Sun Temple mantled with bush, and all
that they did and believed and endured a dim and
uncertain tale.
VI
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE
i. Origins
THE first encounter of the Spaniards with the
Mayas was in 1517, on the coast of the Penin- ,
sula of Yucatan. In this peninsula, lying
to the north-east of the great inverted triangle where
rose the cultural glories of the so-called “ Old
Empire/' the “New Empire " of the Mayas had
come into being. There is no good reason for suppos¬
ing that the founding of its principal sites greatly
post-dated those of the Old Empire. But, unlike the
Old Empire, it possesses histories of a sort regarding
its own origins.
None of these histories survive to the present day in
native scripts which can be translated and trans¬
literated : they are legends and half-tales and suppos-
ings transmitted to the priests of the Spanish
Conquest: they have the muzzy unreliability of the
scrawlings on the town-walls of ancient Pompeii,
except that they lack the cheerful bonhomie of the
latter. One may choose half a dozen different
avenues of narrative in which fall dim lights on the
origins of the Maya civilization in Yucatan. But all
are ruined, bush-grown tracks, with side-paths that
lead no whither.
Yucatan is of comparatively recent geological for¬
mation, formed of limestone, a great porous plain
thrust up from the sea. It is a different land, a bleaker
and a less kindly land than that of the great triangle,
without rivers, for its hills as watersheds are in¬
effective, rising only a few hundred feet above sea-
level. Owing to the porous nature of the limestone
most of the water seeps underground : Yucatan by
nature is elaborately drained by underground chan¬
nels. The soil is poor in the great central stretches of
the country; there also is the ubiquitous forest,
probably much more widely spread now than in
ancient times. There are no lakes or rivers, but
169
170 the CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
numerous great sunk-holes, stagnant, semi-stagnant,
or spring-fed/’ supplying the only open drinking-
places m the country. These are the cenotes that
figure much in Maya tale and religion : near and
about the ancient sites the cenotes were generally
enlarged and faced with stone and made into the
artificial chultunes, where young men and women
were sacrificially drowned to propitiate the rain-
gods .
Along the northern shores of the Peninsula runs a
scattering of islands and sand-banks, where fishermen
m the antique times apparently rested, or exiles fled
for there are inadequate ruins in stone that tell of
their presence and activities. On the north-east
coast is the first island where the Spaniards and the
Mayas made contact—the Island of Women where
Bernal Diaz (59) and his companions looked with
some disgust on the painted images of women, great
numbers of images, in the unexpected temples. South
of it is Cozumel Island, the misty island of the gods,
a great place of pilgrimage in ancient days, pilgrims
coming remote from Central Mexico and Honduras to
worship in its shrines. It was under the control of a
priestly clan, the Cumux, a kind of Mayan Rome with
a papal court. South-west of Cozumel, in rocky and
dangerous seas, is Soliman Bay, where the first at¬
tempt at conquering Yucatan by the Spaniards was
set on foot; inland, across the ancient territory of
Chectemal, is the lake country of Bakhalal, Zian
Caan, “ the edge of the heavens,'’ in ancient Maya
story. Round its western shores the Peninsula
swoops unislanded till it comes to the slow play of
breakers in the Laguna de Terminos, a great salt¬
water lagoon.
Into this territory, as early as the seventh or eighth
Christian centuries, colonists and explorers from the
Old Empire region had come by at least two distinct
routes. We shall meet them in attempting to dis¬
entangle their history in a later section. The first of
the eastern comings of the colonizers may have been
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 171
by sea, and the question has been much debated as
to whether the “ Maya ” found the Peninsula in¬
habited or not at the time of their coming. But with
the reconstruction of Maya history that we have
already viewed, that question is irrelevant. The
people of an Archaic culture who seem, judging by
their remains in caverns and the like, to have inhabited
Yucatan in very remote times, were no doubt, like
their successors, Mayas—Mayas of purer stock than
the later colonizers from the Old Empire region who
were probably of mixed and half-Maya blood, des¬
cended, their leaders and priests at least, from the
alien explorers of Asia or Oceania.
Here they halted and builded and set up their
city-states.
ii. The Sites
The great city of Tuluum is almost unique in Maya
history. It stands upon the sea, unlike practically
all of the architectural complexes reared by the great
civilizers of the Central Americas. From the sea it
shows up now as a line of ruined walls, dazzling in
hot sunshine, backgrounded by the brown-green
Yucatecan smother of landscape. And possibly it is
the first city of the Mayas ever seen by the eyes of
white men, the unfortunate Spanish sailors who were
“ wrecked in Ekab ” in 1511.
Most of its buildings long post-date the single stela
in the city, a monolith bearing the Long-Count date
9.6.10.0.0., a.d. 828. This stela stands in a small
temple—it seems the temple was erected to house
the stela, either because the event recorded on it was
regarded as of great importance, or because the in¬
habitants of Tuluum, in years long after the art and
practice of carving stelae was lost, came to regard the
stone with reverence. Under the crumbling walls of
Tuluum are frescoes from a time long after the city’s
founding; and it is here that one of the very few
actual idols of the Maya period still stands. But it
172 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
belongs to a degenerate art and time: indeed,
Tulmim is a degenerate city of the Mayas.
Again, in another particular, it differs from all the
great sites in its possession of a stone wall com¬
pletely encircling the central “ city.,, It was pro¬
vided, this wall, in the days of the city’s habitation,
with sally-ports and watch-towers, and the possi-
bihty is that it was erected as defence against the
raiding of the Caribs. Tuluum has a drab enough and
degenerate look in its ruins, but the early Spaniards
thought it " as fine as Seville ” (59).
West of Tuluum are groupings of sites, separated
by a few miles, and of an evident antiquity con¬
temporaneous with Tuluum. Probably the new¬
comers from the sea founded them shortly after
founding Tuluum. Coba is the most important of
these sites, with its finely carved stela (it dates from
about A.p. 877) and its oriented temples. The archi¬
tecture is of all periods—the Uaxactun corbelled
arch, a peculiar development, the wall-surfaces of
Lubaantun, and the later superimpositions of the
Toltec times. Coba probably was occupied exten¬
sively from the years of its founding until the time
of the coming of the Spaniards. Some time during
this seven hundred years of history its rulers com¬
menced the building of the great stone roadway, the
one great stone roadway of the Maya era, which
drives through the country in the direction of
Chichen Itza. It loses itself before it arrives at
Chichen Itza, but there is no good reason to suppose
that some extension of it, of beaten earth or the like,
did not once carry to the great Metropolis of Yucatan!
It has long been one of the puzzles of Maya history,
this road, built by a people who, as we have seen, had
neither beasts of burden nor wheeled vehicles neces¬
sitating a. hard and unyielding road surface. To
suppose it a road for ceremonial reasons, a via sacra,
does not carry the explanation much further. Why
from Coba, a comparatively small site ? Why not
from Mayapan, Itzamal, Ake towards the sacred city
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE I73
of Chichen Itza ? The probable explanation of this is
that Coba was no more than a halting-place of
pilgrims en route from the holy wells of Chichen to
the holy island of Cozumel. It is probable that
remains of the roadway, connecting Coba with the
seashore opposite Cozumel, will yet be unearthed.
The via sacra inland terminates in the best-known
of all the Yucatecan sites. The single dated inscrip¬
tion in the Initial Series is 10.3.0.0.0., but there is
little doubt that Chichen Itza was occupied before
this, probably founded by the same colonizers as
landed at Tuluum and spread out through the country
by way of Coba. One section of the Chilan-Balaam
books records that it was founded in a 6 Ahau, which
has been equated with various dates anterior to the
Initial Inscription date. But the Katun counts of the
Chilan-Balaam adventures are, as we have seen, too
unreliable to deserve serious attention.
Chichen Itza, the Wells of the Itza, was so called
from its possession of three great cenotes, or rather,
chultunes. It is the least difficult of all the great
sites from the point of view of the modern traveller—
Dzitas, the nearest railway station, is a little less than
twenty miles distant, and he comes to ruins as impres¬
sive as anything in the Old Empire area, and appar¬
ently with a far more varied history. They cover, those
stone ruins, an area of two square miles or so, temples
and long-houses on their pyramidal sub-structures,
the forts that came later in time, the round tower that
came to the Maya lands with an alien worship. Here
is the Akat-Tzib, the House of the Writings, so-
called, with the impress of the red hand on its in¬
terior walls. Here is the compact temple, the Foloc,
with its branching Ganesha-heads. The Caracol, the
famous round tower, stands at a little distance, a
peculiar structure that will call for further comment.
The Castillo, the so-called fort, rises up bare and
bushless now on its pyramid, for it has been recently
restored by the Mexican government, as has a minor
temple, the Temple of the Warriors, by an American
I74 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
expedition. The great ball court, with its stone rinas
toW thG fcastle^ itsSwaUsri274
leet long, 30 feet high, and 120 feet aoart Tht
houfeseSas0thehHTableSf m1® TigerS’ and sucl1 long-
nouses as the House of Nuns also litter the around
&^0Ubt °-nCe d“ted in Painted majesty-—
k 'i^i• ^ survives at Chichen, though inside the
buildings not outside. The two larger cenotes
largestUn?k^0feS/^d ^ subterranean streams. The
70 feet 3hL Th- 6ngth 150 wide' has sides
Sacrifice. §h' ThlS WaS the famous Cenote of
This great complex of buildings, of all architectural
on^consCted3 ^ the Cmt4 VricafevWentty
penLsula Forl, n t PumClp,al, Clty of the extern
peninsula. For multitude and diversity of ruins it is
barely equalled by Uxmal, to the south west of
Chichen rulerc^fhPltal 0f the?itter enemies of the
^mcnen rulers. There some of the ruins also are
S/whwf' S°me de?tly embushed and rapidly
lading with the years. The principal building the
House of the Magician, crowns a great pyramid ’ and
desolatbne g'rLa11 ^ C°meS in -ew a matted
aesolation. The great House of the Nuns lies near
struTturerind^6'1- °f ^ large
wur f d en.closing a wide plaza. Here the
building is done with great beauty and skill as well
pract<isCedainCthreIS01dYKCateCan pa™in lay-°,ut' ^
practisea m the Old Empire area. The ubiauitous
to eeve^hestatepr0je<^ fr0m the cornices °t buildings
m every state of decay and preservation for
travelled symbds from their Indian home Uxmto'
like Chichen has the ruins of a large ball-court and
numerous other temples and long-houses and colleges
earthand mo^'?^63 th™uSh the ruins, and sprouts
lovelvTattW f ?,ng,and °Yer the finest fa?ades, the
Nuns ind the rn^ dec°ratl,on the House of the
the Turdfs hThe ?mnudiplendYur of the House of
fr urtles- The fagade decoration in the House of
the Governor contains some of the finestTmal
hJ </>
<1 C3
X
- a
cn «
1 -
2 I
W £
E O
o §
b ^ s
n ^
^ ^ CL
O T3
W "S
n o
< ^
£
<D
H
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 175
sculptural work in Yucatan, irrespective of age or
cultural period.
Labna and Kabah are smaller sites to the south of
Uxmal, Labna with the usual architectural as¬
semblage, but the finest arch of any Maya building,
showing what the cantilever could achieve in one
place, at least. Of Mayapan, the third of the great
cities of Yucatan in the New Empire’s heyday, little
or nothing is left. At Izamal are the ruins of a great
mausoleum, where reputedly Itzamna, the leader of a
migration, is laid. The modern Merida stands on the
site of one-time Ti-hoo and has devoured both its site
and presumably its building-stone. Sayil, another
minor city, has temples that actually attain grace and
the appearance of storied height, though no true
storied building was ever achieved in the New
Empire area.
Chacmultun, Kewich, Macanxoc are minor sites 
minor in the sense of less size and less mention
in history, but notable enough in some of their
architectural and sculptural details. New sites are
constantly coming to light, to show how thickly
peopled once was the country—or to show the Maya
habit of building a city and then deserting it after
the passage of a long or short period of years. But
this latter supposition now seems little warranted
Tuluum and Coba and Chichen Itza were inhabited
for some seven or eight hundred years on end, and it
is probable that most of the ruined sites now dis¬
covered were occupied at the time of the coming of
the Spaniards, or had been inhabited just prior to
their arrival.
Except in the case of such calamitous sites as
Mayapan, victim to the fury of the great civil war,
the cities of the New Empire were probably proud
and prosperous enough till the coming of a com¬
pletely alien culture to change and dispossess them
of their antique canons and beauties.
In general, they lack that fine, tenebrous impres¬
siveness of the Old Empire sites—even such a site as
176 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Chichen, striking enough at evening and morning, in
the painted glories of the Yucatecan sunset and sun¬
rise. Little inferior in antiquity to the Old Empire
cities, they came under alien influences, mostly
Mexican, which passed the south-western area by.
History swept up through the Gulf of Mexico and
brought new ideas of grouping and placing in sacred
architecture, new plans of long-houses and colleges,
even perhaps new tools and a geometry more
practically applied.
It is probable that not even in very early times all
the inventions in architecture or the like originated
from the Peten region or the Usamacintla, but played
backward and forward between the two divisions of
the Maya civilization. From the New Empire cities
of Yucatan it was that the custom spread of ceasing
to erect dated monuments. Only a few of the
Yucatecan sites are dated and Chichen Itza contains
one of those last dates in the whole Maya area.
iii. Art and Architecture
Originally and essentially the Old Empire and the
New Empire architect and sculptor drew from a
common cultural well. The temple-substructure is
almost everywhere the pyramid ; the common roof¬
ings for the sacred buildings are the corbelled or
cantilever arch. Thereafter there set in multitudes
of divergences. But it is a mistake to think of these
divergences of New Empire art and architecture as
a later efflorescence of the Maya genius. It is obvious
that a great deal of it was quite contemporary to the
older methods of building and decoration still
practised in the Peten or Usamacintla areas.
Sites in the Peninsula rated as comparatively
modern by the older school of historians include such
centres as Xcalumkin, with its Initial Series inscrip¬
tion and its stelae, Sayil with its stelae and char¬
acteristic Old Empire decoration of the stela-figures,
Kabah with its Menche-like lintel carvings. Yet
APPARENT BUILDING IN STOREYS (THE “ PALACE,” LAYIL)
This effect was procured by recessing the upper floors on a solid substructure
(New Empire)
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE I77
Sayil carries the most obtrusive marks of the imposi¬
tion of un-Mayan sculptural and building motifs—not
because it is a site of great antiquity, and the un-
Mayan motifs came late, but probably because both
could exist side by side or within a few years one of
the other.
These divergences from the Old Empire norm be¬
long to a lengthy history of art, but some of them
may be noted here with brevity. Buildings become
wider and fuller. Columns appear—true columns;
a^ade ornamentation breaks out in stone mosaics of
geometrical or conventional designs, never attaining
the beauty and simplicity of the Mitla builders and
decorators. Few stete are erected. There is a greater
disposition to “scamp” difficult architectural mo¬
ments. And then a considerable vigorous new force
came into Northern Yucatan, and transformed such
sites as Chichen Itza.
^Castillo is an example, as un-Mayan, from the
Old Empire standard, as it well could be. So is the
ball-court, the columns, and more especially the
atlantean supports of altars and low roofings. At
Uxmal the same changes are obtrusive. The round
tower, or Caracol, was no successor of the Tower of
alenque ; it was an innovation. So were the making
of chacmool5, the humanized idols of the Rain-god
with the once-characteristic elephant-snout and head
nnslaid. So particularly were the great columns up¬
built of stone serpents resting upon their heads, the
body forming the mam mass, the tail curled in stone
upon the roofs. Something new and vigorous had
come into Mayan architecture.
So with the sculpture. Carving in the round or in
igh relief is almost unknown. But monotony has
gone from temple-fronts and beauty taken its place
in such buildings as the temple at Kewich, with its
round columns and fine, lozenge-panels interweaving
bayil and Labna approximate more and more in
dec.or?tlon to Zapotecan sites such as Mitla.
With this incursion of a fresh wind of building and
178 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
sculpturing in the sites, there came exquisite carvings
in low relief at such sites as Chichen Itza. Armed
warriors of an alien kind parade in stone : they are
armed and armoured differently from either the
ruling or the helot caste portrayed on the walls of the
Old Empire cities. They are evidently of a different
stock, with undeformed heads, and the technique of
carving and representation is unsubtly different. It
is curious to note this, especially in such structures as
the so-called Temple of the Tigers at Chichen Itza,
where Augustus le Plongeon fifty years ago was
troubled over the Carthaginian-like appearance of
many of the heads of the strutting, parading, threat¬
ening figures painted inside the temple walls, very
beautifully, in red, yellow, blue, and brown.
The serpent columns, the ball-courts, and the
atlanteans are almost certainly of foreign inspiration
—and by foreign is to be understood Mexican. And
that admitted, a further inference is inevitable. Open¬
work decoration on the top of temple-walls is not only
characteristic of Mexican architecture, but is certainly
Asiatic in origin. So certainly are the Atlantean sup¬
ports, from Cambodia and Indonesia. Again there
seems to have been a play of cultural influences, late
into the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, from Asia
across the Pacific. These missed the area of the Old
Empire, not because that area was deserted, but
because they struck further north and took root
there. And from that original seeding-place on the
American Continent there can be little doubt but that
these new influences were carried by sea or the
Western Yucatecan land route to enrich the build¬
ings and art of the New Empire, while leaving the
Old Empire (except perhaps Palenque) untouched.
iv. The Sciences
The ground-work of the New Empire economy
was essentially that of the Old Empire. But, just
as there were incursions or inventions of fresh tech-
A TEMPLE AT CHACMULTUN
Note the columns as a decorative panel motif
(New Empire)
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 179
nique in the arts, so apparently in what may be
called the sciences. Of agriculture it is unnecessary
to speak here, the conclusions in a previous section
on the practice of Old Empire agriculture being
largely drawn from the practice around the Yucate-
can cities. It was a primitive and slovenly science,
perhaps a degenerate one from that practised—at
least originally—around the Old Empire towns.
Little gold-work has ever been recovered from
New Empire sites, except from the great sacrificial
cenote at Chichen Itza. Apart from a bell from
Palenque, none at all has been recovered from the
Old Empire. This has led some students to the con¬
clusion that gold was “ unknown ” in the Old Empire
and very scarce, at least, in the New. The first part
of the statement may be disregarded: it is evident
from the monuments that many of the decorations
of the great figures on the panels and stelae are gold.
Gold strewed the country-side about the ancient
sites, hardly buried at all. Gold was the great
magnet that drew the Asiatic immigrants. But
this leaves the fact unaltered that gold-worked
ornaments are scarce in the great triangle as well as
in the Yucatecan peninsula. For the first, no ready
explanation can be given. Did Asia not only send
emigrants into the Americas, but receive tributes
from there ? Was there an early period when voyagers
both crossed and recrossed the Pacific ? It is not
improbable. Gold was a sacred, a religious metal.
It was possibly carried away or buried with the
members of the ruling caste; finally, in the period
of the half-Spanish invasions which helped to depopu¬
late the Old Empire, some at least must have been
seized, though never such quantities as in Mexico.
Gold may even have passed from the Old Empire in
great quantities in tribute or loot with the “ Toltec ”
invasions of Topiltzin Axcitl Quetzalcoatl.
In Yucatan it is certain that gold was not mined ;
but it was probably worked, especially under the days
of the “ Toltec ” influence. It was melted down in
l80 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
braziers with charcoal fuel, the artisan blowing
through a tube of cane or copper to induce a steady,
even heat for the operation. Thereafter at least two
methods of gold-working were in use, casting and
hammering. In the latter method a remarkable
technique was developed, beautifully thin plates of
gold produced for covering spear-handles and the like;
fine sheetings were even applied to the surface of
beads. Casting, a complicated process of building
up moulds of clay, gum, and wax and running molten
metal into them through a copper or clay or wax
pipette, produced works of great beauty, like the
hawk-bell from Palenque.
Raw copper was probably brought into Yucatan
from the region of Oaxaca, and worked in much the
same way as gold, largely for ornament, but not
entirely. Copper adzes and chisels were made,
especially when the alloy of tin produced a fairly
strong “ accidental ” bronze. Mostly these imple¬
ments appear to have been hammered, but many of
the ornaments are obvious castings. Iron was of
course unknown ; or, to adopt a caution hitherto
seldom displayed in the matter, no trace of it has
yet been found (it moulders away easily in the ground),
and no mention of it is made by the Spanish fathers.
Medicine as a science was probably almost non¬
existent. The religious life supplied all medical aids,
apart from a few herbs common to most times and
cultures. But there was a remarkable development
of one branch of surgery—dental surgery, though
whether from ceremonial reasons or reasons of solid
toothache is unknown. The two central incisors of
the upper jaw were very frequently filed or chipped
to fine points. More than this, however, both in¬
cisors and other teeth were frequently bored on the
outer surface, and filled with discs of gold, jadeite,
obsidian or what not. This was not the barbaric
practising of a barbaric art entirely. These opera¬
tions appear to have been carried out with great
care, the dentist sometimes by a narrow margin
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE l8l
avoiding allowing his drill to impinge on the shriek¬
ing nerve of the patient suffering for the sake of
caries or the glory of God.
Finally, leaving aside the intricate mosaic-work
and inlaying brought to great perfection in some of
the New Empire sites, particularly Chichen and
Tuluum, some mention may be made in this outline
of the making of the feather-work mantles and head¬
dresses—both a science and an art. Old Empire
design and portrait-sculpture show the importance
of the feather-motif, especially in depicting the
feather head-dress which had travelled far across the
continents and millennia since the days of its inven¬
tion in early dynastic Egypt. Feather-cloaks were
made by drawing designs on cotton, backed by bark,
and applying the feathers with paste. These gar¬
ments were things of great beauty, and required great
technical skill in their execution. The mixing of
colours and plumes, the gorgeous plumes of quetzal
and such-like birds, produced not only beauty, but
for the wearer, doubtlessly a garment light, of great
comfort, and adding, like the feathered hat, to his
dignity, lay or priestly, in the ceremonial life of the
New Empire cities.
v. The Katun Count and the Ritual Calendar
Reference has already been made to the modified
form of time reckoning, the “ Katun count ” which
the Maya civilization developed obtrusively in
Yucatan, and probably in the Old Empire triangle as
well. It was a degenerate form of the old Long
Count. For ordinary purposes of computation—
computation inside a period of 256 years or so—it
served well, and apparently either the desire or the
ceremonial need to reckon precisely with all the
cumbrous, but admirable, machinery of the Long
Count, had left the ruling caste. With the coming of
the Katun Count the dating of monuments practi¬
cally ceased ; and so, so far as European chronology
182 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
goes, did the means to correlate with any exactitude
Mayan and Christian dates.
The Katun Count dropped the Baktun, and time
was reckoned by the Katun alone, each identified
among its fellows by its concluding day. Every
Katun ended on a day Ahau, but every Ahau had a
different numeral. The Katun-period consists of
7200 days, divisible by 13 with 11 over. In conse¬
quence, successive Katuns terminate with the day-
sign Ahau accompanied by a numeral less by two
than that which accompanied the preceding Ahau.
Thus : Katun 1 Ahau, Katun 12 Ahau, Katun 10
Ahau, and so forth. Thirteen Katuns passed, and
Katun 1 Ahau recurred.
This method of time-computation was the standard
method in later Yucatan, from the beginning of the
twelfth Christian century until the time of the
coming of the Spaniards. There is no good reason to
believe that it was the early method of time-reckoning
in any part of the peninsula. There, as in the Old
Empire, the Long Count must long have held sway.
But with its passing, it is possible that Maya attain¬
ments in mathematics so degenerated that they
lost the ability to read their own calendrical inscrip¬
tions.
The Books of Chilan Balaam, already referred to,
are in the short- Katun Count—are indeed fringes and
tag-ends of narrative attached to Katun numbers.
Assembled, the Katuns in the Chilan Balaam Books
give an apparent history of 1700 years. But there
are excellent reasons for believing that this sum
might well be reduced by half. The Katuns have
been built up by later Mayan historians, with great
and unbridgeable lacunae in the accompanying
history ; the historical items are ludicrously sprayed
out in the early periods of the Katun computations.
For example, the Tutul Xiu reside for three hundred
years or so at Champoton : without a single recorded
incident of history. There is no reason to suppose
they resided there half that time. The early Katun
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 183
stretches are quite valueless, in the attempt to equate
them with Christian chronology.
When the Spaniards arrived in Yucatan they
found an immense number of gods being worshipped,
including at least two deities that appear to have
been unknown to the Old Empire—not because the
Old Empire was earlier in time than the New, but
because one of those deities, Itzamna, was evidently
a deified Yucatecan, and the other, Kukulcan, a
deified Mexican. With their history we shall deal
later. The attributes of the other gods of the
pantheon have already been touched on briefly :
essentially, the great god was the Rain-God, Chac,
the migrated and transformed Ganesha of the Hindu
systems. With him marched Indra as Maize God,
and around and upon these two deities arose a vast
number of minor divinities, earth gods, rainbow
goddesses, and what not. It is curious to note a
modern habit of presuming the earth gods the oldest
and the most important, and even the presumption
that the Mayas, if left untouched by European
invasion, would have gradually evolved towards a
monotheism. There is no evidence whatever o
such an inclination : quite the reverse is shown.
This multiplying of gods and goddesses was the
inevitable theological evolution in all civilizations
founded—as all were founded—on the Archaic
culture. The gods increased, they did not diminish.
From its beginning to its end, the Maya civilization,
in the New Empire as well as in the Old, remained,
as did all the American civilizations with the excep¬
tion of that of the Inka, a civilization curiously
rooted and static in the beliefs and notions of the
Archaic cult, though equipped beyond the Archaic
cult in many ways. It never evolved to the con¬
sciousness of a racial culture, never attained to man¬
hood, it was always an adolescent with an unassimi¬
lated philosophy. It is possible that into its cultural
ferment came not only great driftages of ideas and
beliefs from orthodox Hinduism and Brahmanism, but
184 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
from Buddhism as well—as in the original complex
Quetzalcoatl-Kukulcan cult. But, like the Mexicans,
the Maya, at their Archaic economic level, with all
its economic lacks in convenience and cultural lacks
in the machinery of ideas-transmission, remained in¬
capable of either developing or assimilating any adult
system of conduct,
any philosophy of life,
Brahmanist or Budd¬
hist. These alien
importations were
covered over speedily
and at once with the
rituals of the seasons,
“life-giving,” the
fertilization of the
earth and crops.
As we saw in a
previous section, deal¬
ing with the script
and calendar in the
Old Empire sites,
there were eighteen
period “ months ” in
the Haab, the solar
year of the Mayas.
In Yucatan each of
these months had its
appropriate feasts and
ceremonies, largely
connected with agri¬
culture, in which every stratum of the populace
appears to have taken part in rotation. The Maya
New Year fell at the beginning of the month Pop,
and 1 Pop, the first day, took to itself one of four
day-signs—Kan, Muluc, lx, and Cauac in the New
Empire after the end of Baktun 10 at least. Ix and
Cauac were unlucky days for the year to start on,
Kan and Muluc were lucky. The latter could look
after themselves, but to ward off plagues and famines
THE SO-CALLED " SUN-GOD ”
(Probably derived from the Gorgon of
Mediterranean myth.)
(From the Dresden Codex.)
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 185
and droughts brought in by lx and Cauac marching
with 1 Pop, elaborate and unpleasant ceremonial
fastings and mutilations took place.
On 1 Pop itself a general and violent spring-clean¬
ing took place in the Maya city, as it did on New
Year's day all over the old Old World. Old garments
were burnt, houses and temple idols repainted, and
the temple fires kindled anew. The castes assembled
at the temple and incensed the gods, and drank great
quantities of balche wine after the sacred fires had
been rekindled.
In Pop the priests prophesied the general state of
the weather and the agricultural prospects for the
coming year.
In Uo those prophecies were read aloud or de¬
claimed to the populace at a special ceremonial dance.
In Zip was the dance of the hunters, to ensure a
good hunting year by sympathetic magic. Much
balche-drinking.
In Zotz the fishers feasted. Dancing, singing.
Balche.
In Tzec was the feast of the Bee-keepers. Balche
ad lib., for honey was an important ingredient in this
ceremonial wine.
In Xul was the great feast of the year, the feast of
the God Kukulcan (variously identified by modern
students with the Buddha, with a deified Mexican
general, with the “ air "-god—and probably com¬
posed of all three). In Yucatan the citizens of other
centres gathered at Mayapan for the celebration of
this feast until Mayapan was overthrown and de¬
stroyed. Then they gathered at Mani, the sacred
capital of the Xius. Green feathered banners were
carried in procession by the representatives of the
cities. The feast lasted for five days, and it is un¬
likely that the balche was spared.
Yaxkin came in while the Feast of Kukulcan was
concluding.
In Mol was a feast for the entire Mayan pantheon.
Everything was painted the sacred colour, blue, in-
186 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
eluding the children. It is to be hoped that the
painting was done before the balche-drinking began.
In the same <f month ” new idols were made both for
the temples and for private devotions.
In Mac was the feast of the earth-gods. Animals
were gutted, and their hearts and entrails thrown
into a fire, and the fire put out by throwing water
upon it, symbolizing the rains laying the spectre of
drought. More balche.
So the feasts and fasts might be continued through
the months ” of the antique Haab. One looks back
on an existence curiously oppressed and also curi¬
ously lightened. The horrendous gods hemmed life
in closely enough, but for fasts were the compensa¬
tions of feasts, the most unendurable of ceremonies
ended in the drinking of balche. What to the
modern mind is strangest is the unvarying routine,
year upon year. Year upon year those sacrifices were
made, this life endured, without change or apparent
progression, until the time of the coming of the Toltec
in Yucatan. And with their passing, and the passing
of the breath from the larger life of Mexico and
beyond the Pacific, the same dark old cult of soil
propitiation went on, propitiation of the dead sun-
god to return to life in order that life might go on.
More clearly than from any other source we glimpse
in these temple-mysteries of feast and fast and cere¬
monial blessing and ceremonial revilement, how much
the Maya culture, by its place in time and space, was
a lost expedition of civilization, twisting and deform¬
ing the human mind as it twisted and deformed the
human head. For a thousand years it was the
strangest litter of the discarded expedients and
beliefs of the greater cults of the world.
vi. Social Grades and the Economic Life
It is doubtful if the all-powerful theocracy of the
Old Empire whose existence has been postulated by
various speculative writers ever existed. Certainly in
FINELY-PILLARED TEMPLE AT LABNA
(New Empire)
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 187
the New Empire, with whose history and cults chance
has made us better acquainted, the priest was sub- v
ordinate to the nobility. In most cases he was of the
nobility, a younger son or the like, heeding to the
temple services the while his elder brother heeded to
civil matters of war and jurisdiction. Over all others
ruled the “ Real Men,” the paramount chiefs of such
centres as Chichen Itza, Mayapan, and Uxmal. Below
them were the batabs of the lesser cities, batabs pos¬
sibly of Tuluum and Acanceh and Labna, vaguely
subsidiary to the larger cities in the periods of dis¬
unity, definitely so for the space of Kukulcan s reign,
and for the time of the League of Mayapan little more
than officials of the civil power. _ How those batabs
delegated their power is uncertain. No doubt they
exercised it largely through the medium of the
holcones, the militia.
The Maya states knew no other type of army.
Warfare was exceedingly common in the Maya New
Empire—more common, perhaps (though this is not
by any means certain), than in the Old. The char¬
acteristic weapon of the militia was the flint-tipped
spear, hurled with great force and accuracy by means
of a spear-thrower. This weapon was common to
both Empires. Strangely, the Maya were at first
unacquainted with the bow and arrow, though not
with the blowgun, though the latter weapon was used
only in hunting. Boomerangs also were used, though
not extensively : the boomerang was probably pre-
Mayan in its American origin. For hand-to-hand
fighting the militia-men of noble rank carried clubs,
the sides set with blades of obsidian: these
clubs were sometimes thrown, and, wielded by a
strong arm, were capable of inflicting terrible
wounds, as the Spaniards and their horses were to
find. A curious weapon in use was a kind of dart
with a string attached : the dart-thrower held the
string and threw, and then tugged. What happened
after that is uncertain: probably the dart-thrower
did not survive to tell.
i88
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
The Mayas would hurl hornets’ nests into besieged
houses and cities, primitive bombs, but no doubt very
effective.. They carried round and square shields into
battle, wicker frames covered with deerskin or rush
plaiting Like the Mexicans, they also possessed a
kind of body-armour of quilted cotton. Sometimes
the quilts were packed with salt. Warriors in flight,
with the salt streaming from their quilts, must have
been a disconcerting sight.
Th(3se are the weapons and armour with which the
militia and occasional bandits and mercenaries are to
fight and murder and adventure throughout the
section devoted to New Empire history. Copper
and perhaps axes, came into use in the
twelfth and subsequent centuries. Marching into
battle, the Maya cheered themselves and attempted
to demoralize their enemies by shouts, yells, and the
blowing of conch-shells. Doubtlessly the enemy
retaliated in kind. One may doubt if great damage
was always done in warfare. A warrior was rated
according to the numbers of prisoners he captured,
not the number of the enemy he slew. This curious
custom is sufficient evidence of the ceremonial origin
of Central American and Mexican wars. Captured,
prisoners were driven back to Ake or Mayapan or
Chichen or Uxmal, whatever the conquering city,
caged, and sacrificed with the usual insanitary rites.
The holcones were under command of the nobles,
the nobles themselves presumably children, cousins!
uncles and general hangers-on of the batabs and
Real Men. There seem to have been two com¬
manders, at least in the larger cities—a permanent
soldier commander, and an elected general, the
Nacon, corresponding vaguely to a civil administrator
of military affairs. This Nacon was clipped around
by severe rules and restraints, he might not eat
meat, he was not allowed to drink balch&, and he
was forbidden sexual intercourse. The consequent
probably organized at the end of his term of
office is an interesting subject of speculation.
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 189
This Nacon is not to be confused with a minor rank
of the priesthood. At the head of the sacerdotal
order in each city the chief priest appears to have
been the ahkin mai: it is possible that the Sun
Snake, the Ahau Can, lorded it over the other high-
priests from Mayapan or Chichen in the days of the
Federal Republic of the Yucatecan states. His office
was to see to the more important religious cere¬
monies, see to the management of the long-houses
where the sons of the nobility were taught and the
colleges where aspirants and novices to the priest¬
hood were initiated into the reading and writing of
glyphs, the calculating of the periods of the calendar,
divination, and the like esoteric sciences.
Doubtlessly the priests in those colleges were priests
of the chilan rank only. These were lower in rank
only than the ahkin mai himself. It may be said that
Maya civilization was built on the lives and work of
the chilans, just as Maya existence was built on the
lives and work of the helot peasantry. It was they
who carried out the interpretation of the wishes of
the gods : they who were the astronomers, mathe¬
maticians, architects, and no doubt the inspirers of
the sculptors and painters and the like guildsmen.
They formed a kind of upper civil service, though
their duties were inextricably linked with the priest¬
hood. They were, to the modern mind, the most
sympathetic of all the castes in that antique
civilization.
Below the chilans were the nacons, whose office,
whose sole office, was to officiate as sacrificers. They
sacrificed animals and men, cutting open the breast
and tearing out the heart. They were as horrific a
priesthood as the world ever knew and in the bright
air and dazzling sunshine of the Central Americas, in
the great building complexes, painted and amazing,
it is little wonder that sight of them chilled the hearts
of the Spaniards with disgust and hate. They wore
their hair long, we are told, and matted with the blood
of the victims. At the Skinning Sacrifices it was a
19° THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
nacon who donned the skin of the flayed woman and
danced the ceremonial dance. They went clad in
ong cotton robes, blood-stained sacrificially, and
their mental life is a thing as remote from modern
concept as the mental life of the dinosaur.
Below the nacons came the lay-priests,’the chacs,
who held the victims in position while the nacons
sacrificed and performed various minor offices about
the temples. Below the chacs were the holpop, who
sang the temple hymns and dirges, possibly with a
popping labial fervour suitable to their name.
There were also vestals of a sort, who swept the
courts and tended the sacred fires, the immemorial
duty of vestals from Rome to Peru, and Peru to
Uxmal. They were recruited from the ranks of the
nobility, but were under no such penalties and in
possession of no such privileges as those of Rome or
^ Was a sma^er and a meaner life in Chichen
or Mayapan or Uxmal than in those great states, and
sound economic reasons forbade the upkeep of large
unfertile harems of the chaste. So the vestals wedded
as they could and went back to the life of the laitv
unhindered. J
. ^ Mexico there were crafts of Guildsmen in the
civilization of the Toltecs that presently sprang up •
it is less certain that such crafts prevailed in the New
Umpire. But they are a likely feature of the hier¬
archy. Some constant tradition of skill and technique
one must postulate to account for the perfection of
carving and embellishment and painting of temple
and tower and long-house. Allied to the artisan
Guildsmen, and their existence certain enough, were
the Yucatecan merchants, also banded in guilds, and
wearing a fan as a badge. These probably traded far
and wide not only through the New Empire, but the
Old, southwards into Honduras and San Salvador
and northwards through the Tehuantepec neck. The
seeds of Maya civilization were no doubt carried far
ancl wide by the merchants, if only as objects of
trade . it needs no great stretch of imagination to see
RISE OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE IQ1
the famous Tuxtla statuette, which has given rise to
so many fantastic theories, as an object of trade sold
or mislaid by some wandering Maya merchant from
the Peten region.
Some of these merchants were slavers, marching
or transporting by sea small gangs of human
merchandise to Mexico. Gold from Honduras and
Costa Rica was imported raw into the New Empire
area and worked into fine objects for export and home
consumption. The New Empire also exported great
quantities of embroidered mantles and the like, and
possibly also cacao and honey. Cacao in quills was
the common currency of Central America and of
Mexico. Gold had still an almost purely religious
value : to the end of the antique American civiliza¬
tions it was regarded not as wealth but as a magical
giver of life. . .
Possibly within the uncertain fringes of their
shadowy middle class must be included the various
types of artificers. Equally possibly, many of those,
goldsmiths, masons, and so forth, were skilled slaves
and no more. But the whole cumbrous super¬
structure rested upon the shoulders of the peasantry,
whose status is doubtful. To denominate them
helots, as has been done throughout this history,
seems the least unwarrantable. They were at the
mercy, mentally and physically, of the priests and
the nobles, and their labours supported such richness
and elegance as there was in the lives of their betters.
They bent their deformed heads in awe, doubtlessly,
of chilan and batab, and dread of nacon and chac,
and had their moments of hatred of these rulers, and
possibly their moments of revolt. But no tale comes
to us of the rise of a Maya Spartacus, just as the status
of the actual slave in Yucatan is uncertain. Men
might be sold into slavery for crime, or, in poverty,
might sell themselves. Prisoners of war were oc¬
casionally kept as slaves, more frequently sacrificed
on the altars of the thirsting gods.
Under other sections the staple of their economic
192
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
!w ■1iI?afeYa?1? cultivation have already been
described But in the New Empire, or some sections
’ anct probably arising late in history, the
met w have Passed int0 a communal
^trit K0 /i lnguth¥r0und- Each family possessed
produce1 on this.hUndred SqUare yards and grew their
This information we have on the authority of
Bishop Diego de Landa, and his statement has been
considered of doubtful value, if the Maya of pre-
onques actually farmed in the slovenly
manner of their modern descendants, or even of the
folk whom the Spaniards came upon. But possibly,
great pestilence and civil war which pre-
com™g> agricultural science
AtJ-he least it is certain that the wasteful
methods credited to them would never have pro-
field64/^u trihute-paying, existence on a
held, a kan, four hundred yards square. Again,
some form of intensive cultivation of the land seems
the only explanation.
These were the cities, the arts, the sciences, the
gpds, and castes and classes of the New Empire
civih/sation. Probably they were largely paralleled
m the contemporary Old Empire. But it is to and
fro on the territory of the New Empire alone that
is ory, egendary history, presently commences to
march and halt and lay siege, and raise up pagans of
triumph and despair, and across which ebb the final
Pacific11 StreamS from the 01d World beyond the
VII
INTERLUDE IN ANCIENT MEXICO
ANCIENT Mexico in the popular mind
/\ remains synonymous with Montezuma,
X V. treasure, and the late Rider Haggard.
Even those who have passed beyond the naiveties of
this view have seldom progressed further than W. H.
Prescott, and still envisage his genteel Aztecs as the
fons et origo of all things Mexican.
The latter view, so far as the historian is con¬
cerned, is roughly sixty years and three research
stages out of date. By 1889 Mr. W. J. Payne was
summing up the common opinion of his generation
of historians, who had arrived at the second stage :
“To the Toltecs, among the early peoples of the
New World, the first place no less indisputably
belongs than to the Greeks in the Old ” (50).
The Aztecs had been deposed. But backgrounding
the newly-elected Toltecs were already the uneasy
ghosts of the builders of the ancient cities in the great
Central-American triangle, and the more well-known
builders of Chichen Itza, Uxmal, and Tuluum. The
historian already quoted dealt sternly with these
upstart Mayas:
“ An opinion has even been entertained that the
Mayapossessedan indigenous culture, independent of,
though parallel to, that of the Nahuatlaca [Toltecs,]
to which the latter was substantially indebted for
some of its principal features. We are compelled to
regard this view as erroneous.”
Nevertheless, the Mayan ghosts refused to be laid.
From the point of view of antiquity, the Toltecs wilt
into insignificance in the light cast upon the antique
American scene from that cumbrous lamp of cal-
endrical attainment which was the great glory of the
Maya Old Empire. It is now generally accepted that
such semi-civilizations as rose to being in Ancient
Mexico were heritors of the culture of Central
America; the Toltec is seen as no originator, but
one gifted with a mere barbarian imitativeness.
193
N
194 THE conquest of THE MAYA
The irreverent might speculate that the process is
unending, and prophesy that in another twenty years
the Maya themselves may stand convicted as the
merest nouveaux riches. Nor is either the irreverence
or the speculation unwarranted. That apart, and as
the following brief sketch of their elements will seek
to show, a single origin is as little traceable in the
diversity of Mexico’s culture as—in the confused
obscurity of their history—is a single ancestor for its
tenebrous tribes.
The calculiform glyphic inscriptions of the Maya
cities supply us with approximate datings. But in
Mexico proper, beyond that Tehuantepecan Isthmus,
there are no such aids. Cultural comparisons and the
careful dissection of legend must suffice until the
Aztec manuscripts open in the middle of the thir¬
teenth century. And both Archaic cultural remains
and Archaic legends lie, actually or metaphorically,
in strata disrupted again and again, by this or that
upheaval, to fantastic unintelligibility.
To make brief and arbitrary selection, however,
the Mexico contemporaneous with the Old Empire’s
beginnings appears still in the culture of the " Archaic
Horizon.” Dotting the curvature of the Gulf and
the length and breadth of the main plateau were
occasional settled sites. Maize and the aloe were
cultivated around these sites—maize cultivation had
already extended as far northwards as the Panuco
Valley. A crude pottery was manufactured, some
archaic experimentings in textiles prove the domesti¬
cation of the cotton plant; and there is a complete
absence of signs of metal-working. It was still
largely a land of the nomad and hunter, the settled
site an exception rather than the rule.
This “ Horizon culture ” is ascribed {a) to no
definitive inventive focus, and to have evolved and
progressed through some two thousand years or
more ; (b) to an origin completely intrusive, an alien
importation from Central America, barely ante¬
dating the first Christian millennium.
HEADS OF THE RAIN-GOD (TOLTECIZED INDRA—GANESHA) on the
SO-CALLED HOUSE OF THE NUNS, UXMAL
(New Empire)
INTERLUDE IN ANCIENT MEXICO IQ5
Selectivity balks between these diametrically-
opposed conclusions and turns to the “ Archaic
Horizon ” peoples themselves. Of these, settled or
nomadic,enjoying or disregarding the archaic culture,
two can be identified definitely, three or four tenta¬
tively. In the vicinity of modern Vera Cruz were
the Totonac&, whose speech some six hundred years
later was discovered to have Mayance affinities.
Further north along the Gulf in Huaxtlan, the
Tamarind Land, were the Huaxteca, a people
possessing close ethnical affinities with the Maya.
(As previously noted, it is possible that all the
“ autochthonous autochthones ” from the Panuco
Valley to Copan were once Maya or proto-Maya,
though none of them originators of the Old Empire
civilization.) Still remoter in the north were the
Mazahua and Mixe, with unidentified origins and
affinities. The dim folk of the central plateau and
the Pacific slope are nameless. In Oaxaca the racial
groupings of Zapotec and Mixtec had perhaps already
differentiated. All were peoples on the verge of
history, and on that verge, for the next thousand
years or so, they remained.
Circa a.d. 500, disturbing the ancient serenity of
centuries, the Otomi appear to have descended on
the central plateau from the mists and mountains
of the north. Hunters to whom agrcultural methods
had penetrated in the unknown lands of their origin,
they marched south in search of more fertile tracts,
probably warring with the ancient inhabitants and
probably carrying the first seeds of organized warfare
into Mexico.
In later days, when the possession of Nahuatl
blood in Mexico was as important as Norman in
England, these Otomi were to claim kinship with the
Toltecs and Aztecs. But they “ appear by their
monosyllabic language and some other peculiarities
to have been isolated ethnically ” (51), and to have
preceded all other invaders. If their placing here is
correct, they were but the forerunners of a far more
ig6 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
important migration. From the remote north, after
lengthy journeyings since leaving that unidentified
Huehuetlapallan—the Great Colourful Place—des¬
cended that social class, cluster of cultural excellence,
or definite tribal group to which with some reason
were ascribed most of the subsequent glories of
Mexico: these were the Toltecs, the “ Master-
Builders.”
Of the various dates ascribed to their arrival at
the site of their ultimate capital, Tollan, a.d. 770 is
the more probable. But they did not attain to that
capital immediately on entering Mexico. Under their
reputed leader, Great Hand (Huemactzin), they had
journeyed down the Pacific coast for many years.
Some of these journeyings had been by sea. Definitely
within the borders of modern Mexico they had first
halted and built Tlachicatzin—identified with a
dozen partially-excavated sites, including Colima on
the Pacific slopes. Mysteriously evicted from that
settlement, they took to their wanderings again,
apparently wheeled eastwards across the central
plateau, and founded Tollantzinco. Fifty or a
hundred years thenceafterwards they penetrated
northwards up into the heart of what was then
Otomi territory and in a place renowned for the
basket-making qualities of its reeds (tollin) laid the
foundations of that city that long haunted the
memories of the Mexican tribes.
They were “ men of peace,” noteworthy cultivators
and architects. White-robed, portly, with hair cut
short to the occiput (52), their feet shod in henequen-
fibre sandals, the elders and leaders in each settlement
superintended the plantation-cultivation of maize,
pulse, pepper, cotton, and the pulque aloe. They
used stone tools, but also “ wrought gold and silver
and copper into such shapes as they pleased ” (53) ;
they built at Tollan great storied buildings, temples
and palaces and pyramids. “ They had necroman¬
cers, sorcerers, magicians, astronomers, poets, philo¬
sophers, and orators : they knew everything, good
INTERLUDE IN ANCIENT MEXICO IQ7
and bad ” (54), according to one venerable enthu¬
siast. They worshipped at first One God—in his
solar manifestation. Later came the rise of the
“ young god,” Tezcatlipoca, and with his advent
human sacrifice. Their fame spread north and south.
A divine being, Quetzalcoatl, descended to earth,
revived ancient ways of life and brought new secrets
of power. It was the Golden Age of Anahuac.
Its foster-child, before the unpleasing advent of
the scientific historian, was at least an age of golden
romancings. Yet modern excavation and research,
though they dim the picture’s colours, do not deny
the outlines. These “ men of peace ” appear to have
called themselves Toltecs no more than the Hellenes
called themselves Greeks. They rejoiced in the
designation Aculhuaque—“ Strong Men.” And the
“ young god,” Tezcatlipoca, was the horrendous
war-deity whom they transmitted to their successors,
the Aztecs. These are neither the characteristics nor
the gods of a peaceful people. But it may be that the
immigrants were in small numbers, subduing the
native inhabitants by force of military superiority,
and inaugurating thereafter a long era of peace till
the pressure of fresh northwards immigrants revived
war-cult and war-god.
Modern research generally designates them, as it
does the Maya, a Stone Age people, to be judged by
Stone Age standards. But it is doubtful if the term
—in America, at least, where chipped tools, polished
tools, copper tools, and the so-called ” accidental
bronzes ” were all used indifferently in the same
periods in the same areas—has any just meaning.
Chalcolithic—those who employed stone when metal
was unavailable—would appear to approximate
more closely to the facts of legend and excavation.
Of their storied buildings, palaces, and temples, no
trace now exists in Mexico proper, though the pyra
mids of Cholula and Teotihuacan still stand. They
brought new things into New World architecture—
the pilaster, the atlantean support, fagade decoration
igS THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
in the form of intricate formal mask panels, the ball-
court. It was an art as dull in imaginative concept
as it was energetic in achievement—the art, one
would judge, of an uninventive people.
So with their sculpture—either of the human
figure, m low relief, or the giant sculptured mosaics
that still obtrude from the pyramidal bases at
Teotihuacan. Technique is as adequate as artistic
flair is absent. In pottery, among a mass of un¬
remarkable household utensils, they made beautiful
vases, slip-painted in the primary colours.
“ Necromancers, sorcerers, and magicians,” they
may well have had ; and no doubt even the difficul¬
ties of an agglutinative language were no bar to
oratory. Of their astronomy we have no direct
knowledge. It was probably as inferior to that of the
Old Empire Maya as their calendar—a borrowed
product—was inferior.
In the worship of a single solar god (probably in the
mam an agricultural deity) whose subsequent lustre
was somewhat dimmed by the rise of a war god, the
Toltecs pay remarkable tribute to the conclusions
of the modern school of historians, and hardly merit
the severe and unconsciously humorous strictures of
an early pseudo-savant—that “ animalism seems to
circumscribe their whole religious bent.”
To summarize briefly the views of four modern
schools of historians, the entire Toltecan semi-
civilization was (a) brought by the Toltecs from
their original home, Huehuetlapallan ; (b) evolved
in the districts surrounding Tollan ; (c) derived from
the Maya Old Empire in Central America; (d) im¬
ported from across the Pacific.
The first school lacks a definite geographical focus.
If in British Columbia or in California the Great
Colourful Place is to be identified—as it may well
be in either—the lack in these regions of the most
obtrusive elements in Toltec culture is remarkable.
If in the Mound-Builder region of the Mississippi,
then the Toltecs, fully equipped as to culture,
INTERLUDE IN ANCIENT MEXICO IQQ
achieved the remarkable feat of deserting their remote
home and migrating into Mexico before the radiations
from their own Mexican cultural adventure had
made possible the growth and existence of the Mound-
Builder communities. One may suspect that even
the Abbe Brasseur’s necromancers would have
balked at this miracle.
The second theory, championed by those who see
all civilizations as separate ferments in hermetically-
sealed containers, has now few supporters. Least of
all had it support among the Toltecs themselves, who
consistently referred their advancement to the work
of alien culture-bringers.
The third hypothesis is based on the greater anti¬
quity of the Maya Old Empire, and the undisputable
certainty that the Toltecs absorbed various cultural
elements from the great Central Americans. The
fourth, championed in various fashions and in various
ages by the Spanish conquerors, Humboldt, and—
to some extent—the modern historical school,
deduces a direct cultural relationship between Eastern
Asia and Mexico.
Although the mass of conservative opinion un¬
doubtedly gravitates to support of the third school,
that opinion has all too frequently been formed from
the study of exclusively American subjects. To
test the claims to paternity of either Mayan or
Asiatic it is necessary to move southward a moment
from the scene of the Toltecs’ hasting activity in
rearing Tollan.
Before any overwhelmingly affective drift of
culture from the Mayan Old Empire could have
ebbed up into Mexico it must, presuming a land
route, have passed through the Isthmus of Tehuan¬
tepec. Inside the Mexican region, a little north of
the Isthmus, lie the ruins of Mitla and Monte Alban.
Their construction is consistently ascribed to the
tribes in occupation of the region at the time of the
coming of the Spaniards. These were the Zapotecs
and Mixtecs. No certain datings can be applied to
200 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
these two test sites. And this is important. For if,
in the view of the Mayoid school, their remote
antiquity is assumed, then they were built by the
immigrant wash of culture from the Central American
debacle ; if dated late in pre-Columbian history, it
was a reflex flow of culture from the Mayan-inspired
Toltecs.
Both sites are show-places of the ancient American
scene. Monte Alban, in the process of excavation,
appears to be yielding such stores of “ treasure ”
as are likely to retrieve the reputation of Mexico
in the eyes of the romantic novelist; Mitla has long
been as fruitful of popular theorizing and even more
barren of satisfactory evidence than Tiawanako of
the Peruvian Andes. Amid heaps of rubble and
great vegetal mounds stand its much-discussed
“ palace-complex ”—quadrangular buildings, the
walls reared with extraordinary skill and symmetry.
For ornamentation these walls are severely patterned
in grecques and the like variations on world-known
geometric elements. World-known—but not else¬
where in America north of Panama. “ The sculp¬
tural decoration of the buildings at Mitla is unique
in Central America ^ (55).
Humboldt, in whose day Mitla appears in a much
better state of repair, noted the palace's " arab¬
esques," its caryatids, its general appearance of
having "striking analogies to Lower Italy "(44).
But he added, with his usual caution, that analogies
of this kind are very limited proof of the ancient
communication of nations. Charnay spoke of it as
“ a bewildering maze of courts and buildings, with
facings ornamented with mosaics in relief, of the
purest design; but under its projections are found
traces of paintings, wholly primitive in style, in
which the right line is not even respected " (56).
Charnay's abominable painters were undoubtedly
Toltec, and Toltec art, therefore, a late superimposi¬
tion. And there is no trace of Mayan datings; no
characteristic Mayan sculptures (the “ grecque " is
INTERLUDE IN ANCIENT MEXICO 201
as un-Mayan as it well might be) ; the palace
columns are quite definitely columns, not carved
wall-section roof-supports as in the Maya area.
The claim that Mitla stands as the “ half-way
house ” between Mayan and Toltec art is therefore
proved to have little foundation. Other origins
must be sought for the basic elements of Toltec
culture, as they must be sought for Zapotecan.
The question returns to the battle-fields of an
earlier controversy—" local development ” as against
extra-American inheritance. As has been stated, the
only survivals of Toltec architecture in Mexico proper
are pyramidal. We have noted how the orthodox
Americanist draws a severe line of demarcation
between the American and the Asiatic pyramid both
as to shape and function. “ The American pyramid,
built in terraces, had but faint resemblance even in
outline with the Nilotic monuments, and was never
chambered, but a solid structure.”
Humboldt (44) records, however, that in cutting
the road from Pueblo to Mexico a large portion of the
Cholula pyramid was cut adrift from the main mass
and laid bare a tomb built of stone slabs and sustained
by beams of cypress. Two skeletons reposed there,
some basalt statuettes, and a number of pieces of
glazed pottery. One can account for this heterodox
conduct on the part of the Cholula pyramid-builders
only by supposing that they were no true native
Americans at all, but aliens, impolitely or ignorantly
flouting the Monroe doctrine in archaeology.
Indeed, it now seems fairly obvious that Toltec
and Zapotec, in their different areas, were the
recipients of such trans-Pacific culture waves as
built up the Maya Empires. But they were different
waves, from slightly different sources and the cultural
streams that dried up so far as the Mayas were
concerned continued for a considerable time to play
actively on the Mexican coast. A glance at the map
will show good reasons for this.
This origin and connection was denied in toto by
202 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
the older school of historians, ascribing in the case
of the Mexicans, as of the Mayas, all resemblances to
Old-World civilizations to “ the narrow and limited
bournes within which the human mind and the
human hand can function.” They ascribed to the
human mind, in fact, a narrowness and an assiduous
inventive silliness entirely incompatible one with
the other.
Enhanced by natural development from within,
and by stray fragments of Maya culture from the
south, the Toltec civilization appears to have
reached its zenith about the end of the eleventh
Christian century. It then became menaced by the
arrival of new war-like tribes from the north—the
ferocious Chichemaca. And, under these historical
stresses, it prepared to fling into the Mayan drama
of history a number of protagonists who were
vitally to colour and affect that drama.
VIII
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW
EMPIRE
i. The Great Descent
THE New Empire, according to the legends
collected by Lizana (13) and others, suffered
or benefited throughout its history from three
invasions—the Great Descent, the earliest; the
Little Descent, the second in dating but the least in
importance; and the coming of Kukulcan (the
Toltec invasion).
It is difficult to connect either of the first two
invasions with the dated cities of Tuluum, Coba,
Chichen. But, on the whole, the scanty evidence
seems to point to the fact that the invaders of the
Great Descent came from the north-western section
of the Old Empire, and probably in the eighth or
ninth Christian centuries. It is probable that the
country was inhabited before their coming, and it is
equally probable that the story of the Great Descent
is no more than the story of the coming of the alien
culture-bringers (or their half-breed descendants),
who had prospected up through the Old Empire area
from their landing-place on the Pacific shore.
They were led by a God Itzamna, and his wife (and
sister) Ixchel, the Rainbow Goddess ; they were led,
in fact, by typical Children of the Sun, people of the
divine caste. Later historians have been apt to
identify them with the sun in his progress, as Itzamna
was also a God of the Mayas. But there is no reason
to doubt the actual humanity of either Itzamna
or his consort. And it seems to have been as common
for the Maya to bear the names of their gods as it
was for the Spanish Jesu-Marias to wear plate-
armour and rape Amerindian women.
To the present writer the legend of the Great
Descent enshrines the first authentic-sounding note
in Maya history. It seems a legend of the autoch¬
thonous Maya themselves—not of the culture-
203
204 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
bringers. The Maya of the horizon culture, the
Archaic civilization, stared out their wonder upon
the strangers, strangely armed and gifted, who came
marching from the north-west into their country,
settling here and there, bringing new gods and cults
Itzamna, we are told, brought the art of maize¬
growing and also of the script. It is very possible
that indeed he brought improvements upon the
primitive technique of maize-cultivation, and if
a member of the hybrid ruling-caste of the Old
Empire it is likely that he brought with him the newly-
fashioned script. His features and those of Ixchel
are dim enough to our eyes, but his story strikes a
fine plangent note in that distant land, bright with
sunshine, this lost Oceanic or Indonesian or half-
breed, remote from the possibility of his native land
and its cults ; or perhaps a child of the Americas,
remembering back through several generations dim
traditions of his alien ancestors. But doubtlessly,
as did all the Sun Children, (the most remarkable
blood-caste which ever appeared on the earth and
which wandered with civilization from Egypt to
the ends of the earth,) he was conscious of his own
divinity, as his followers were and soon the Yucatecan
natives as well.
Itzamna laid the foundations of Champoton and
probably Kimpech and then pressed deeper up
towards the peak of the Peninsula. Kabah and Sayil
may have been founded by him in this march, and
finally, Izamal. There Itzamna died and was buried
in a great pyramid—the Itzamatul, long a place of
pilgrimage for the Western Yucatecans.
This eruption of civilization among the Mayas it
was which probably reared the somewhat florid and
yet unimaginative architecture of north-western
Yucatan. Probably Itzamna and his following,
though they brought the script, either lacked or
discarded the cumbrous mathematical calculations of
the calendar fashioned by their fathers in the Old
Empire. Possibly its fashioning had not yet been
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 205
completed. At least, despite the apparent antiquity
of many of the sites, they stand undated in their
bush, and lead to a natural supposition that it was
here that the Katun Count was first used, from here
and not from any catastrophic overthrow of the Old
Empire that the new system of dating originated.
ii. The Little Descent
The coming of the Little Descent may be identified
(and with some certainty) with the wanderings of
that remarkable family, the Tutul Xiu, whom we have
already encountered erupting through the stagnant
peace (or at least silence) of Old Empire history.
After abandoning Chacnouitan, according to the
family chronicle, they settled at Bakhalal. Two
hundred years later they “ discovered Chichen-
Itza,” settled there, and “ were accepted as lords of
the land.”
Did their coming precede that of the Great
Descent; and, coming to Chichen, did they find the
city already settled ?
As has already been stated, no reliance can be
placed in the contradictory datings of the Books of
Chilan Balaam. The probability is that the Tutul
Xiu arrived in the region of Chichen Itza towards the
close of the tenth century. Long prior to that, as the
datings show, eastern Yucatan had been settled—
to judge by its architecture settled from the Peten
region—and Chichen Itza, Coba, and Tuluum built.
When the Tutul Xiu arrived on the scene it was prob¬
ably through a flourishing land, citied and peopled.
The inhabitants one must postulate as necessary
figures for accepting the Xiu as “ lords of the land.”
Probably the inhabitants were the usual Maya,
Choi Maya, with the usual organization, and the
Xiu by this time a war-like tribal grouping. But it
seems that the Western Yucatecans, the Holy
People, Itzamna’s people, who had grown by this
time into something of the likeness of a nation, had
206
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
extended their sway over Chichen Itza. Indeed, the
very name of the city means the Mouth of the Wells
of the Itzas—The Mouth of the Holy Wells. It is
probable that the Xiu forcibly captured the city and
laid the surrounding country under tribute, laid,
indeed, the Itzas under tribute. From this arose the
eginnings of that remarkable triangular leaguing
and conflict that was to dominate New Empire
history to the end.
After the arrival of the Little Descent the history
of Yucatan dims. The Books interweave their mean-
mgless dates, confusing Itzas and Xiu very unhelp¬
fully and hopelessly, from the point of view of most
modern historians. The confusion, however, seems
laigely unnecessary. A remarkable statement illu¬
mines the shadows, the statement that the Tutul Xiu,
no doubt in order to conciliate the surrounding Itzas ’
“ called themselves Itzas.”
The re-christening appears to have availed them
little. After a lapse of some years—a hundred and
twenty in the Xiu chronicles, but this is manifestly
merely dragging in a sacred calendar number—the
surrounding Itzas appear to have arisen and driven
out the Tutul Xiu. The latter decamped, wandered
across the Peninsula, and seized the town of Cham-
poton.
Champoton was the first port where Yucatan’s
next alien invaders were to land.
iii. The Golden Age of Itza
The rulers of Izamal during the time when the
Toltec Xiu occupied Chichen Itza appear to have
been the Cocomes. Possibly these Cocomes, true
Itzas, were mainly instrumental in sending forth the
Xiu on their unwilling exodus through the wastes of
Yucatan to Champoton. At least, relieved of the
hated Strangers, as the Xiu were called, it would
seem that a large portion of Yucatan submitted to
Cocome rule. Indeed, a great Pax Itzana may have
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 207
been instituted, missing out Champoton with its rebel
Xiu. This at least is a more probable re-setting of
the broken mosaic than that blur of senile exoduses
and marchings which some modern historians foist
upon the Maya scene—the Itzas themselves fled to
Champoton, the Xius apparently vanished into the
ground, and the rest of the inconvenient details of
Yucatecan history of the time dismissed as “ euhe-
merized sun-myth.,,
It was probably during the era of early Cocome
rule that, to the south, in darkness for us, but not
necessarily for the Yucatecans, the Old Empire was
attaining its apogee. Habits and customs, rumours
and hostilities, we may suppose, flowed to and fro the
Old and New Empire areas. A great rectification of
the calendar—the putting of Pop in order—took
place at Copan, and for that rectification it seems
likely, from the representation of seated astronomers
each with a primitive instrument in his hand, carved
on an altar at Copan, that representatives from many
Maya cities attended, New Empire as well as Old
Empire. There are vagaries of dress in the squatting
priests, and, to judge from the glyphs, vagaries of
names and towns. One priest, in turban and orna¬
ments, looks as though he had newly stepped ashore
from Indonesia. Yucatecan tradition duly records,
what has been verified from the altered gnomons of
the great sun-dial of Copan, that “ Pop was put in
order,” i.e., Mayan ceremonial time was brought into
line with solar time.
In this period it is probable that the great sacred
road from Coba to Chichen Itza, and perhaps from
Coba to the sea-coast opposite the Holy Island of
Cozumel, was built. Both Chichen and Cozumel
were sacred places, Cozumel the Iona of Yucatan, an
island of temples and the grisly rites of the Mayan
faith. And probably it was in this age that the
Three Brothers of Bishop Landa’s tale ruled. Their
history casts some light on the dark scene, even if it is
a light almost wholly fictitious.
208 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
They appear to have been the sons of the ruler of
Chichen Itza, the sons of the Cocome. When their
father died the three were left to rule jointly, an
oddly depressing trio, as we view them. Probably
they seemed equally depressing to the Itzas. So far
from embarking on the usual dynastic squabbles,
they were inseparable, the three brothers, living
together, together worshipping the gods. They kept
the traditional laws strictly, or amended them in the
interests of a secure morality. They kept the feasts
and fasts scrupulously, and spent long hours in the
temple ceremonies. They appealed very much to
Bishop Landa when he heard of them five centuries
later, though we may imagine that the helots of the
fields, the fishermen in their canoes, the artisans
scraping the temple-walls with their stone tools,
moiled and toiled on through the long hot days of the
summers or the days of rain and torturing insect-
clouds, and were but little concerned.
No rift appeared in the fraternal lute until news of
some kind summoned one of the brothers to Bak-
halal: this seems to warrant the idea that Bakhalal
was part of the Itza state. No sooner had he gone
than his brothers threw off the guise of piety and
moral strictness, and proceeded, as no doubt they
themselves and their admirers called it, to make
whoopee. New taxes were levied and collected.
Banquets and all-night feastings became the rule.
Women were raided from their homes to satiate the
lust of the Two Brothers. Chichen (presuming that
city was their capital) became an Amerindian Milan
under the rule of a mad Sforza.
It was too much at last even for the patient Mayan
spirit, and the populace presently rose in revolt. The
Two Brothers were captured and executed for
“ oppressing the republic/'
What happened to the Third Brother at Bakhalal
is not told. It is to be hoped that he shared the fate
of the other two. More probably, like a later Cocome
whose family was exterminated, he returned to con-
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 20Q
tinue the dynasty which was shortly to face the
invasion of a non-Mayan enemy.
iv. The Coming of Kukulcan
This has brought us up to a period of Yucatecan
history still uncertain in its dating. But from both
Mexican and Yucatecan traditional history it is safe
to assign the period now under review towards the
middle of the twelfth century, circa a.d. iioo or a.d.
1150.
About this time it appears that the great Toltec
city of Tula or Tollan was captured by barbarians,
the Chichemaca, and its inhabitants scattered^ Some
of them stayed on in Mexico, little pockets of civiliza¬
tion in the flooding seas of barbarism, but of the
main body of the Toltec people a great southwards ^
migration took place. That the Toltecs realized the
condition of Central America and were aware of the
civilization of the Mayas there can be little doubt.
Probably Toltec merchants had already traded
widely in Yucatan, Toltec pilgrims visited Cozumel.
The odd belief that each American civilization lived
in complete ignorance of its neighbour has been
dissipated by the facts of modern research.
The ruler of Tollan at the time of its capture by the
Chichemaca was an old man, Huemac, whom the in¬
vaders hunted down and murdered. Thereafter the
leadership of the migrating Toltecs passed into the
hands of one of the most remarkable men in American
history: the Lord Axcitl Quetzalcoatl—Axcitl the
Humming-bird Snake, whose name the Mayas were
to translate as Kukulcan.
In the legendary history of the Toltecs there
appear to have been at least three Quetzalcoatls.
The first was that missionary-explorer-reformer who
arrived in Toltec territory probably towards the close
of the ninth century, bringing the arts and crafts, the
methods of weaving and star-calculation—bringing,
in fact, the elements of advanced Asiatic culture into
210
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
the life of an Archaic Culture people. He appears to
have dominated the Toltec mind not only during his
life, but for long after his death. His attitude
towards the native Amerindian pantheons is curiously
reminiscent of the attitude of the Buddha and the
Buddhist missionaries, as the present writer has
shown elsewhere (57). He was horrified at the thought
of human sacrifice, but approved of such sacrifices as
those shown on various Maya sculptures—the draw¬
ing of blood from the tongue and genitals by thorns,
and so forth. Then he died and passed from the
Toltec scene.
Dead or departed, he appears to have been identi¬
fied with the Toltec Sun God, or placed in control of
many of the functions of that luminary. In the years
that followed a curious anomaly grew up. Quetzal-
coatl was worshipped with all the sanguinary rites
of the other gods of the Amerindian pantheons, the
while his reputation as a gentle reformer, one who
hated human sacrifice, still lived on. In fact, he was
a. late and alien god who never became fully natura¬
lized. It is an interesting speculation, which cannot
be followed out here in any detail, whether the first
Quetzalcoatl ever had a human life in the Mexican
plain and mountains, whether indeed he may not be
simply the tale of the Buddha, the Brahmanized
Buddha of Indonesia, translated into Toltec terms
and transplanted to Toltec territory. If so, it was a
strange enough avatar of the great Sakya Muni which
took place in ancient America.
The third Quetzalcoatl, the Toltec warrior whose
conquests and adventurings were so greatly to affect
the fortunes of the New Empire Maya, was probably
the cacique of some priestly Toltec house specially
and specifically concerned with the Quetzalcoatl
worship. He was named after the god, as Itzamna
of the Great Descent may have been named after
the common sun god of the Maya Old Empire. Of
his likeness or appearance there is no possibility of
disentangling a certain portrait. His features are
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 211
blurred in those of the earlier Quetzalcoatl, the
missionary-stranger, pale-skinned, long-robed, black-
bearded. The American Indians grow a thin and
unchancy crop of face-hair, but some castes appear to
have cultivated ceremonial beards. Perhaps Axcitl
Quetzalcoatl was bearded, and largely in the tradi¬
tional likeness of the god whose name he bore.
The refugees appear to have drifted through the
Tehuantepec neck and into Acallan by sea and land.
What happened in that vague territory is uncertain.
Probably the Toltecs conquered and settled those
debatable regions. Probably they came into actual
conflict with the Maya Old Empire. At this period
that Old Empire appears in the throes, as we have
noted, of a fresh Period of Disunity. Did the
presence of the Toltec migrants to the north of its
territory add to that disunity, cause it, or take advan¬
tage of it ? There is a dim and unreliable tradition of
Quetzalcoatl sailing up the Usamacintla and con¬
quering various cities along its course—Mench&-
Yaxchilan, and perhaps Piedras Negras. But this is
very doubtful. There is nothing whatever in Old
Empire sculpture which suggests Toltec influences :
the Old Empire remains in the darkness from which
it is improbable it will ever be excavated, and we
follow the Toltecs on another venture.
This was the invasion of Yucatan.
Possibly news of the dissentions in the Peninsula
following the death of the Two Unjust Brothers in¬
fluenced the Toltec invaders. Possibly it was a kind
of blind drive towards an admittedly weaker section
of the Maya territory. For, in darkness though it is,
one apprehends the Old Empire as strong as it is
tenebrous. And perhaps the Toltecs were aware of
the country surrounding Champoton, held by the
Tutul Xiu, as a land hostile to the rest of the Penin¬
sula, more easy to attack.
The invasion appears to have taken place by the
sea, and to have touched Yucatecan soil first at
Champoton. There is no account of the landing and
212 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
battle which must have taken place, but the issue
could never have been greatly in doubt. The Toltecs
were probably the much better armed and led of the
two forces. Against them were doubtlessly opposed
the usual Maya militia, and militia then, as now,
were probably hopeless troops to set against pro¬
fessional warriors. Further, the Maya were still un¬
acquainted with the bow. One creates a fanciful
picture of this decimation of the Maya ranks by the
Toltec bowmen. The city was probably captured
with ease.
Now, though the legends are confused and un¬
reliable enough, it appears very likely that it was
this invasion of the Toltecs which led to the eviction
of the Tutul Xiu from Champoton. They fled into the
interior of the Peninsula, probably a great hijra of
men, women, children, from the advance of the
triumphing Toltecs. For once the Mani chronicle
almost breaks into loquacity. The Xiu endured
great hardships, “ wandering under the forest trees,
living upon roots.” The story has the authentic ring
of a people violently dispossessed of their homes.
Quetzalcoatl apparently lingered but a short while
in the captured sea-town of the Mayas. He marched
into the interior, and thereafter the route of his con¬
quest is a matter of supposition. One may imagine
Kimpech and Sayil falling into his hands, Itzamal,
where the great tomb of the Itzamatul may have
surprised the conquerors with its likeness to their
own great pyramids at Teotihuacan, now in the hands
of the barbarous Chichemaca. Chacmultun and Xul,
with their great temples and colleges and inscriptions,
po doubt were entered by the Toltec forces, but there
is no story of whether they resisted or surrendered.
One has the impression, nevertheless, of a singularly
feeble defence, and may speculate as to how the
Cocome rulers of the Itzas behaved. Did the Real
Man of Chichen Itza organize a heroic army and great
battles devastate the scene on the road to Chichen
Itza ? Were the Mayas as ferocious opponents to
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 213
the Mexican strangers as they were later to prove
to the Spanish ? Or was that later resistance the
result of the infusion of Toltec blood, not to speak
of Toltec military science ?
Of these things there is no record. Probably the
terrible bow proved as effective a weapon in the
campaign as the needle-gun of the Prussians was to
prove in 1870. The conquering Toltecs, the Strong
Men who had been unable to withstand the Chiche-
maca, dominated with comparative ease the tribes
of Maya peasants and priests and ineffective nobles.
One may pause and wonder what the peasants
thought as the invaders tramped through their
plantations, whether they greatly resented their
coming, or had the unpatriotic outlook of all sweated
land-serfs. And what did the Toltecs think of the
land and its gods, and its men with the mis-shapen
heads ?—the Toltecs themselves went undeformed.
Chichen Itza was captured. The rulers of the Itzas
submitted. Cozumel Island, the Holy Island, was
either taken or the priestly caste who ruled there, the
Cumux, made diplomatic peace with the invaders.
Quetzalcoatl and his Toltecs were in possession of
the New Empire.
v. The Reign of Kukulcan
With Yucatan so subdued, a design of considerable
ambition seems to have fructified in the mind of the
Toltec leader. This was to build a federal capital
which would rule, through the Toltec power, all the
cities and settlements of the Itza.
Chichen Itza was an impossible capital, probably
because the Itza still looked upon the Toltecs as
interlopers who had defiled their sacred city. Fur¬
ther, the mass of occupied Maya cities in those days
appears to have lain to the north-west. Nor would
Izamal, under its giant mausoleum, have proved a
better centre, already wedded to a local cult and
with a long history of its own. Quetzalcoatl therefore
214 the CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
resolved to found a completely new city, situated
in the midst of the most populous region.
His plannings probably received considerable
impetus from news of the latest move of the Tutul
Xiu. Evicted from Champoton, as we have seen,
into that vast stretch of Yucatecan territory then
nameless, but afterwards to be called after the city
of Mani, the Xiu appear to have built up considerable
political or military power in a comparatively short
time. The Katun dates would extend this period to
a hundred years or more, but they may be disregarded.
It is more probable that, under the leadership of a
vigorous “ Governor/’ Ahzuitok Tutulxiu, the Xius
in a few years or even a few months, welded them¬
selves into a strong power—the only power in the
Peninsula not subdued by the invaders. They ad¬
vanced northwards, and, almost contemporaneous
with the plannings of Quetzalcoatl, commenced to
build the city of Uxmal.
We may project Ahzuitok and Quetzalcoatl as the
protagonists in a dim Yucatecan drama. The end of
it is certain, though how that end was attained, by
force or diplomacy, is uncertain. However that be,
the Xiu entered the federal league imposed by the
Toltecs, and probably aided in the building of the
new capital, Mayapan.
Various fantastic etymologies explain this name.
It was said to have been detestable to the Maya, who
suspected a Toltec sneer. The invaders were said to
translate the word as Maya—“ not virile,” and pan,
“ a banner.” This would make of Mayapan the
Woman’s Banner, the Eunuch’s Flag. The con¬
quered Maya, as proud of their reproductive powers
as most peoples, probably credited their conquerors
with an unusual subtlety. It seems certain, never¬
theless, that after the departure of the Toltecs the
Maya called the city by many fresh names : Tancah,
the Middle of the Earth, Ichpa, the Fortress, and
many others. Mayapan outlasted them all, however.
It was a last legacy of rude Toltec vigour.
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 215
Quetzalcoatl instituted a league of three principal
powers, which, in turn, were to be responsible for
the governance of the lesser cities under their sway.
These three powers seem to have been the Eastern
Yucatecans, under the rule of a nameless family in
Chichen Itza ; the Western Itza, under the rule of a
branch of the Cocomes at Izamal; and Central
and Southern Yucatan, under the rule of the much-
travelled Tutul Xiu at their new city of Uxmal. The
Cocomes themselves were installed in the federal
capital, Mayapan.
The League appears to have been equipped with an
elaborate constitution. Two bureaux were to rule
under the Toltec overlord or his viceroys, the
Cocomes. One, the political, was to have the Cocome
as president, the other, the religious, was under a
high priest who also resided at Mayapan. To
strengthen the central authority, the members of
the League and their subordinate cities were required
to deliver up hostages to reside in Mayapan and there
receive such training and culture as the central
authority considered meet.
Apparently Quetzalcoatl was not only a conquering
warrior and a statesman of considerable foresight and
skill, but also a propagandist of his religion—the
Quetzalcoatl worship, the honouring of that divinity
whose name the Maya translated as Kukulcan. To the
beginning of the League period we may confidently
assign the coming of Toltec influence in New Empire
sculpture. In Chichen, Izamal, Mayapan began to
rise Toltec temples and phallic towers, decorated
with the giant serpents, the grinning monster-heads
and the marching warriors beloved of Toltec art.
Toltec altars upheld by squat atlanteans, Toltec
palaces with serpent-pillars, Toltec ball-courts, large
and elaborate, overhung and overshadowed the pro¬
ducts of the native civilization. It was an art and an
architecture with a certain aridness, without much
imaginative scope. On the other hand, it has to
modern eyes a clean grace and naive intimacy which
216 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
no true Maya art possesses. It is nearer the human
norm than the twisted heads and fuss of insane
ornamentation beloved of the unsubdued cities of the
Old Empire.
Oddly enough, and the inevitable ball-courts
apart, the cities under the rule of the Xius show the
least mark of Toltec influence. One may imagine
from this that the strength of the Xius was still
considerable, that the “ Strangers/' in fact, were the
only patriotic Maya of the New Empire not com¬
pletely subdued.
How long this most interesting of Yucatecan
statesmen, Quetzalcoatl-Kukulcan, remained in the
New Empire is uncertain. (As indeed is the authen¬
ticity of much of his activities.) Legend, however,
despatches him to Tabasco to make new conquests
to add to his empire. Possibly he led his all-conquer¬
ing Toltec army back into Mexico against the
flooding Chichemaca. Of where he went and how he
fared there appear to have arisen great cloudings of
rumour and surmise. His disappearance led to his
speedy incorporation with the Quetzalcoatl-Kukulcan
worship—he was made one with the sun-god, who
possibly himself had been some Asiatic missionary,
who himself may have preached some Buddha-avatar
of the Brahmans.
The turn and play of the historic forces have
introduced many a strange cultural complication—
the Buddha a saint in the Christian calendar, and the
same Buddha probably worshipped with rites of
human sacrifice in the temples of Chichen Itza and
Mayapan.
vi. The League of Mayapan
For over two hundred years, from about the begin¬
ning of the thirteenth Christian century until the end
of the fourteenth, the League of Mayapan endured.
It is a time almost without history, an era of peace
in the New Empire, almost as voiceless and nameless
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 217
as the entire history of that Old Empire which prob¬
ably still endured in the country to the south and
west, or only now was decaying.
It would be easy to construct from the known
elements an imaginative picture of that time, pro¬
viding we remembered it imaginative, not historical:
religion static in essentials, but the temple-rites
growing ever the more drearily complicated. There
were endless sacrifices and prayings, fastings and
feastings and mutilations. The spirit-denizens of
forest, mountain, cenote, and sea increased till it
would seem the very bacilli of death were apprehended
and worshipped. Architecture, transformed through
the Toltec influences, soon lost initiative in the
design of new forms, and indulged in repetition on
repetition of earlier forms. Pottery and jewel-work
evolved a beauty and polish before unknown, and
then, in a kind of bored desperation, strayed into the
ultra-fantastic in shape and design. Sculpture,
portrait sculpture, became unknown. . . . Indeed,
it needs little imaginative vision to see a kind of
cultural leprosy thick-dusting the peace and pros¬
perity of the era of the League, which so many
modern historians have postulated as one of peace
and contentment.
The peace was more of sleep than of content and
the result of statesmanship, we need hardly doubt.
The peasants toiled as immemorially they had toiled,
in the hot Yucatecan weather, for two hundred years,
seed-times and harvests, expecting little, and being
undisappointed, for, if League social customs at all
resembled those prevalent at the time of the coming
of the Spaniards, they received little. No doubt
among the middle classes—the Guildsmen, the chilan
priests—an individual might now and again arise who
was different, who did or carved or said uncon¬
ventional and unexpected things, who raised a
building with slimmer pillars, widened the corbelled
arch, resurrected some of the antique skill in astro¬
nomical measurements, experimented with the casting
218 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
of metals. But of those imaginative, though not
imaginary folk (for of them the real stuff of history
is made), the records are dumb amidst the shouting
of the captains and the kings.
But throughout that two hundred years of Yuca-
tecan history even the kings are strangely muted of
voice. The first Cocome established in Mayapan was
succeeded by his legitimate descendants, and these
seem to have behaved with considerable statesman¬
ship. They remained the League’s overlords, but
no more. Some of them built city houses in Mayapan
to attract to the capital the country batabs and
governors during certain seasons, we are told.
Mayapan was the scene of the great Kukulcan
festival, for five days every year, and no doubt the
roads that led to the capital had pictures bright and
barbaric and colourful enough in those days of
pilgrimage when the delegations from the various
Yucatecan cities marched to the capital, with their
banners of green feathers, clad in ceremonial
costumes, passing through the villages of the helots,
the rulers carried in litters, surrounded by guards¬
men bearing bright hint-edged spears and clubs.
No doubt life for the nobles in Mayapan, as in their
home cities, was no mere solemn cyclical celebration
of solemn temple ritual. Rape played, no doubt,
as great a part in Maya life and romance as it did
elsewhere, in spite of the contention of some modern
writers that the ancient Maya were a singularly
sex-cold race. The phallic picotes of Uxmal and
Chichen Itza, suggest otherwise. Phallicism was a
lively cult in Mexico, and apparently in the New
Empire as well—this pitiful worship of the
emblems of fertility by a culture relatively non¬
producing.
No doubt Cozumel steadily increased in fame and
fortune throughout the era of the League, and the
great Coba-Chichen highway was often enough
crowded with pilgrims come from far and near
through Central America and Mexico. The Holy
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 2ig
Island, like the rest of Yucatan, had accepted the
Kukulcan rite of the Toltecs—the now-vanished
Toltecs, racially and culturally vanished, little more
than a name in the home of their origin. The
Kukulcan was incorporated in the Maya pantheon,
a Mexicanized Indra-Buddha cheek by jowl with such
deities as the Mayaized Indra-Ganesha-Chac. The
Xiu in their capital Uxmal appear to have become
especially enamoured of the Kukulcan cult. Bishop
Landa records that just prior to the coming of the
Spanish conquerors, the whole “ month ” of Xul was
devoted to the “ Kukulcan ” festival at Mani.
Landa, however, makes the Xiu the heroes of his
history and the Cocomes the villains, and would
naturally associate the least repulsive of the Mayan
deities with his heroes.
During the period of the League the Xiu built
their political capital, Mani, at a short distance from
their ceremonial capital, Uxmal. In many respects,
as we have noted previously, the Maya civilization
never emerged from the Archaic culture stage of the
whole ancient world, with its dual organization and
dual villages. Tikal and Uaxactun were probably
examples of this, and later Uxmal and Mani. But
Mani was also built near the greatest flint quarry in
Yucatan. Fortune favoured the Xius and their new
town became the principal weapon-making centre in
the Peninsula, for in Yucatan flint held much the
same position in the economic life as iron did in
contemporary Europe.
And then abruptly, round about the year a.d.
1400, plantation and temple alike awoke from the
peaceful life of two hundred years to see the fires of
war kindle and kindle from city to city until the glare
of them was over all the lands of the League.
vii. The End of the League
At the time when the conflict broke out the Halach
Uinic of the League, the Real Man, was Hunac Ceel;
220 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Ulil was the Governor of Izamal; and Chac-Xib-
Chac the Governor of Chichen Itza. The name of
the Xiu governor of Uxmal is unknown. The Xius
at the beginning of the conflict kept warily in the
background, perhaps from their privileged position
in Mani supplying the combatants on all sides with
weapons from their great flint-quarries.
Probably disaffection with the power of the
Cocomes in Mayapan first rose to open revolt under
the reign of Hunac Ceel, who seems to have had few of
the pleasant traits and most of the unpleasant.
His type is such as we should expect from a long
generation of rulers regarded as semi-divine, yet
forced in no way to keep their divinity burnished.
His reign appears to have been marked with fresh
taxes and extortions on the League cities. Finally,
he learned that Ulil of Izamal was plotting his over¬
throw in company with Chac-Xib-Chac.
There is an alternative reading to the story which
makes Hunac Ceel and numerous other nobles
descend on Chichen to celebrate the wedding of the
Red Man. During the wedding feast most of the
guests, in the usual Maya fashion, drank themselves
speechless and powerless—all but the wily Hunac
Ceel. Preserving his sobriety not for moral, but
strictly immoral reasons, he abducted the bride—
a squint-eyed, deformed-headed Paris with a Helen
whose name is not even mentioned. Considering
the facets of his character later turned on history,
the more romantic version of the story does not
seem improbable. Grave historians reject the
story of the abduction of Chac-Xib-Chac's bride,
and ascribe the outbreak of war to Hunac Ceel’s
political ambitions, just as they burn the topless
towers of Ilium for commercial reasons rather than
the face that launched a thousand ships. But com¬
mercial wars belong more to the era of developed
capitalism than to that of a barbaric league of cities.
Whether the cause was abduction, or Izamal and
Chichen the aggressors, war broke out.
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 221
At first success appears to have gone with Chac-
Xib-Chac. But the fortune of battle changed, Hunac
Ceel captured Chichen Itza and drove out the Red
Man. The fate of Ulil is uncertain. Probably he
also was driven from Izamal. Hunac Ceel, so far
from being the overlord of a federation, was now the
ruler of a compact kingdom—but for the Man
territory under the old hereditary enemies of the
Cocomes, the Tutul Xiu.
Hostilities for a little appear to have hung fire,
the Xiu diplomatic and wary. Then Hunac Ceel
had a mercenary army brought from Mexico, from
Xicalanco or the neighbourhood of Tlascala. These
new-comers were descendants of the tribes which
had broken up the Toltec republic, and kin to the
Aztecs who were now rising into prominence in the
Valley.
Ahtzinteyut-chan, Tzuntecum, Taxcal, Pantemit,
Xuchucuet, Itzuat, and Kakaltecat were the leaders
of this Mexican horde, and the seven sweet sym¬
phonies boom menacingly, if a trifle meaninglessly,
across the history of those days. Hunac Ceel seems
to have made no immediate use of these allies. He
settled them in Chichen Itza, which suggests that
Chichen had become depopulated. Probably its
population had migrated southwards.
This was a bad tactical move on the part of the
Mayapan tyrant. The Maya regarded Chichen Itza
as a sacred city, and the Nahua bowmen with the
seven captains as defiling foreigners. War again
broke out, this time with the Xiu leading the con¬
federate forces. The Cocomes, beaten in the field,
took refuge in Mayapan fortress. Apparently their
Mexican allies were laggard in coming to their aid.
Hunac Ceel appears to have been dead by this time.
His successor, with his Nahua allies at length in
Mayapan, was dismayed to find these allies singularly
insubordinate. He fled from the city and took refuge
in the state of Kimpech. The allies took Mayapan
and instantly fell to bitter quarrelling over who
222 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
should control it. It appears that the Xiu had been
enticed to take the field on the promise that they
would be given Mayapan when the Cocomes were
overthrown. But now the confederate governors
refused to acknowledge the supremacy of the Tutul
Xiu, and the various parts of the Maya army broke
up and scattered back to their homes.
From Kimpech it is told that the Cocome de¬
spatched another embassy to Mexico, asking for a
further army of mercenaries. Some historians see
this embassy at the court of the Aztecs. More prob¬
ably, it gathered men in Tabasco. One version, at
least, brings over an army of Tenochcas and Xica-
lanques under the command of a captain, Kanul, who
was subsequently to give his name to a Maya state.
With this army to back him, the Cocome advanced
on his ancient capital of Mayapan, brushed aside
what little opposition there was, and entered it in
triumph.
Bourbon-like, however, the Cocomes seem to have
been incapable of either learning or forgetting. They
commenced to pay off old scores. Hunac Ceel's suc¬
cessor died, and his son, Nacotcocome, appears to
have been moulded in his grandfather’s image. His
oppressions became too bitter for the populace to
endure. Again they rose in rebellion, and again, after
much urging, the Tutul Xiu of Uxmal placed them¬
selves at the head of the rebel forces.
This was the year 1451, one of the few certain dates
in Maya history, a remarkable and fateful year. The
rebel confederates besieged Mayapan, the Mexican
mercenaries being again strangely missing from the
scene. Confident in the walls of the Fortress, Nacot¬
cocome behaved with some prudence. But the in¬
surgents conspired with a priest inside Mayapan, one
Ahchel, who opened the gates to them.
Mayapan was looted and a terrible massacre of the
Cocomes set in. They were hunted down in the
rooms and corridors of the Mayapan palace, run to
earth in its remotest corners, and slaughtered, or
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 223
raped and slaughtered, without mercy. Not a soul
of the Cocome family-group in Mayapan remained
alive, the only regret of the triumphant confederates
being that a younger son of Nacotcocome, despatched
on a mission to Bakhalal, escaped their vengeance.
The Xiu again laid claim to rule Mayapan in the
place of the Cocomes, and, as before, their allies
instantly became their enemies, and vigorously
denied them the right. It even appears that the Xiu
again besieged Mayapan, this time defended by their
erstwhile comrades-in-arms. The Xiu blood was up.
They captured the city a second time, set it on fire,
levelled its walls with the ground, and retired to
Uxmal.
With their retirement, the last symbol of unity on
the New Empire had fallen.
viii. The Period of Disunity
With the break-up of the League the New Empire
in Yucatan appears to have assumed much the same
tribal groupings as the Spaniards found on their
arrival seventy years later. The central and most
powerful state was Mani, ruled by the Tutul Xiu
from their two capitals of Uxmal and Mani. Apart
from these solid foundations of power, the Xiu also
laid claim to the ruins of Mayapan and yearly the
Governor of Uxmal appears to have marched his
militia into the ruins to reiterate the claim. Then,
like the men of the Duke of York in the ballad, he
marched them home again.
South of Mani, and bordering on the cities of
the Old Empire, lay the territory of Peten Itza.
How definite were its city groupings there is no
record. It may even have been ruled from Tikal
and Uaxactun. West, along the inland Mani border,
lay in northwards journey Peten-ekte, of which we
know little, Tixchel, of which we know less, and
Potonchon, centred round its capital of Champoton,
where the Mexicans under Quetzalcoatl-Kukulcan
224 the CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
had landed, where the Xiu had resided during their
exile from Northern Yucatan, and where now, in the
period of disunity, a warrior family, the family-group
of the Covoh, dominated the scene. This family was
to provide a general of some skill and unlimited
ferocity to oppose the (as yet) inapparent Spaniards.
North of Potonchan lay Kimpech, a state ruled
apparently by a minor branch of the Cocomes, and
north of it Chakan, in whose territory stood the city
of Sayil, then, perhaps, a minor Athens, as to-day it
is a minor but intriguing show-place for the traveller
in Yucatan.
North of Chakan lay Kanul, apparently settled by
the mercenary army brought by the Cocomes to sub¬
due their subjects. The Maya treated the invaders
with great leniency, either through policy or a
clemency little to be looked for. The story goes that
they were allowed to settle the sea-coast tract, which
they named after their leader, on the understanding
that they should not inter-marry with the Maya
populace of surrounding territories. They were a
lesser breed without the law, but probably, in spite
of the prohibition of the victorious confederates, soon
became thoroughly Mayaized in blood and culture.
Kanul included the great religious site of Ti-hoo,
where the present-day Merida is built. Technically,
Mayapan was also in its territory, but this seems to
have been no bar to the annual excursion and games
of the haughty Xius from Mani.
Cepech was a little corner state on the sea-border,
of which nothing is told. It was sandwiched in
between Kanul and Ahkinchel, the latter, the tradi¬
tion goes, founded by the same priest, Ahchel, as had
opened the gates of Mayapan to the besieging con¬
federates. His people, the Chels, dominated the sea-
coast for long, second in power only to the Xius of
Mani.
Between Mani territory and Ahkinchel there
presently sprang up a new Cocome state. This was
Zotuta, founded by the sole survivor of the slaughter
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 225
of the Cocomes, that Cocome who had been absent
on a mission in Bakhalal. It contained the two cities
of Zotuta and Tibullon, and, characteristically
Cocome, remained on very bitter terms with both
Mani and Ahkinchel in spite of the fact that Tibullon
was supposed to signify “ We have been judged ”—
an allusion to the fate of the Cocomes of Mayapan.
No family in Mayan history appears to have de¬
served its judgment so thoroughly, and one cannot
but sympathize with Landa in his sympathies for the
Xius who had helped to bring their fate upon the
Cocomes, and were twice cheated of their reward.
Indeed, the Xius are the most sane and under¬
standable of all the warring little tribes that endured
in Yucatan. Their history was one of dogged
independence and resolution. Only time and
circumstances defeated their attempt to establish
a hegemony over all the other states of the
Peninsula.
In the north-eastern corner of the Peninsula there
were three states at least—Tizimin, Calotmul, and
Kupul. Calotmul appears to have been little more
than a narrow belt of country surrounding that much-
harassed city, Chichen Itza. Tizimin is merely a
name. Of Kupul, the largest of the three, we also
know little.
Opposite the shore of Kupul lay the Holy Island,
Cozumel, where the priests of the Cumux family
probably carried on their rites and sacrifices un¬
disturbed by the rage of events in the Peninsula, and
looked out from their towers at a sea unflecked with
alien sails.
South of Kupul lay the states of Ekab and
Cochuah, Ekab with apparently Tuluum as its
capital—a Tuluum probably raided and settled by
the “ cannibals from the sea.” The ruling family
here was the Exbox. Cochuah, a large and indefinite
territory stretching into the even larger and more
indefinite Bakhalal and Chectemal, was reputed to
have over a million inhabitants at the time of the
226 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Conquest, and was ruled by a family group with the
generic name of May.
This cataloguing of uneuphonious names suggests
a wild confusion and disintegration of the New
Empire. Yet this disintegration appears, at first, to
have been political only. And that political collapse,
the legends tell, was productive of nothing but good.
For a time peace descended on the ruins of the
Empire. Men came back from bush and forest and
exile to ruined plantations and deserted city-sites,
and set to the tilling of the maize-plantations, the
hunting of deer and peccary. Again the forest clear¬
ings were set with long villages of huts, the grass-
grown Sacred Road was cleared, and pilgrims,
comparatively undisturbed, might make their way
through Yucatan to the City of the Holy Wells and
the Holy Island beyond.
As if in alliance with these tardy blossomings of
political peace, the weather for six years was such as
no man could remember in Yucatan. Rain fell
heavily at the seasons of planting. Suns came full
and strong, ripening, but not destroying. The very
seas and rivers swarmed with fish.
It was the Indian Summer of the Mayas.
ix. The Great Hurricane
But one winter morning of the year 1465, when the
sleepy temple-guardians at Cozumel were tending the
early fires, they saw gather in the south-east a terrible
shape of clouds. The air became filled with flying
spume and a hot oppressiveness. Then in front of
that hasting mass they saw the racing waters of a great
tidal-wave, and presently the buildings were rocking
under a terrible hurricane which tore the roofs from
the thatched dwelling-houses and the corbelled
arches from the temples. Nor did the hurricane stay
at Cozumel. Leaving a train of wrecked villages, it
poured inland and burst on the interior country like
a thunderclap. Temples and long-houses and colleges
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 227
were levelled with the ground. Houses, wrapped in
straw against the unusual cold of that winter, were
overthrown or swept away; in whole districts the
straw, catching
fire, lighted up
the cities and the
ruins left by the
hurricane in con¬
flagration.
Still westwards,
uprooting forests
and settlements a-
like, roared the
wind. Amidst the
packed popula¬
tions of Zotuta,
Mani, and Ahkin-
chel it played the
part of a destroy¬
ing fiend, till, under
a louring canopy of
cloud, the sun was
presently extin¬
guished.
Far into the
night the deva- the so-called maize-god
stated Peninsula (From the Dresden Codex.)
heard the seaward
howling of the God Hurakan, who gave his name to
this wind, and gives it to ours. By morning it had
gone, across the Gulf of Mexico, and a dazed nation
came crawling out to view its littered path.
x. Pestilence and War
Out into the Gulf, and out of history, that wind
bore more than material wreckage. It bore the peace
of the Indian Summer that had succeeded the break¬
up of the League. In the state of Mani Uxmal
appears to have been abandoned during this time,
228 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
perhaps through the damage wrought by the hurri¬
cane, more probably from the damage wrought by a
calamity following hard on the heels of that gale. The
Tutul Xiu moved to their civil capital, Mani, leaving
the splendours of Uxmal desolate. About the same
time the Maya-Toltec of Chichen Itza, descendants of
the first mercenaries brought over by Hunac Ceel,
deserted their city for some unknown reason and
marched southwards in exodus. These were the
settlers of Peten Itza on Lake Flores, which remained
the last free city of the Mayas.
Chichen seems to have been colonized again imme¬
diately, probably from Kupul or Tizimin. It was a
valuable site, its rulers flourishing on the tributes of
the pilgrim-trains and the reputation of the Wells of
Sacrifice.
But Yucatan had not finished with calamity with
the passing of the great hurricane. A great pestilence
came on the Peninsula. Those who touched the dead
were also in a few hours dead. The pestilence spread
far and wide, afflicting not only the Maya but their
very crops, according to the tradition that the
Spaniards found. The very fruit mottled with a
strange, fungoid mildew, poisonous and burning to
the taste. Amidst streets and fields dead and un¬
buried bodies, hideously swollen, burst open, dis¬
playing the intestines filled with maggots. No doubt,
wherever the plague touched on temple altar or
temple cess-pool, in that land without sanitation and
with hideous blood-rites, the plague was kindled afresh.
The peace of thirty years vanished with the coming
of the plague. There is, indeed, in the historian’s
eyes, a fine tragic intensity in those last years of the
Lost Expedition’s madness. Banked-up hatreds were
released and old wrongs remembered. Much though
the Cocomes of Tibullon and Zotuta hated the Tutul
Xiu and all that they had done to overthrow the
power of Mayapan, their detestation for the Chels,
the renegades who had split the Maya state, was
equalled only by the detestation in which the Chels
THE HISTORY OF THE MAYA NEW EMPIRE 22Q
held the inhabitants of Zotuta. Possibly the thirty
years of peace had done no more than nurse to
warmth their mutual wrath. Even in that period a
kind of economic warfare was waged between the
two states. The Chels, lords of seaports that in after
years were to retreat far inland, refused the passage
of fish and salt into Zotuta; Zotuta retaliated,
somewhat ineffec¬
tively, by boycot¬
ting the export of
fruit and game
into Ahkinchel.
With the plague
there came on the
Cocomes either a
fresh upstirring of
hate—or else an
overmastering
desire for fresh fish.
War began.
The Cocomes
raided up into Chel
territory. While so
engaged, the news
was brought to
them that Zotuta
had been invaded
by the terrible
Tutul Xiu, the
Lacadsemonians of
Yucatan. The
Cocomes hastened back, and they and the Xiu armies
vanish into incoherent years and campaigns from
which it is hardly possible to disentangle any clear
view of the fortune of the war. The whole Peninsula, or
at least the northern states in it, seem to have been
drawn into the conflict with extraordinary rapidity.
The plague had gone, but the New Empire Mayas
scarcely noted its passing. Possibly it depopulated
large centres, possibly it may have decimated and
A VARIANT OF GOD CHAC
(Indra-Ganesha.)
(From the Dresden Codex.)
230 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
scattered those tribes, voiceless in history, who up to
that time at least had still remained in possession of
the Maya Old Empire. In Yucatan itself, the
country-side echoed to the din and screams of the
passing and re-passing of bodies of painted warriors,
the sacking of temples and colleges. Wholesale
massacre became the order of the day in the treat¬
ment of a conqueror towards his conquered.
For sixteen years the war raged. Over a hundred
and fifty thousand of the Maya perished. Towards
the end of the war, petering out in exhaustion, some
priest on the watch-towers of Cozumel, drowsing in
the sun, may have raised his head and seen, far out to
sea, the passing across the horizon of vast sea-houses
gleaming in the sun.
It was the year 1493. Those were the ships of the
Spaniards.
IX
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
i. Preludes and Prophecies
ON October 12th, 1492, Christopher Columbus,
with one small ship and two caravels,
having crossed the Atlantic Ocean for the
first time in the recorded history of any of the
Mediterranean peoples, sighted a small island in the
Bahamas which he called San Salvador. Beyond
lay Cuba and Hispaniola, islands with strange in¬
habitants, both the cannibals and the gentle savages
which contemporary European thought had classed
as of kin with the phoenix and the unicorn ; beyond
these, as Columbus gradually learned in the course of
his three great voyages, were innumerable other
islands. But it seems that he never suspected the
mainland as a mainland : he thought of the islands
only as rather disappointing preliminaries to his
arrival either in India or in China.
It has been said that his coming ended the cultural
isolation of America from the Old World. As we
have seen in this outline of the growth of the Central
American civilizations, there is no good reason for
supposing that America was isolated from the Old
World for any lengthy period from the beginning of
the Christian era until the end of the thirteenth or
fourteenth centuries, when numerous wars, con¬
quests and the like in Indo-China and Indonesia
apparently put an end to a well-recognized and well-
followed emigration route. Nor had America been
isolated from Europe : the colonizings and adven-
turings of the Norsemen on the American coast as
early as the later half of the tenth century are now
well known. And there is at least a possibility,
which need not detain us here, that in ancient times
other cultural influences had crossed the Atlantic
from the African and Mediterranean shores, though
the main inspiration for the building of the Central *
American civilizations had always been Asiatic.
231
232 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
In the islands of the West Indies Columbus found
not only matter for surprise in the character and
characteristics of the inhabitants, but for some dis¬
illusionment regarding their material culture. We
now know the islands to have been inhabited by
peoples at the primitive level, without even the
faintest traits of culture, until a short century or so
before the arrival of the Spaniards. They were
peoples living on the fringes of the great experiment
of civilization elsewhere clouding the skies with
sacrificial smoke in the Central, Northern, and
Southern Americas. They were (like other American
peoples beyond the reaches of that experiment (58))
children of nature, in an unambitious Golden Age,
hunters, swimmers in the seas, charitable and
hospitable and mirthful folk.
But from South America had come a warlike and
trading people, who had learned civilization up on
the Andean slopes and carried it down the Amazon,
with its basis agriculture, and most of its unpleasing
religious rites, including a ceremonial cannibalism
which speedily ceased to be ceremonial. These new¬
comers, the Caribs, half-civilized tribes on the fringe
of the American civilizations, apparently raided the
Maya upon occasion, and traded with them on others.
And they penetrated into the West Indies and here
and there raised barbarous “ kingdoms ” amidst the
communities of the primitives. They were, indeed,
repeating the march of all civilizations since the first
sprouted in Ancient Egypt, their march across the
globe when Columbus and his Spaniards came to
wipe that experiment away, with a spray of lead, as
a gardener spraying greenfly from a fruit.
But the Spaniards found no marks of the high
civilization of India or China, until, on his third
voyage, Columbus at Guana jo encountered the
canoes of some merchants who gestured that they
had come from the west. They were clad in cotton
garments, these merchants, and apparently had
golden ornaments; they reinvigorated the hope
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 233
of Columbus that westwards lay the India he
sought.
It is probable that they were Mayaized Caribs
from Yucatan, from the Chel seaboard, perhaps, or
from Ekab. No account, unfortunately, of the
reactions of those merchants to the sight of Columbus
has come to us. They seem to have been less sur¬
prised than the Spaniards.
Columbus returned to Spain to die. Other
voyagers streamed up and down the Gulf and
amidst the islands, but the Central American civil¬
izations and Mexico remained undiscovered. In 1506,
it is true, Juan Diaz de Solis and Vicente Yanez
Pinson apparently sighted the coast of Yucatan,
and may be noted as its technical discoverers. But
they believed it merely another island, and did not
put into land.
The first intimate contact of Spaniard and Mayan y
was in 1511. A caravel bound from Darien colony
to headquarters at San Domingo struck a reef and
went down. So quickly did it sink that only the boat
of the governor, Valdivia, escaped, together with
twenty of the crew. Amongst that score or so of sur¬
vivors were Geronimo de Aguilar, a pious young man,
some kind of lay priest, and Gonzalo Guerrero, a
sailor.
For thirteen days of sun and exposure they
drifted in the open sea. Towards the end of the
thirteenth day, however, a long line of coast appeared.
It was Yucatan, though they were unaware of the
fact. Wind and tide drove them towards the shore.
Shortly after landing they were surrounded and
seized by a party of Maya.
We may imagine the shock of surprise endured
by the Spaniards. They had encountered savages
in plenty in Darien, but none like these—men of
diminutive stature, with squinting eyes and deformed
heads, clad in garments skilfully woven, sandalled,
strangely armed and armoured. Probably their
captors stared at them and fingered them in an equal
234 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
wonder, then marched them into a nearby city. It
is still very uncertain what that city was. Perhaps it
was Tuhmm, where the Exbox ruled, and the
Spaniards looked upon the city in its later heyday,
a city with a thousand years of history, walled, with
its temple-fires in the air, its strange and aberrant
ceremonial and religious life.
The Spaniards were flung into a pit and left for
a short time. Then a party of the Maya appeared
and dragged out Valdivia and some others. They
were hurried to a temple and sacrificed, very horribly,
and their bodies then quartered, cooked, and eaten
by their captors.
The remaining Spaniards, it seems, were kept for
several days in captivity, being fattened on maize
for the table. Then another of their number was
taken away and sacrificed, and the remainder deter¬
mined to escape. Probably Guerrero was the ring¬
leader of the attempt. They succeeded in slipping
the thongs from their feet and wrists, and breaking
from the pit or hut in which they were immured. It
was night-time, and probably they looked back and
saw the lights on the devil-temples and the strange
wavering outlines of the buildings of the strange and
horrible city in which they had been immured.
With these for guide, they fled in the opposite
direction, into the bush.
All that night they fled through the forests of
Ekab, penetrating deeper and deeper into the
interior. Probably there were villages to be avoided,
and dogs that bayed at them. They found themselves
in a low range of hills with the coming of the dawn,
and penetrated through those hills, thus, though
they did not know it, passing out of Ekab into the
state of Cochuah.
For _ several days they were lost in the bush,
surviving meagrely enough in that waterless country.
Then they fell into the hands of a chief called May,
the presumptive ruler of Cochuah, and were taken to
his city, possibly Tabi. Cochuah seems to have
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 235
been on bad terms with Ekab at the moment, and
the Real Man of that state, from motives of pity or
defiance, neither surrendered his captives to his
neighbour, nor sacrificed them. The Spaniards
found themselves enslaved, without rigour and with¬
out compassion.
The news of their arrival spread throughout the
Peninsula with more than one curious result. There
can be little doubt that both the New Empire Maya
and the Mexicans had heard of the coming of the
strangers in the West Indies : such canoe-convoys
as Columbus had seen at Guanajo must have carried
home that news speedily enough. In the east was
blowing up a great cloud of tenebrous rumour and
surmise. And, because in Amerindian legend and
myth, strangers out of the seas were phenomena
well known, the roots of all the Amerindian civil¬
izations and religious systems came, alien-born, out
of the seas, there was a natural attempt to identify
those tarrying strangers with other figures in legend,
with prophecies accredited to those antique figures.
The story of the fears entertained by the High-
Chief of the Aztecs, Moctezhuoma, then ruling in
the pueblo of Tenochtitlan in Mexico, is well
known. It was believed that the strangers were gods
of the Toltecs, were children of Quetzalcoatl.
The high place of the Quetzalcoatl (Kukulcan) cult
in Yucatan appears to have been Mani, the capital
of the Tutul Xius. And it was there that Muchan-
xiu, the Real Man of the Xius, heard from his high
priest, one Ahpula Napotxiu, that remarkable
prophecy of the coming of the white men and their
destruction of the land, in the interests of a <f higher
faith,” which has aroused so much controversy.
Yet there seems no good reason for doubting the
essentials of the prophecy attributed to Napotxiu.
No doubt the version to which the future was enter¬
tained had been poured through an orthodox
Catholic sieve, but one may say that almost any
intelligent Maya of those years of the New Empire,
236 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
looking at the political confusion around him, the
country but slowly recovering from the last civil
war ; further, hearing of the exploits of the Spaniards
in the near west and the strange and terrifying
weapons that they carried, could have made the
prophecy of their conquering the distracted states.
And by 1514, we must remember, the captive
Spaniards had been held for two years as prisoners
of the Maya of Cochuah.
A round dozen had succeeded in crossing the inhos¬
pitable hills from Ekab. But within two years only
two remained alive. It does not seem that they were
treated with peculiar brutality. The strange food
and probably the malarial climate were responsible—
possibly, also, the alien life of the city where they
were imprisoned. They must have seen their Mayan
masters taking part in horrifying temple-rites,
rending the body of the victim, cooking his flesh'
assisting at the awful ceremony when the sacrifice
was flayed alive. In the dark temple corridors to
which they bore burdens from quarries or plantations
they would see the insane sculptures of snakes and
feathers surrounded by the paragraphed devil-
script, and cower from priests whose hair and
garments were matted with blood. Of a race accus¬
tomed enough by then to cruelties in religious
matters, it is yet possible that they were largely
sickened and scared to death.
Only the pious Aguilar and the blasphemous and
resourceful Guerrero were left. The former seems
to have been protected by as singular a mental
blindness as ever a stranger brought to an alien
country. Wrapt and secure inside the armour of his
own beliefs, he saw the Maya gods as devils, the
Maya as infidels who denied the Christ. He was a
messenger and an explorer, albeit an involuntary
one, from the great adventure of civilization to one
of its lost expeditions ; and he seems to have treated
it as though it were a lapsed village in the Spanish
mountains. Unimaginative, heavy, dutiful, he turned
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 237
his eyes alike from the wonders of the Mayan
cultural life and from the friendly looks of the Mayan
women. He might have been interpreter and historian
of all that is dark to us in the Maya. Instead, he
turned away his eyes, or, through the long, stifling
nights, battled with the fiends of desire and lust
which haunted his priestly bed, imagining that he
was surrounded in the darkness by smiling Maya
women, ardent to seduce him.
Guerrero was of other temper, yet he too failed
the opportunity we can envisage. One imagines him
prowling the streets of Tabi, quick for adventure
with women and men, subservient and sly with the
priests, forceful enough in other matters. In a year
or so it seems that both he and Aguilar became very
proficient in Mayan, and then Guerrero set about
displaying his proficiency and skill in arms to the
ruler of Cochuah. He improved their bows and
spear-throwers, and probably introduced fresh tactics
into Mayan warfare. Becoming discontented even
with this progress up from slavery, and learning that
the ruler of the neighbouring state to the south, the
state of Chectemal, was one where skill in military
matters was valued, Guerrero escaped across the
border into Chectemal. If an account of his adven¬
tures had survived, it would probably contain twice
the interest and information furnished by the entire
records of that Spanish Conquest that was following
at his heels. But Guerrero was too busied with his
new master and the way of life he encountered in
Chectemal to heed to recording his adventures.
He seems to have been hospitably received by the
ruler of Chectemal, one Nachancan. He set about,
under that ruler’s instructions, re-arming and re¬
drilling the Can army; he was formally enrolled
a member of the tribe, married a Can “ princess,"
allowed himself to be painted and tatued in the
Mayan manner. Further, through the emissaries
of Nachancan in the rest of the New Empire it
seems that Guerrero spread the warning that the
238 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
white men would come in time and attempt to seize
the country They should be killed as soon as they
set foot on the land.
It was a remarkable but understandable metamor¬
phosis. Aguilar meanwhile remained a slave in
tochuah. His account of his adventures during
those years has many an unauthentic note. The most
probable explanation of his slow preferment in the
harim of the Real Man of Cochuah is that the Maya
looked on him as a harmless idiot, and unkindly
asmbed his sexual reticences to physical impotence.
This was m 1514. Five years were to pass ere a
messenger was to arrive from Cozumel Island with
ransom for the two strayed Spaniards.
11.
Expedition of Hernandez de Cordoba
Meanwhile, the Spanish slave-merchants of Cuba
yere h harder to collect cargoes among the
islands. They knew of Darien and the Panama lands
by then, and of a great island to the south-east of Cuba
rumours grew ever more plentiful. That island was
the as yet unnamed Yucatan (for to the Maya of the
New Empire their country was simply the Land of
the Turkey or the Land of the Deer).
In Cuba a number of Spaniards combined to
purchase two ships for the ostensible purpose of
exploring and reconnoitring to the west. Slave-
raidmg was not in the articles, for the Spanish
crown, m spite of all that had happened to practically
enslave and largely exterminate the native popula¬
tion of the West Indies, and that in the short space
of twenty years, still set its face rigorously against
slavery undisguised. Diego Velasquez, the Governor
j aPPears ha-ve had no such scruples. He
provided the two ships with provisions and his moral
fyPP?^ apd they sailed from St. lago de Cuba on
the 8th of February, 1517.
An extra ship had been purchased by then, for
he preparations had gone on for almost a year.
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 239
Apart from sailors, there were over a hundred soldier-
adventurers and disappointed Spanish prospectors on
board,ready to turn their hands either to gold-looting
or slave-raiding. One of their most notable members
was that genial Bernal Diaz, the historian, who was
later to accompany Cortes to the colourful conquest
of the Mexican tribes. The selected or elected com¬
mander was one Francisco Hernandez de Cordoba,
as courageous as he was weak-willed and uncertain
of purpose.
They sailed with uncertain winds that came and
passed and left them becalmed and resumed again,
stragglingly westwards, for a period of twenty-one
days. The burning seas were unislanded and light¬
less. But on the ist of March land at length was
sighted, a great stretch of it, and nearer at hand a
small island. The Spaniards disembarked at the
island and gazed in surprise at the buildings upon it
—temples with idols of women, perhaps of Ixchel
the Rainbow Goddess. The island was deserted and
the filthy temples brooded in the still heat. The
Spaniards waited for a little while for the priests or
owners to return, and then re-embarked. The
island was used by Yucatecan merchants, and had
no permanent priesthood. It seems to have been the
last port of call of travellers voyaging out into the
seas.
Cordoba had his ships head north again and they
sailed along the coast. Then it was that a great town
came in sight, shining with white roofs and walls
in the sunlight. The Spaniards crowded the rigging
and stared at it in delight and surprise. We do not
know, in this time remote from that, which town it
was ; perhaps El Meco in Titzimin. To the delighted
Spaniards it was proof positive that at last they had
arrived in the legendary and longed-for East. They
instantly christened the town Grand Cairo, and
prepared to anchor. The wonder of that white
town seen inland from the barbarous American shore
comes down to us from them.
240 THE CONQUEST OE THE MAYA
Night seems to have been falling, and the Spaniards
slept on their hopes and expectations. Next morning
nve great canoes were observed paddling out
towai ds the ships. They did no more for a while than
reconnoitre, then came nearer and a parley ensued,
rurally, presents were exchanged, albeit suspiciously
and with some strain on both sides. The Maya of
the town had heard of Guerrero’s warning and their
batab or governor had planned an elementary
strategy for entrapping the invaders.
He did not invite them to land that day, probably
perfecting his plans. But on the next the canoes
came out again, and the canoemen, by gestures,
invited the Spaniards to visit f‘ Grand Cairo.’’
There were considerable language difficulties, and
a great deal of confusion over a Maya phrase which
sounded like Cabo Catoche, to the Spaniards. They
took this, somewhat ingenuously, to be the name of
the nearby headland, and solemnly affixed that
name to it in their chart and records. The alternative
reading is that the Maya said Conex Catoch—^
town of the Canoch.
The Spaniards agreed to land, but apparently in
their own boats. A party of about thirty, with
twelve arbalests and ten muskets, piled in and rowed
to the shore. Here again a parley seems to have
taken place, and the word Yucatan, for which modern
philologists find half-a-dozen unconvincing meanings,
was overheard by the Spaniards. They took it to
mean the name of the country.
They could see Grand Cairo shining through a grove
of trees, and the chief gestured them to follow him.
On the outskirts of the town the Mayan holcones or
militia fell on the strangers and a bloody battle
ensued. At the noise of the fire-arms the Maya
fled in terror, leaving two prisoners, later christened
Melchior and Julian, in the hands of Cordoba’s men.
The Spaniards, albeit victors, turned about and
retreated.
On the way to the shore Bernal Diaz tells (59) how
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 241
they came on a hideous “ Temple of Sodomy ” and
some other buildings, with idols and the like gear in
them. Probably it was a shrine of the phallic cult im¬
ported from Mexico, and Diaz, gazing at the carved
genitals, was as shocked as a good Catholic ought to be.
The comments of the rest of the Spaniards are not
recorded. Probably they were unprintable. Strip¬
ping the temples of a few jewelled toys, the Spaniards
re-embarked, together with their prisoners, and
the Maya of Grand Cairo no doubt watched them go
before they re-entered the town.
Disgusted with his reception, and having neither
the command nor the force to occupy Grand Cairo
permanently, Cordoba raised anchor and set sail
along the north Yucatecan coast, coasting the long,
flat islands which there stretch league on league, and
with the now ruined temples probably occupied and
alive with watchers. The news of the advent of the
Spaniards at Grand Cairo appears to have been borne
swiftly through the country. By the time they
sighted Kimpech, once a retreat of the Cocomes of
Mayapan, a description of their ships and persons
was in the hands of its batab. Nevertheless, he
received them courteously, the Spaniards disem¬
barked and entered the town. They found it a great
city of the usual long-houses and pyramided temples
—temples which Bernal Diaz entered and describes
in detail, the painted, sun-glittering exteriors, the
blood-splashed walls within. All the town was
alive with hordes of priests, wearing long garments,
also blood-splashed, records Diaz. These priests we
now know to have been the chacs, and perhaps one
or other of the great annual festivals was about to
be celebrated when the Spaniards arrived. In one
temple Diaz was surprised to see a cross—a common
symbol of both the Old and the New World, though
Diaz did not realize this and supposed that Kimpech
had once known the elements of his own faith and had
subsequently relapsed. . . . Cordoba abruptly cut
short his stay in the erratic fashion characteristic
Q
242 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
of him, collected fruit and water, and sailed down
the western coast of the Peninsula.
But at the next great town sighted, Champoton,
the capital of Potonchan, he was destined to receive a
warmer greeting than at Kimpech. Expectation and
hostile preparation marched parallel with the south-
westwards groping of Cordoba’s ships, so that the
ruler of Champoton, one Mochcovoh, prepared to
give them a stern welcome. Gathering every warrior
available he marched down to intercept the forces
from the anchored ships.
There followed the first pitched battle in American
history between the Whites and the civilized Amer¬
indians.
Kneeling, the Spaniards fired into the charging,
colourful mass of their opponents—browning them,
in the hunter’s phrase. But the Maya attack, though
it reeled, did not break. Mochcovoh’s voice and
example stayed it. Undaunted wave on wave of
the Potonchan Maya flung themselves against the
Spanish landing-party, apparently indifferent to the
continuous explosions of the fire-arms and the red
execution caused by these and the steel swords of the
whites. Presently the fighting appears to have been
hand to hand and the numbers of Maya began to tell,
in spite of their inferiority in weapons and armour.
After an hour’s fighting, Cordoba ordered a retreat
to his ships, having lost over twenty men killed,
besides two captured and instantly sacrificed in the
sight of their horrified fellows. Also, over fifty of
the Spaniards had been wounded, many seriously,
the commander himself among them.
The Spaniards tumbled back into their boats and
rowed for the ships, leaving the ferocious Mochcovoh
the victor, though at terrible cost. Nevertheless, the
Spaniards had been repulsed and had been proved
far from invulnerable. Presently the ships raised
anchor and turned north.
They had turned back for Cuba, and did not arrive
there for many days, what of the wounded and dis-
THE CONQUEST OE THE MAYA 243
abled men on board. At St. lago, within ten days
of being carried ashore, Cordoba himself succumbed
to his wounds, leaving to his surviving companions to
spread the tale of the citied land to the west, rich in
temples and bloody priests, golden ornaments and
ferocious warriors.
iii. Expedition of Juan de Grijalva
The first round had gone against the Spaniards, but
Cuba was full of adventurers little likely to be dis¬
mayed by the fate of Cordoba. The Governor,
Velasquez, had the two captives, Melchior and Julian,
assiduously and unceasingly questioned as to the
state of affairs in their country of Yucatan. Probably
the captives understood but little Spanish, and that
with difficulty, for one cannot credit them with de¬
liberate intent in the deception they practised on
their interlocutors. Yes, they affirmed, there was
much gold in Yucatan—a land singularly barren in
the metal, all Yucatecan gold being imported.
Velasquez accordingly wrote off an account to the
Council of the Indies of the rich new lands recently
discovered by an expedition he had despatched : and
asked for authority to outfit yet another expedition.
Nevertheless, news of the disastrous fate of Cordoba’s
venture was common property, and probably the
Council would have turned a cold ear to Velasquez
but for the fact that its President, Bishop Burgos,
was a friend of the Governor in Cuba. Burgos
praised Velasquez to the Emperor, and obtained the
necessary authorization.
Velasquez proceeded to outfit his new expedition,
of four ships this time, and with a force of over two
hundred men. The most obviously suitable com¬
mander was his own nephew, Juan de Grijalva, and,
in spite of his dislike for and distrust of this relative,
Velasquez appointed him to the command. Two or
three of the other adventuring cavaliers with the
expedition were to leave their names in history—
244 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Pedro de Alvarado, whom the Aztecs and Quiches
were to know to their cost, Alonso de Avila, the
companion of Cortes, and a Francisco de Montejo,
still no terror to the New Empire Maya.
Grijalva’s instructions were simple: To collect
gold, and found a colony, if it were possible.
He sailed from Cuba on the 5th of April, 1518, and
five days later sighted the coast of Yucatan, possibly
the low-lying northern beaches. Here he would have
disembarked an investigatory party, but that again
the treacherous tides played havoc with his plans, as
with Cordoba’s. The currents set in and carried them
about the painted seas for another eight days. On
the ninth an island hove in view, and the Spaniards
cast anchor. Though they were unaware of the fact,
they had come on the Holy Place of the Maya cult,
the Sacred Island of Cozumel.
The Cumux priests, no warriors, appear to have
fled to the bush or the mainland at the first sight of
the ships. Grijalva, landing, found an empty city.
The Spaniards climbed and adventured in the painted
temples and long-houses and stared their amaze and
disgust at the idols and objects of esoteric worship
left behind by the Maya. They pried around hope¬
fully, seeking treasure and finding little, except a
young woman, a Jamaican Indian who had been
brought to Cozumel, perhaps in slave-trade from her
native home, subsequent to the coming of the
Spaniards to the West Indies. She seems to have
been overjoyed at the sight of Grijalva and his com¬
panions. She preferred the Spaniards to the Maya
any day; and one, imagining her life in the grisly
Sacred Isle, can wonder little at her choice. Touched,
the Spaniards acceded to her request and took her on
board the ships.
Hugging that inhospitable coast, Grijalva sailed
north and then west, perhaps in view of Grand Cairo,
but not venturing to land there. News of their
second coming was speedily abroad in the Peninsula,
for, despite the glowing embers of civil war, the Maya
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 245
had recognized the whites as a common enemy—all
except the Tutul Xiu of Mani. The news reached
Mochcovoh at Champoton, and on the morning of the
15th of May, when the ships of Grijalva cast anchor
opposite Champoton, the Maya were found assembled
on the shore in considerable force.
Julian and Melchior accompanied the Grijalva
expedition, and remembering the last experience at
Champoton, and recognizing the banners of the
ferocious Covoh Real Man himself, advised Grijalva
not to land. Grijalva, however, was of a different
temper to the erratic Cordoba. He had the boats
manned, and from these, before landing, the Spaniards
poured in a hail of lead on the close-packed Mayan
ranks. A considerable struggle took place on the
water’s edge, three of the Spaniards being killed and
several wounded. Then the Covoh militia, dismayed
at the casualties, broke in spite of the presence of
Mochcovoh himself, and fled into the interior.
Grijalva marched into Champoton, searched it, looted
it, and re-embarked. There seems to have been little
of value in the town, and the Spanish commander
resolved to sail south in search of richer cities.
Southwards he accordingly sailed. But meanwhile
Mochcovoh, defeated but undismayed, resolved that
other Maya states should receive the Spaniards as he
had received them. Accordingly, he despatched
heralds along the coast, rousing the populace. Gri¬
jalva’s ships sailed down to the Laguna de Terminos,
paused there, and made indecisive explorations.
Then he sailed on, still hugging the coast, till he
arrived at the mouth of the Tabasco.
There he found a great army of the mongrel state
of Acallan gathered to resist his landing. The heralds
of Mochcovoh had already arrived. In the back¬
ground was a great town.
Grijalva had the gathered natives addressed by
Melchior and Julian. He spoke pacifically. The
reply was truculent. They had already a “ king ”
in Acallan. For this new King Carlos and his pre-
246 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
tensions they cared nothing. But of the fight at
Champoton and the slaughter there they knew much.
Sixteen thousand men, they declared, were gathering
to defend the town from the invaders from the sea.
Most of this oration seems to have been for the
benefit of Mochcovoh’s heralds. Despite these vaunt-
ings they made little or no attempt to resist the
Spanish landing. Instead, they entered into trade
with Grijalva's ships, and permitted him to erect his
standards on the shore. But Grijalva found their
town disappointing—it was not yet one of the golden
cities of Ind. Inquiries, however, elicited the inform¬
ation that a great and powerful empire lay to the
north-west, a land where gold was plentiful. Grijalva
reembarked.
For days he coasted up the Mexican Gulf, by rich
lands and templed islands, till he was assured that
the fabled Empire did really exist, and that the
Aztecs, not the Mayas, were worthy of an expedition
of conquest. With that certainty he turned his ships
about and passed out of Mayan history, reaching
Cuba on November 15th, 1518.
iv. Expeditions of Hernando de Cortes
Cordoba’s report of the reputed wealth of the new
lands had roused the Governor Velasquez, as nothing
else in his governorship had done. Grijalva’s expedi¬
tion apart, he resolved to equip a strong venture for
the conquest, or at least the successful looting, of the
lands in question.
The most obviously suitable captain was again
Juan de Grijalva, newly returned. But it appears
that the Governor hated his nephew, and now found
excuse to blame him for the fact that Grijalva had
planted no colonies in Yucatan or Mexico. One of
the tale-bearers to the Governor against Grijalva
appears to have been Francisco de Montejo. Grijalva
was dismissed, and Velasquez looked about for
another commander,
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 247
This, after numerous intrigues and disputes, he
found in Hernando de Cortes, a slave-owner and
adventurer of a singularly fiery and yet cold spirit.
After various delays, Cortes, with eleven ships and
five hundred and fifty soldiers, sailed from Havana
on February 18th, 1519, commissioned to win the
“ Indians " to the true faith and submission to the
suzerainty of the King of Spain.
A storm of some violence arose, scattering the
convoy. Taking advantage of this, and in spite of
Cortes’ orders that the ships keep as close together
as possible, Pedro de Alvarado, in command of one
of the vessels, sailed straight for Cozumel Island,
where he had been before. The terrified Cumux
priests looked out and saw another great sea-house
come. As was their custom, they diligently fled into
the bush. The Cumux, had they tried, would prob¬
ably have been able to match their short-distance
sprinters against the whole of the rest of the New
World. Alvarado landed, raided the temples, stole a
little gold, and was just recovering from the flush of
this meagre success when Cortes and the rest of the
Armada arrived.
Cortes, furious at this minor looting which threat¬
ened the success of the greater loot he had in mind,
upbraided Alvarado bitterly in front of the whole
army. Three of the Cumux had been captured, and
Cortes had them addressed by Melchior, telling them
that the Spaniards meant no harm to the Indians.
He despatched them into the bush in an effort to stay
the flight of the priests.
In a day or two a large number of the guardians of
the Sacred Isle, drawn, no doubt, by both curiosity
and confidence, returned to their houses and temples.
Meanwhile, Cortes had explored these, not greatly
stirred by the architecture or sculpture ; the lack of
gold vexed him. However, sight of the various idols
in the temples stirred his crusading zeal, and we are
told he held a solemn service wherein his chaplain
expounded the truths of the Gospel to the Cumux
248 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
priests. The latter were unimpressed, though still
perhaps a little breathless from these continuous
flights into the bush. They declared that Cozumel
was the Sacred Island of the universe, and its gods
very powerful and terrible, not to be renounced under
pain of terrible sufferings to all the country. Im¬
patient at this reply, Cortes had the images of the
gods flung out of the temples and images of the Virgin
and Child erected in their stead.
The Maya priests stared at these in astonishment,
recognizing the Mother-Goddess Itzazaluch and the
boy Itzamna. Were these the deities they were called
upon to worship, there was no great difficulty in the
matter. Delighted, Cortes observed the change in the
conduct of the Indians. They were apparently ready
to become good Christians. With the erection of a
great crucifix the Cumux were still more impressed—
recognizing it as an obscene caricature of the Vahon-
Che, the Tree of Life, with a dead barbarian fastened
to it.
While this revel of mutual incomprehensibilities
was going on in templed Cozumel, Cortes had heard
that two Spaniards lingered in captivity on the
nearby mainland. He despatched one of his
captains to sail over to Yucatan, and from there
send some of the Cumux priests into the interior,
carrying various bells and beads as ransom for the
unfortunates.
Aguilar at Tabi was discovered as keeper of the
Real Man’s harim. The May, in good-natured con¬
tempt, had thought of a way in which the slave’s
evident physical disabilities might be put to account.
But Aguilar had remained unaware of the reasons
for his elevation. He ascribed it to the fact that the
evidence of his chastity had impressed the May to
awe. For several years he had devoted himself
with a scrupulous attention to his palace duties and
to fighting the nightly temptations which assailed
him. One can vision the giggling Mayan background
to those years.
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 249
To the last he seems to have remained ignorant of
even the name and title of his master, solemnly
referring to that individual as the Ahkin Cutz—the
High-Priest Turkey—and no doubt ascribing the
consequent laughter of his charges to meditated
assaults upon his chastity.
With his own release, a new duty was now laid
upon him. This was to find Guerrero, whom he had
not seen since the latter’s escape from Cochuah, but
who was said to be still alive, far to the south, in
Chectemal, the kingdom of the Cans.
Enjoining the Cumux messenger to proceed to the
coast and await his return, Aguilar set out for Checte¬
mal. One would like to know his route and the things
he saw and did on that journey, on the Yucatecan
tracks, by the Yucatecan forests, in the heats by day
and under the bright Central American stars. So at
last he came to the Can capital, and, protected by
the ransom he bore, sought out Guerrero. He found
him in a thatched palace, a Maya warrior, painted
and tatued, a Maya chief and a worshipper of devils.
Aguilar explained his mission, how Cortes on
Cozumel had sent ransom for them and waited with
his ships to take them away from Yucatan.
But the painted Guerrero laughed. To a Christian
country ? He was no Spaniard, but a warrior of
Chectemal, married to an Indian, the father of three
children. What Spaniard would welcome him back
or admire his tattooings ? Would Cuba rejoice over
his ear-plugs or nose-ornament ? He would stay on
in Chectemal.
Finding that nothing could move the renegade,
Aguilar embraced him, and went, and never saw him
again, himself at last gaining Cozumel and the ships
of Cortes before the latter set sail for the Gulf of
Mexico to encompass the destruction of the Aztec
civilization.
With that campaign this outline has no part. But
the Cozumel venture was not Cortes’ only contact
with the Maya. Five years went by, years of fighting,
250 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
sieging, marching, looting and destroying in Mexico.
The top-heavy Aztec civilization fell before the guns
of the Spaniards, and by 1524 the entire country
was in the hands of Cortes. Then there came to
the latter in Mexico news that a lieutenant of his,
Christoval de Olid, whom he had sent to subdue
Honduras, was declaring his independence of the
Mexican command and acting on his declaration.
Cortes resolved on a desperate venture. This was
to march down the length of Central America,
through unknown lands, and fall upon Olid in
Honduras.
It is one of the great marches of all history. Cortes
passed down through Acallan into the forested lands
beyond, watered by the Usamacintla and its tribu¬
taries. Somewhere in south Acallan he came to a
great city ruled by a merchant prince, and despite
the denials of many historians influenced by notions
of the Old Empire’s “ abandonment ” long before,
this city of Izancanac may well have been Palenque
or some other Maya site that bears a different name
to-day. Beyond that, he found the country in a
violent state of civil war. He was in the Land of the
Deer, its cities being violently assailed by tribes
of the Lacandones, barbarian Mayan tribes who had
never been civilized. In this civil war we may see
the true cause of the Old Empire’s collapse.
Yet this is only another interrogation mark in the
darkness of its history. Cortes was pressed for time,
and had no leisure to waste in meditating on the war
among the f< Indies.” So he passed south, till, in
the Peten lands, he came on a small lake with an
island in the centre, and on that island, the white-
gleaming walls of a city.
This city was Tayasal, the lake Chultuna ; it had
been settled nearly a hundred years before by Itza
emigrants from Chichen Itza and surrounding
territories, who, as we noted, migrated south after
the fall of Mayapan. Its ruler was paddled across
the lake to parley with Cortes, and the latter, in too
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 2$1
great haste to attempt the conquest of the city,
nevertheless demanded admission to it. This was
readily granted, and Cortes was rowed to the land,
together with thirty soldiers. He found it templed
and well-housed, a flourishing city in its strange
lake, albeit worshipping the devil-gods of the New
World. With the shadow of Olid on his mind,
Cortes hastily preached to them the virtues and truth
of another variety of gods, and, according to his own
statement, had the satisfaction of seeing the reason¬
able Itzas burn or destroy all their idols. Then he
crossed again to the mainland, and resumed his march,
vanishing from the Itzas’ ken, though leaving behind
one of his favourite horses, Morzillo, in their care.
This thunder-beast had greatly impressed the Maya
of Tayasal. They over-fed the horse in a temple
specially constructed for it, and had the chagrin to
find it die in their hands. A statue of the animal was
carved in stone, and until 1618, at least, and probably
for another seventy years more, it was worshipped
there and in the surrounding country as Tzimin-chac,
the thunder-god.
Cortes passed on to Honduras and out of Maya
history. For another three years the New Empire
remained uninvaded. Then, in the year 1527, the
much-harried Cumux priests looked out one morning
and saw a flotilla of the strangers’ ships again arising
out of the sea.
v. Montejo Lands in Yucatan
These ships bore the troops of Francisco de
Montejo, a Spaniard whom we have met before in
the expeditions of Grijalva and Cortes. A cadet of a
rich family in Salamanca, a cautious and lumpish
commander, he had little of either the magic frenzy
or the magic magnanimity of Cortes. It was the
misfortune of the oldest of the American civilizations
to be conquered by the meanest of the white new¬
comers.
252 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Despatched to Spain after the Mexican conquest,
Montejo had set about a scheme cherished in his
mind since he sailed with Grijalva : the conquest of
Yucatan by himself. Alter busied years of intrigue
and obscure plottings, he had at length received the
coveted commission. Knowing that he would have
to outfit the expedition largely from his own resources,
he took the precaution to marry a second time, in
1526, a rich heiress, Dona Beatrix de Herrera. With
funds acquired from this marriage at his disposal, his
claims upon the Spanish crown had seemed much
more imposing.
The commission he received conferred on him the
rank of adelantado,” and made of him captain-
general of Yucatan for life. He was directed to
" conquer the Isles of Yucatan and Cozumel,” to
bring the “ Indios ” to the Christian faith, and
to enslave only “ rebels.”
Early in 1527 he sailed for the land of the Maya
New Empire with three ships, 520 mixed troops,
foot and horse, some light guns, and several packs of
bloodhounds.
The ships wheeled in by Cozumel and cast anchor
there. For once the Cumux did not fly. Montejo
disembarked and parleyed with the priests for food
and interpreters. Further, he himself set about
learning Yucatecan and instructed his officers to do
the same. He also attempted to learn as much as
possible of the nature of the country he proposed
invading, and the characters and characteristics of its
various caciques.” It is odd to reflect how much
more complete in many details is our knowledge of
these matters than Montejo’s could have been. What
the Spaniards discovered through slow years of
conquest we can see unimpeded in a preliminary
glance.
Even so, that landscape is blurred and indistinct.
Naobonkupul ruled in the Kupul land, and Namuchel
in Ahkinchel. Nachicocome, a vigorous scion of the
Cocomes, reigned in Zotuta. Muchan was dead in
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 253
Marti, and had been succeeded by a son whose name is
uncertain. In Chectemal the militia of the great
Can clan was officered by the renegade Guerrero.
At Tabi the harim of the May still giggled over
memories of the chaste Aguilar. Mayapan was a
smouldering ruin under the quick spread of the jungle
bush—a ruin to which the Xiu ho? cones marched
yearly to make show of suzerainty. The ferocious
Mochcovoh a trifle subdued in his outlook upon the
strangers, perhaps because of the stories of their
prowess in Mexico, reigned in Potonchan. Uxmal
was deserted by the Tutul Xiu. Chichen Itza was
still a great Holy City, with ever-increasing sacrifices
at its Cenote, the underground reservoir. Religion
was a static aberration, a putrescence in the minds
of those descendants of primitives whose gods were
brought by far-sailing Pacific colonists. Art and
sculpture had decayed greatly in the years of plague
and civil war. Mutual hatreds between the three
great clans, Xiu, Cocome, and Chel flared up every
now and then in bloody campaigns. The peasants
toiled as always they had toiled, priests sacrificed
with the ancient rites, nobles hunted, cocks crew
from the straw-built sheds. Everywhere was a
rumour of the white men and their deeds in Mexico
—mixed, perhaps with the story of the whelming of
of that congerie of great cities to the south, that we
call the Maya Old Empire—a whelming brought
about by plague, dissension, and the raiding Lacan-
done barbarian.
This was the Yucatan that awaited the conquest
of Montejo and his steel-clad adventurers, bearded
men, excitable, covetous for gold, pious, cruel,
sincere, sadistic and simple-minded.
Nor had it long to wait. Montejo, confident in
the quality of the Yucatecan of himself and his
officers, had his anchors weighed and the vessels
coasted out from the shelter of Cozumel and turned
towards the brown-green glitter of the Yucatecan
shore. From Cozumel they sailed down that shore,
254 THE conquest of THE MAYA
into Soliman Bay, and again cast anchor. There
was a nearby town that we cannot now identify.
Perhaps it was Zami. Perhaps its temple-steps
crowded with sightseers to watch the landing of the
white men—a ceremonial landing in which Montejo
lined up his troops, the men standing bare-headed
the while Gonsalo Nieto, the standard-bearer, un¬
furled the royal flag of Spain and declaimed " in the
name of God I take possession of this country for
God and the King of Castile/’
Round the standard gathered the cavaliers of the
expedition a less comely and valorous crew, to our
mind, than those who subdued the Aztecs. There
was Montejo himself, uneasy, heavy, suspicious,
indecisive; his son, Montejo the younger, twenty-
ei§ht years of age, with more of both the darker
qualities and the darker vices than his father ;
Montejo’s nephew, an uncertain figure; Alonso
Davila, the Paymaster, with a red reputation from
the conquest of Mexico ; Hernando Moreno de Quito,
the Master of the Smelters, who was to oversee the
smelting down of the treasure of the Maya ; Gonsalo
Nieto, and a few score more, all hardened to barbarian
warfare. They knelt on the beach the while Fra
Francisco Hernandea, the solitary and peevish cleric
of the expedition, elevated the cross and invited on
them the care of the saints, in especial St. lago.
Then the cavaliers mounted, the footmen formed in
line, the guns rumbled behind on their carriages, the
bloodhounds strained at their leashes ; and, appar¬
ently without opposition, the Spaniards marched into
the nearby town and occupied it.
After that first flare of colour and action, the story
halts for several weeks. Characteristically, Montejo
seems to have hoped the country would both submit
without opposition and at the same time give such
resistance and treasure as would equalize his achieve¬
ment with Cortes’. He despatched a ship to the
viceroy in Cuba, telling him of the safe arrival of
the expedition in Soliman Bay, and how, prior to
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 255
marching into the country, they would “ await the
Franciscans.” Meantime, his troops seem to have
engaged themselves in thoroughly ransacking the
country-side.
They did so with a growing disgust, peering into
huts, tearing aside the curtains from the doors
of long-houses and colleges, climbing the clumsy
steps of the pyramids to peer in dim and odoriferous
rooms of sacrifice, and nowhere was there evidence of
anything of value. Yet it was to take them another
ten years to realize that there was less gold in the
average Mayan town than in the most poverty-
stricken European hamlet.
They began to suffer very dreadfully from the heat.
Some kind of an epidemic touched the expedition.
By the end of the first two months over fifty men were
dead. Montejo resolved on some definite action.
Leaving a portion of his force behind, he took the
cavalry, the bloodhounds, and perhaps some of the
foot, and set out northwards.
News of his coming ran quickly up through the
Maya lands.
He halted at a town called “ Ekab.” The ruler is
described as Nacom Balam : he was either the high-
priest of the place, or the Spaniards entered into the
usual maze of confusions in Maya names and titles.
He received Montejo peaceably and contemptuously !
The expedition had reached “ Ekab ” almost starving
and the Maya dubbed their guests “ eaters of filth.”
The soldiers sweated in the night-heat and their
armour. At dawn Montejo marched out and north
again.
One can imagine the heat and perspiring weariness
of those marchings ever deeper into Yucatecan
territory, largely through trackless country, a strange
country where templed villages would erupt from the
bush and fade back again into the green day-night of
the jungle. The men marched and swore and hoped
for treasure : Montejo, halting one evening at an
unknown village and entertaining, as usual, a crowd
256 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
of Maya notables who had come to see the expedition,
escaped assassination by a miracle : a giant Mayan
snatched a sabre from Montejo’s little negro slave
and would have despatched the leader of the
Spaniards but that one of his cavaliers cut him down.
And still there was no sign of treasure, and still the
Mayans left them unattacked, though they had now
passed beyond Kupul territory and were entering
Titzimin.
Here they came to a templed town, Loche, a copal
centre. They entered it without opposition, and were
received languidly and disdainfully by a batab who
lay in a hammock and scarcely raised his head to look
at the conquerors. One regrets that the incident is
not enlarged in the Conquerors’ histories, this meet¬
ing of the Mayan Diogenes and the sadly-inadequate
Spanish Alexander. The bored batab had the
Spaniards fed ; then, drawn by the rumour of great
cities to the west, they pushed out from Loche and
marched into Ahkinchel.
There seems to have been some incidental skirmish-
ing by this time, but no regular opposition. What
happened next is sadly mixed in the various outline
histories of the conquest of Yucatan. The most
probable version is that the next city the expedition
came upon was Chuaca, a great Chel centre; and
entered it without opposition. The Chuacans they
found seventy thousand in number and the most
intelligent and cultured of the Mayas they had
hitherto encountered. Their city had regular streets
and was beautified with great “ stone houses.” Its
extent was such that though they entered its suburbs
towards midday and marched without halt they did
not attain the city centre till darkness was falling.
. . . One can only suppose that the conquistador
who left this account must have looted and drunk
several jars of the ceremonial balche in the suburbs.
But Namuchel, the Real Man of Ahkinchel, was at
length moving. He raised his militia and marched
down on Chuaca. In the morning the Spaniards in
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 257
Chuaca descried his approach. Monte jo, glad to
demonstrate his power in a definite engagement,
marched out to meet him.
There followed what seemed in its essentials a
repetition of many a battle fought by the Spanish
conquerors of Mexico. The charging Maya were
mown down in scores by the guns and arquebuses,
dispersed and broken up by the charges of the horse¬
men. In an interval of the fighting the bloodhounds
were loosed and these tore out the throats of the
native wounded, or, leaping upon the warriors,
affixed their fangs in the naked flesh under the loin¬
cloth. But the Maya recovered again and again,
and in face of their overwhelming numbers, Montejo
decided on retreat.
Six captives were left in the hands of the Maya
to suffer the usual grisly fate of such unfortunates.
Montejo retreated across country towards Ake, the
principal pueblo of those parts. While Namuchehs
army was licking its wounds, disposing of its
dead, and sacrificing its prisoners, the indomitable
Spaniards marched into Ake and surprised it. The
inhabitants fled or submitted.
Again there is a blur of the historical record, one
version giving an indecisive battle fought between
Montejo and the Cocomes for the possession of Ake,
and a retreat by Montejo back into Chel country.
What is certain is that the Spaniards next appeared
at Zilam, a Chel coastal town, and that there Namu-
chel came and made submission to Montejo.
The Adelantado had unconsciously profited, per¬
haps, by Chel hatred of the Cocomes, for the first of
the Real Men to defeat the invaders must have had
cogent reasons enough for submitting so shortly
afterwards. With Zilam his base, Montejo summoned
up his ships from Soliman Bay, and turned to
subjugating the rest of the country.
But, by a fortuitous conjunction of events, the
surrounding Maya territory neither wished nor
attempted resistance to the invaders. The Chels
R
258 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
had submitted, the Cocomes seem to have remained
mute after the battle of Ake (if such a battle was
ever waged), and suddenly Montejo received an
ambassadorship from the Tutul Xius of Mani,
offering alliance and support of the most powerful
state in Maya land.
What led to that submission is wrapt in as much
obscurity as the rest of the campaign, but it does not
seem unwarranted to connect the incident with the
fact of Mani being a centre of the bastardized
Kukulcan worship and the Spaniards being almost
universally accepted as descendants of the God. So
the last and strongest representatives of Maya civiliza¬
tion allied themselves with an invader who had come
to end that civilization forever.
Kimpech made submission, and probably the
minor states. All Yucatan now lay at the feet of the
Spaniards.
vi. Eviction of the Spaniards
From Zilam Montejo presently transported the
bulk of his followers to Chichen Itza. The sale of this
city to the Spaniards by Namuchel, to whom it did
not belong, is one of the few amusing incidents of this
penultimate chapter in the long, tangled history of
the Maya race. The Spaniards displayed an amazing
punctiliousness in their purchase of the town, oc¬
cupied it, doubtlessly cleansed its temples, and re¬
christened it Salamanca. Then Montejo set about
the invariable practice of the Spaniards in their
occupation of American cities—dividing up the sur¬
rounding country into encomiendos—sections of
territory containing between two and three thousand
“ Indies ” in each. These natives became the slaves,
in fact if not in name, of the particular Spaniard to
whom, for service in war or intrigue, the encomiendo
was donated.
For a little the Maya surrounding Chichen appear
to have accepted their enslavement with a dazed
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 259
docility. Then the occupation began to show its
worst features. Montejo, worried, wearied, and
bankrupt, realized that this was not Mexico, that
Mayan wealth, where it existed, consisted in corn and
slaves and tobacco and cacao. The Spaniards let
loose their fury and lust on the populace in tortur¬
ings and beatings, the Maya rated so cheaply that a
horse was valued as worth a hundred Indians, and
“ the daughter of an Indian Prince might be pur¬
chased for a cheese/' in the words of one chronicler.
And for de Moreno, the Master of the Smelters,
there was little or nothing to smelt.
Presently the rumour reached Montejo that the
country with mines, the land of gold, lay in Chec-
temal, to the south. He despatched Alonso Davila
and Francisco Vasquez, a’ mining expert, to in¬
vestigate this rumour with a promise of 300 ducats
reward for finding a single mine. There followed, on
the jungly borders of Chectemal and Cochuah, several
months of marchings and counter-marchings, raid¬
ings, skirmishes with the population, and growing
discouragement on the part of Davila. On the
borders of Chectemal the Can militia behaved with
a new tactic : they acted in a fashion uncustomary
with Mayan troops. Legend has it that this was the
work of Guerrero, the renegade, that he himself was
in command of the holcones who vexed the prospect¬
ing, marching, irritated Davila. He had made the
Maya town of Chable his capital; at last, from his
raidings and colonizings in Chectemal he retreated
back on that capital, apparently in some straits.
Food was lacking and uncertain, and the Can army
pressing him hotly. He despatched messengers with¬
out avail to tell Montejo of his straits.
But the lines of communication by land had been
cut. Chichen Itza had risen against the Spaniards.
From the surrounding country bands of Maya came
marching down to invest the strangers in the fortress,
men of Kupul and Titzimin, perhaps, though the
records do not say. Provisions began to grow scarce
260 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
in the fortress and night after night the conquis-
tadores listened to the threats of torture and death
hurled at them over the walls by the besiegers. Since
the beginning of the siege over a hundred and fifty of
Montejo’s men had been killed.
The Adelantado resolved to abandon the city to
the Maya, for neither the Chel nor the Xiu seem to
have shown any willingness to come to his rescue. It
was probably a non-national holy crusade that was
being waged against him. A secret way out of the
fortress was found by the Spaniards, and an ingenious
plan hit upon to deceive the besiegers. A number of
Mayan dogs were in the fortress. One of these was
chained just out of reach of a piece of meat. The
other end of the chain was fastened to the clapper of
a great copper bell so that whenever the starving
animal strained towards the food the sound of the
bell boomed through the fortress.
All that night the Maya spearmen and bowmen
investing the stronghold under the gaping serpents
and the protruding Ganesha-heads of America heard
the tolling of the bell at intervals and credited the
strangers with their usual vigilance. But when morn¬
ing came the defences were seen to wear a deserted
look. Not a gleam of arquebus or steel morion shone
from the walls. A storming party of the Maya broke
in the doors and barricades without opposition. The
Spaniards had gone, passing through weary Chichen
undetected in the darkness, and were far on the road
to the sea.
But outside that darkness they pass into a dark¬
ness of history almost as opaque. Montejo’s natural
line of retreat would have been to Zilam of the Chels
and from there to take ship from the land of his
misfortunes. Instead, at least one record pictures
him reaching Zilam and from there setting out on a
south-westwards march through Ahkinchel and
Zotuta. Perhaps he hoped to reach Mani and the
succour of his allies, the Tutul Xiu. But they seem
to have offered no help whatever although Montejo
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 26l
was probably pursued by the Maya insurgents almost
in view of the towers of Mani. Somewhere in that
country the pursuit slackened and the Spaniards at
length reached Kimpech and safety.
It was not such safety as Montejo could trust. He
lingered a few weeks longer at Kimpech, was joined
by the depleted forces of Davila—who, after crazy
wanderings through the bush-country of Chectemal
and Bakhalal had reached Trujillo in Honduras and
taken ships from there—then sent orders to his son
at Zilam to bring the Spanish transports round to the
western coast. Nearly half of that confident force
which had set foot on the beaches of Zami was left
dead in the lands of the Maya—half, and most of
them unburied, their bodies rotting in the jungle or
nailed to the temple-walls of Chichen or lying beside
some village altar where they had screamed in the
agonies of sacrifice. No treasure of any account
had been found, nothing but disease, ferocious
enmity, and the incomprehensible friendliness of the
Xiu.
It was the year 1532. Fugitive and despondent,
but swearing to return, the Spaniards embarked and
sailed away from the land they had so nearly
conquered, just as a terrible breath of pestilence
came hurrying in with the spring.
vii. The last Five Years of Mayan Freedom
With that pestilence came a terrible drought.
Famine spread rapidly. Few plantations had been
tilled or planted in the western principalities, and
the Kupul-Cocome force, marching home, found
hunger and cannibalism raging in the cities so dearly
won from the Spaniards. Scores died from the black
death that came again from the altars. Daily in the
decaying, half-deserted cities sounded the screams of
victims offered up to the insatiable and implacable
Rain God ; and men, remembering the efficacy of
the ancient Chichen pools, despatched parties to
262 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
sacrifice there. Cozumel was perhaps almost a
forgotten sanctuary, or one defiled by contact with
the “ scum from the sea/’ as the haughty Maya had
dubbed the Spaniards.
In Mani the temperamental Xiu Governor prepared
an offering for the Chichen Itza cenote. Six youths
and maidens were selected and permission requested
from Nachicocome for the party to pass through
Zotuta to Chichen. So exhausted was the country
that the Xiu believed the ancient hatreds were
dead. Thus indeed it appeared : the Cocome Real
Man returned a friendly reply, inviting the sacrificial
procession to enter and lodge in his own city.
It set out from Mani under the leadership of a
favourite son of the Xiu Governor, Ahkulelchi Xiu.
Sacrificer-priests, sad-faced victims, and twenty
soldiers marched behind him. They reached Zotuta
on the nightfall of the day on which they had set
out from Mani. The lethargic Cocomes watched their
entry in silence, and perhaps some uneasiness came
on the Xiu bowmen, those Maya Spartans. But
Ahkulelchi found himself well-received by Nachi¬
cocome and lodged in the guest-house of the palace,
he and all his company.
In the dead of the night that house was fired by the
Cocome guards. From the heart of the flames rose
the screams of the trapped Xiu. They sought to
break out by the window-slits and doors, but the
latter had been tied by ropes of green hide, and when¬
ever they succeeded in tearing down the obstructions
a hail of arrows from the Cocomes drove them back.
All the sacred embassy, including Ahkulelchi, perished
in the flames.
The news of the crime stirred a strange indignation
among the Maya. Even Kanul and Kupul, long
enemies of the Xiu (as indeed were most other
tribes) sent threatening messages to Nachicocome.
But they made no attempt to join the Xiu army of
invasion which was being prepared at Mani. All
Yucatan looked on in indifference at the gathering
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 263
storm-clouds of that last war between the two Maya
states.
These two had fought across the Yucatecan stage
for over half a thousand years ; and now again they
faced each other, unconscious of their mutual destiny,
how soon they would both be forgotten actors and
their stage set for another play. Then the Xiu
crossed into Zotuta and the campaign began.
It swayed now this way, now that. Nachicocome,
a general of merit, drove out the invaders and would
have occupied Mani had not the indomitable
Lacedaemonians raised a fresh and vigorous army and
beaten him off. But gradually vigour departed from
the campaign. Food grew scarcer and scarcer.
Soldiers on the morning of battle fell and died of
plague. The armies degenerated into starving bands
of robbers which still wasted the borders even after
organized hostilities had faded out through sheer
exhaustion.
That winter the rains came hardly at all to the
parched and withered plantations, nor the next, nor
the next. Instead, the wind brought great clouds of
grasshoppers which stripped the foliage from the
trees and destroyed the scanty crops, leaving the
earth bare and brown, the trees shivering wands in
the forests. The war still went on, the starving cities
to north and south hearing of it as a conflict is heard
in a nightmare. Then large numbers of the Maya
began a great migration to the south. In great
hosts, staggering, plague-stricken, they went into the
jungle-trails on the track of the Little Descent, and,
far from their states and cities, cenotes and altars,
were dispersed and massacred by the Mopanes of
Belize River.
Towards the end of five years of civil war and
recurring famine, there died in Mani Ahpula Napot
Xiu, who appears to have been the last high priest of
the Xius. In that year the ships of the strangers
again appeared off the Yucatecan coast, and the
beach at Champoton rang under the iron-shod heels
264 the CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
of the new army of conquest brought from Mexico
by the son of Francisco de Montejo.
viii. Return oj the Spaniards
It was the year 1537. After obscure campaignings
and plannings in New Spain, and particularly Tabasco,
the Montejos, with a considerable force, had returned
to the conquest from which they had been so ignomi-
niously driven away five years before. The ships
sailed up and anchored off Champoton, and the son of
Mochcovoh received the strangers with a suspicious
docility. He allowed them to land and make camp,
and fed and entertained them. Then he attacked
their camp.
After a lengthy struggle, he was beaten off.
Negotiations were begun, and the Covoh submitted.
But again he was merely gathering fresh forces ; it
appears, indeed, that he gathered them from far and
near, perhaps there were Cocome and even Kupul
contingents in the army of Maya militia that hovered
round Champoton. At length the time was ripe and
they struck. The Spaniards were driven from their
camp and the camp sacked. All day the battle roared
down towards the beaches of Champoton, and there
by their ships the Spaniards turned and at length
the Maya attack scattered and broke before the gum
fire from the ships. Various companions of the
Montejos were afterwards to tell in their memoirs of
the ferocity of those hours of fighting, and a great
disgust spread among them. Here were no meek
Indies or eager allies, but ferocious and blood¬
thirsty tribesmen.
The invasion began to peter out. Most of the
Spaniards sailed back to New Spain, though the
Montejos’ force hung on to some little part of Cham¬
poton and never quite relinquished it.
With a fuddled patience Montejo set about re¬
organizing the conquest, and at the end of another
two years had drawn together an army of needy and
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 265
hardy spirits, though the more adventurous ha.d sailed
for the golden wealth and gilded lies of Inkaic Peru.
By 1540, however, with Campeche in their hands,
the Spaniards prepared again to subjugate Yucatan.
In a letter signed at Villa Real de Chiapa the senior
Monte jo handed over the chief command to his
son, instructing him, in the curious muddled spirit
characteristic of all the instructions given by com¬
manders to sub-commanders in the Spanish conquest
of America, to treat the Indios well, to make war on
“ rebels,” to free slaves, to establish encomiendos, to
leave the Mayan territory untouched, and to build
a Spanish capital at Ti-hoo !
Re-christening Campeche San Francisco de Cam¬
peche, Monte jo the Younger despatched a small
force towards Ti-hoo to occupy that city and establish
it as the Spanish headquarters in the Peninsula. It
was understood that the chief of Kanul was friendly
towards the invaders; but this friendship was
feigned. Kanul and Chakan allied and gathered a
considerable force to resist the marching Spaniards.
Near a village called Pokboc invader and Maya met
in a short and sanguinary battle. No details of it
come to us, but the Maya were defeated with great
slaughter and the small expedition marched on Ti-
hoo and captured it with ease.
By the middle of the year 154° Monte jo the
Younger was himself established in a small camp
in Ti-hoo and narrowly watching events in the Penin¬
sula. The exhausted Maya had moved lethargically
against the fresh invasion, but now, with a leader
at last found, they showed considerable determina¬
tion. This leader was Nachicocome, the Real Man of
Zotuta who had slaughtered the Xiu delegation to the
Sacred Wells. In the autumn of 1540 he gathered
a considerable army and marched it against the
“ scum from the sea.” Monte jo descried it from the
hill of Ti-hoo and marched out to engage it. The
Maya met the invaders with their old tactics and
weapons, and, as was almost always the case under
266 THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
these circumstances, were bloodily defeated.
Patriotism was not enough.
Nachicocome retreated back into his own lands
defeated but unconquered. While he gathered
fresh resistance the Tutul Xiu moved on Ti-hoo, not,
however, as enemies, but as friends to cement the
alliance made with the Spaniards in the first invasion.
The Xiu Real Man announced his conversion to
Christianity, was re-christened, and promised to
spread the Faith among his fellow-countrymen. He
brought to Ti-hoo a lengthy train of Mani governors
and batabs, all of whom submitted to baptism, and
with their coming the delighted Spaniards saw the
strongest state in the Peninsula conquered without
a blow. Kukulcan had triumphed again.
The Xiu departed in February from Ti-hoo and,
true to their word, sent missionaries far and near
among the Maya states, advising submission to the
invaders and acceptance of the Christian faith.
Their embassy came to Zotuta in April, and Nachi¬
cocome listened in a growing fury. Then he com¬
manded that the Maya missionaries be butchered,
and went on with his work of raising a great army
against Ti-hoo.
On June n, 1541, the combined Xiu and
Spanish armies met the forces of Nachicocome at a
unknown place. He had brought seventy thousand
warriors to this last great battle, probably the
flower of the surviving Maya armies. The Spaniards
looked out on a sea of plumes and gay mantles as
the hordes of bowmen and spearmen marched to
attack. Then the guns opened.
By nightfall the Maya were fleeing from the field,
heartbroken and in despair. Nachicocome retreated
back upon Zotuta and watched through the succeed-
ings months state after state fall into the hands of
the “ scum from the sea ” and their allies. A ring
of conquered country gradually encircled Zotuta,
and at length, in May, 1542, that city fell, the last
Maya city of importance to resist the strangers.
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA 267
Prophecy had foreseen the end in the “ Song of the
Tiger-priest ” that rang in the ears of the Maya in
those years, as the Spaniards marched bloodily from
conquest to conquest :
" Eat, eat, while there is bread,
Drink, drink, while there is water,
A day comes when dust shall darken the air,
When a blight shall wither the land,
When a cloud shall arise,
When a mountain shall be lifted up,
When a strong man shall seize the city ;
When ruin shall fall upon all things,
When the tender leaf shall be destroyed,
When eyes shall be closed in death,
When there shall be three signs on a tree :
Father, son and grandson hanging dead on the same
tree :
When the battle-flag shall be raised
And the people scattered abroad in the forest.”
EPILOGUE
WITH the fall of Zotuta the Conquest of the
Maya may be viewed as complete. The
heroic defence of their countries by the
Can and May armies of Chectemal and Cochuah, the
rising of the Itza which culminated in the massacre
of Valladolid, the terrible vengeance exacted by
the Spaniards for that massacre before the country
was pacified by Francisco de Bracamonte belong
rather to the pacification of a province of New Spain
than to the Conquest of the Maya. How one by one
the antique cities were abandoned at the orders of
the conquerors and the Maya herded in great new
centres under the surveillance of Christian ruler
and Christian priest, how for a brief time Mani under
its Xiu “ king ” (whose descendants survive in
Yucatan to this day) rose to pride and greatness in
the shelter of the Spanish power and was overthrown
not by arms but by an ironic combination of economic
forces, how, long after the rest of the Maya had sub¬
mitted the citizens of Peten on Lake Chultuna (who
had entertained Cortes’ horse so hospitably) lived
free on their island till conquered and dispersed in
1697 by Martin Ursua—those happenings are with
Hispano-American history, not Mayan. With the
last great battle of Montejo the Younger the strange
lost expedition of civilization in the American forests
M was rejoined to and submerged in the greater Adven¬
ture of mankind.
Nor was that submergence unjustified, nor may the
Spaniards, whatever their motives, be accused of
cruelties unknown before their coming or the over¬
throw of a culture higher than their own. The mind
of Mayan civilization had grown feeble and debased.
It left to the common mind of man not a single
thought or aspiration of importance.
And indeed it may be asked what it left at all that
this history of its rise and fortunes should be
attempted. Perhaps nothing. But a wider imagina¬
tion brings understanding and a growing sympathy
268
EPILOGUE
269
for those remotest men of the ancient Golden Age,
the men of antique America, who were drawn in the
maze of civilization’s alien growth and, isolated
from the great lights and compassions that came on
that civilization elsewhere, knew only the unending
circling of its dark and tenebrous ways or the
phosphorescent glow of a brittle intellectualism.
Imagination may forget the painted long-houses and
the smoking altars, the brutish gods and the mystic
scripts, and turn more happy eyes on such things as
the great Sun Dial at Copan, more happy hearing to
the faint murmur of the work and life of the first
Kukulcan, that Amerindian Buddha.
We see them on the painted boards of pseudo¬
history, a little people, a little cult, dreaming its
dreams and passing ; and whether that is to us only
a play and procession of days and ghosts, or indict¬
ment for the codes and crimes of our own civiliza¬
tion, prophecy for it of a fate as fantastic and
terrible, is for each who reads to decide or pass and
forget.
REFERENCE BIBLIOGRAPHY
(The bracketed numbers correspond to the numbered
references throughout the text.)
(1) L'Amerique Precolombienne, by A. Gagnon. 1908.
(2) Voyage Pittoresque, etc., by F. de Waldeck. 1838.
(3) Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatan,
by John Lloyd Stephens. 1841.
(4) Incidents of Travel in Yucatan, by John Lloyd Stephens.
1843.
(5) Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan, by Diego de Landa.
(Edited, with French trans. by C. L. Brasseur de
Bourbourg.) 1861.
(6) History of the Conquest of Mexico, by W. H. Prescott. 1843.
(7) Queen Moo and the Egyptian Sphinx, by A. Le Plongeon.
1896.
(8) The Maya Chronicles, by D. G. Brinton. 1886.
(9) Archcelogical Studies amongst the Ancient Cities of Mexico, by
W. H. Holmes. (Field Columbian Mus.) 1895 and
1897.
(10) The Numeration, Calendar Systems, and Astronomical
Knowledge of the Mayas, by C. P. Bowditch. 1910.
(11) Guide to the Maudslay Collection of Maya Sculptures.
(British Museum : Compiled by T. A. Joyce.) 1923.
(12) Historia de Yucatan, by D. L. Cogolludo. 1868.
(13) Historia de Yucatan, by B. de Lizana. 1633.
(14) Conquista de Itza, by F. Villagutierre.
(15) Historia general de los hechos de los Castellanos en las Islas i
tierra firme del mar oceano. 8 decads. 1601-1615.
(16) Gesammelte Abhandlungen, by E. Seler. 1902 (onwards).
(17) Mexican Archceology, by T. A. Joyce. 1914.
(18) Histoire des peuples mayas-quiches, by J. Genet and
P. Chelbatz. 1927.
(19) Maya Art, by H. J. Spinden. 1913.
(20) The Inscriptions at Copan, by S. G. Morley. 1920.
(21) The Civilization of the Mayas, by J. E. Thompson. (Leaflet
of the F. M. Nat. Hist. Chicago.) 1927.
(22) Ancient Civilization of the Andes, by P. A. Means. 1931.
(23) The Genesis of the American Indian, by Ales Hrdlicka.
(International Congress of Americanists, XIX, pp. 559-
568.) 1917.
271
REFERENCE BIBLIOGRAPHY
272
(24) Ancient Hunters, by W. J. Sollas. 1923.
(25) South American Archceology, by T. A. Joyce. 1912.
(26) History of America, by W. Robertson. 1777.
(27) The Golden Age, by H. J. Massingham. 1927.
(28) Downland Man, by H. J. Massingham. 1926.
(29) Human History, by G. Elliot Smith. 1930.
(30) The Children of the Sun, by W. ].VQiry. 1926.
(31) {a) In Art and Archceology, XVI, pp. 51-58. {h) In Science
Monthly, XXIII, pp. 289-304. 1923.
(32) Gods and Men, by W. J. Perry. 1927.
(33) La Esfinge Indiana, by J. Imbelloni. 1926.
(34) The History of the Maya, by T. Gann and J. E. Thompson.
1931-
(35) Myths of Pre-Columbian America, by D. A. Mackenzie.
1923.
(36) Shells as Evidence of the Migrations of Early Culture, by
J. W. Jackson. 1917.
(37) Maya Cities, by T. Gann. 1927.
(38) Atlantis in America, by Lewis Spence. 1925.
(39) Old Civilization of the New World, by A. Hyatt Verrill.
1929.
(40) In the Beginning, by G. Elliot Smith. 1926.
(41) Tribes and Temples, by F. Blom and O. Le Farge. 1926.
(42) Elements of South Indian Palceography, by A. C. Burnell.
1878.
(42a) Maya Astronomy, etc., by J. Teeple (No. 403 Publ.
Carnegie Inst., Washington). 1931.
(43) Ergebnisse einer Forschungsreise in Mittelamerika und
Mexico, by W. Lehmann. (Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic.)
1907-1910.
(44) Vues des cordilleres et monumens des peuples indigenes de
L’Amerique, by A. von Humboldt. 1810.
(45) The Hittites, A. H. Sayce. 1912.
(46) History of the World (Ed. A. J. Hammerton). 1910.
(47) In Antiquity, Vol. 4, No. 15, pp. 285-302, by J. Leslie
Mitchell. 1930.
(48) Maya Civilization and Climatic Changes, by E. Huntington.
(Int. Cong. Amer., XIX, pp. 150-164.) 1917.
(49) First and Last Things, by H. G. Wells. 1929.
REFERENCE BIBLIOGRAPHY 273
(50) History of the New World called America, by W. J. Payne.
1899.
(51) Pre-Historic North America, by W. J. McGee and C. Thomas.
1905.
(52) Costumes of America. 1780.
(53) Histoire Generate des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne, by
Bernardino de Sahagun. 1880.
(54) Histoire des nations civilisees du Mexique et de VAmerique
Centrale durant les siecles anterieurs a Christophe Colomb,
by C. £. Brasseur de Bourbourg. 1857-1859.
(55) Maya and Mexican Art, by T. A. Joyce. 1927.
(56) Les Anciennes Villes du Nouveau Monde, by Desire Charnay,
1885.
(57) The Buddha of America, by J. Leslie Mitchell. (The Cornhill.
XLI.) 1931.
(58) Early History of the Creek Indians, by J. Swanton. (Bull.
73. Bur. Amer. Ethn.) 1922.
(59) The Conquest of New Spain, by Bernal Diaz de Castillo.
(English ed. trans. by A. P. Maudslay.) 1916.
3
INDEX
A
Acallan, state of, 245, 246
Acanceh, 187
Aculhuaque (Toltecs), 197
Agave Americana, 32,140
Agriculture, origin, 46
spread of, 49, 52, 53
Aguilar, Geronimo De, 233-
238,248-249
Ahau can, chief priest, 189
Ahkin mai, chief priest, 189
Ahkinchel, state of, 224
Ahkulelchi Xiu, 262
Ahzuitok Tutul Xiu, 214
Ake, 172
Amerindian {Red Indian), 38
“ Antilia,” supposed fragment
of Atlantis, 60
Archaic culture, 47, 48
in Mexico, 194, 195
Architecture, method, 73,
74
origins, 77, 78, 79
Asiatic influences, 36
Astronomy, 92
Aztecs, 21, 222
B
Bakhalal, 142, 225
Balche, ceremonial drink, 185,
186
Ball-game, 135, 138
Egyptian origin, 139
Batab, district governor in
New Empire, 187
Behring Straits, 39
Blom and Le Farge, Messrs.,
exploring mission, 31
Bracamonte, Francisco de,
pacifies Yucatan, 268
Buddhist influences in Maya
religion, 184, 210, 216
C
Calendar, 92, 93, 101, 102, 103,
104, 105, 106, 107, 108,
109, 181-186
correlation of Maya and
Christian, 107, 108
Asiatic similarities, 101, 109,
no
Calotmul, state of, 225
Caribs, 232, 233
Catherwood, Frederick, 24, 25
Catoche, Cabo, naming of, 240
Cepech, state of, 224
Chable, 259
Chac, God, 112, 113, 114
Chacmool, humanized Rain-
god, 177
Chacmultun, 175
Chacnouitan, halting place of
Tutul Xiu, 142, 205
Chacs, priests, 190
Chac-Xib-Chac, 220, 221
Chakan, state of, 224
Champoton, 206, 207
Chectemal, state of, 225, 259
Chels, people of Ahkinchel,
224
Chichemaca, 202
Chichen Itza, 29,172-174,175.
205, 206, 213, 258, 259,
260, 261
Chilans, priests, 189
Chilan-Balaam (Books of the
Tiger Priests), 35, 140,
141, 182, 205
Cholula, 197
excavation in pyramid of,
201
Chuaca, 256
Battle of, 257
Civilization Mayan, three prin¬
cipal lacks in, 150, 151
Civilization, origin in Ancient
Egypt, 46, 47
Coba, 172, 173, 175
Cochuah, state of, 225, 259
275
INDEX
276
Code culture, 61
Cocomes, New Empire family,
206
Columbus, Christopher, voy¬
ages of, 231, 232, 233
Copan, 24, 25, 69, 70, 207
Cordoba, Hernandez De, Ex¬
pedition of, 238-243
Cortes, Hernando de, expedi¬
tions of, 246-251
Cotton cultivation, 96
Cozumel, Island of, 207, 213,
218, 219, 225, 244, 252,
253
“ Cross,” Temple of at Pal-
enque, 68, 69
Cuicuilco, Archaic site, 49, 50
Culture, Archaic, origin, 47, 48
D
Davila, Alonso, 254, 259, 261
Descent, Great, 203, 205
Little, 203, 205, 206
Diaz, Bernal, historian, 239,
240, 241
Diffusion of culture, causes of
trans-Pacific, 120, 121
Disc, winged, 86, 87
Dogs, as food, 96
Dresden Codex, 28, 29, 33
E
Earth-monster at Quirigua, 70
Egyptian—appearances, 25, 26
Ekab, state of, 225
Elephant as sculptural decora¬
tion, 87, 88, 89
F
Feasts, religious, in New Em¬
pire, 184-186
Feather work in New Empire,
181
Fresco-painting, 90
G
Ganesha, Hindu god as Maya
deity, 113, 114, 183
Glyphs, calculiform, 32, 34,
35, 100, 101
Gods, Old Empire, 111-116,
164
Gold, New Empire, 191
Gold, search for, 48
Gorgon as Sun-god, 114, 184
" Grand Cairo,” 239, 240, 241
Grijalva, expedition of Juan
de, 243-246
Guerrero, Gonzalo, 233-237,
249
Guildsmen, 190
H
Hanuman, Hindu god as Maya
deity, 114
Hemandea, Fra Francisco, 254
Holon Chantepeuh, Tutul Xiu
ruler, 141, 143
Huaxteca, Mayance tribe, 58,
195
Huehuetlapallan, home of Tol-
tecs, 196, 198
Humboldt, Baron A. Von,
explorations of, 36, 199,
200, 201
Hunac Ceel, 219, 222
Hunahpu, mythical Quiche
hero, 136-138
Hunhunahpu, mythical Quiche
hero, 135, 136
Hurakan, God, 227
Hurricane, Great, 226,227
I
Indra, Hindu God as New Em¬
pire deity, 183
Itzamal, 172
Itzamna, New Empire leader,
203, 204
INDEX
Itzas, 206, 208
Ixchel, Rainbow Goddess, 203,
239
Izancanac (possibly Palenque),
250
J
Jade, search for, 48
K
Kabah, 175
Kamil, mercenary, 222
date of, 224
Kaxchiquel, 21, 134
Kewich, 175
Kimpech, state of, 224
Kukulcan (Topiltzin Axcitl
Quetzalcoatl), 203, 209,
213
Kupul, state of, 225
L
Labn&, 175,187
League of Mayapan, 216, 223
Life, every day Mayan, imag¬
inative picture, 151-168
Life-giving substances, de¬
posits, 61
search for, 48, 49
Loch£, 256
Lubaantun, 72
M
Macanxoc, 175
Maize, cultivation of, 53, 54,
93, 94, 95, 96, 192
Makara as Earth-monster, 89
Man, Early, his character, 43
in America, 44, 45, 46
Mani, 219, 223
Maudslay, Dr. A. P., 30
277
Maya, origins, 57, 58, 59, 60
Maya, sites names of, 73
Mayan, civi Nation, three prin¬
cipal la ks in, 150, 151
everyday life, imaginative
picture of, 151-168
Mayapan, 172, 175, 214
Mayapan, League of, 216, 223
Mazahua, 195
Melanesian incursions, 39
Menche-Yaxchilan, 65, 71
Merchants, 190, 191
Metal work in New Empire,
179-181
Mexican mercenaries, 221, 222
Mexico, 193-202
Milk, remembered as divine
drink, 54
Mitla, 177, 199, 200
Mixe, 195
Mixtec, 195, 199
Mochcovoh, ruler of Cham-
poton, 242, 243, 245, 246
Moctezhuoma, high-chief of
Aztecs, 235
Mongoloid stock, differentia¬
tion of, 40
Monte Alban, 199, 200
Montejo, Francisco de (The
Elder), Expedition of, 251-
261
(The Younger), Expeditions
of, 254, 265, 266
Mound-builders, North
America, 50, 60, 198
Mu, 29
Muchanxiu, ruler of Mani, 235
N
Nachancan, ruler of Chectemal,
237
Nachicocome, ruler of Zotuta,
252, 262, 265, 266
Nacon, civil administrator,
188, 189
Nacons, priests, 189, 190
INDEX
278
Nacotcocome, 222, 223
Nahna, 29
Namuchel, ruler of Ahkinchel,
252, 256, 257, 258
Naobonkupul, ruler of Kupul,
252
Napotxiu, Ahpula, high priest
of Maui, 235-236, 263
New Empire (General), 169-
171
Archaic culture in, 170, 171
batab, district governor in,
187
calendar in, 181-186
feasts, religious in, 184-186
feather work in, 181
gold, 191
metal work in, 179-181
Mexican mercenaries brought
to, 221, 222
“Real Man/’ paramount chief
in, 187
sciences in, 178-181
warfare, 187,188
Nieto, Gonsalo, standard-
bearer, 254
Nonoual, home of Tutul Xiu,
141
O
Old Empire, three racial types
in, 117, 118
end of, 143-147. 250
theories of catastrophic de¬
cadence in, 124-129, 143,
144
religion of, 111-116
warfare in, 130-133
Otomi, 195, 196
P
Painting, 89, 90
Palenque, 27, 68, 69
Peasants, 191, 192
Peresianus, codex, 33, 34
Peten-ekte, state of, 223
Peten-Itza, state of, 223
Phallicism, 218
Piedras Negras, 70, 71
Pinson Vicente Yanez and
Juan Diaz De Solis, dis¬
coverers of Yucatan, 233
Plongeon, Dr. A. Le, 29, 178
Polynesian incursions, 39
Popol Vuh (The Book of the
People), 134-140
Potonchan, state of, 223
Pottery, 91, 92
Pusilha, 71, 72
Q
Quetzalcoatl, Amerindian
Buddha, 210, 216
Topiltzin Axcitl, 179
Quiche, 21, 27, 134
Quirigua, 27, 70
Quito, Hernando Moreno de,
254. 259
R
" Real Man,” New Empire
paramount chief, 187
Religion, Old Empire, in, 112,
113, 114, 115, 116
S
Sacrifice, human, 115, 116
San Andres Tuxtla figurine, 57,
59
Sayil, 175-177
Sculpture, 80-89
Asiatic similarities, 85-89
Shells, as amulets, 54
Slaves, 191
INDEX
Solis, Juan Diaz De and Vicente
Yanez Pinson, discoverers
of Yucatan, 233
Stelae, 56, 80, 81, 82
Stephens, John Lloyd, 24, 27
“ Sun,” Temple of, at Pal-
enque, 68, 69
T
Tayasal, on Lake Chultuna,
250-251
Tecpan Guatemala, 27
Teotihuacan, 197
Teosinte (wild maize), 53
Three Brothers, the, 207, 208,
209
Tibullon, 225
Ti-hoo, 175, 265, 266
Tikal, 66, 67
Tixchel, state of, 223
Tizimin, state of, 225
Tollan, 196
Toltecs, 21, 193, 196-199, 201,
202
Toltec, art influences, 215, 216
Toltec, origins of culture, 198,
199, 202
Tools and weapons, 98, 99
Tools, Stone Age, world-wide
diffusion, 41
Totanaca, Mayance tribe, 58,
195
Troano-Cortesian Codex, 33
Tuluum, 171, 172, 175
Tutul-Xiu, clan, 35, 140-143,
205-207
Tzibanche, 67, 68
U
Uaxactun, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66
Ulil, Governor of Izamal, 220
279
Ursua, Martin, conquers Peten
(Tayasal), 268
Uxamacintla, 21, 24
Uxmal, 27, 174, 175
V
Vasquez, Francisco, 259
Vestals, 190
Vukub, Hunahpu, mythical
Quiche hero, 135, 136
W
Waldeck, F. de, 23
Warfare, New Empire, 187,188
Old Empire, 130-133
Weapons and tools, 98, 99
Weaving, methods of, 98
X
Xbalanque, mythical Quiche
hero, 135-138
Xibalba, mythical kingdom,
135-140
Y
Yucatan (General), 21, 30,
32, 169, 170, 171
Z
Zami, 254
Zapotec, 195, 199, 200, 201
Zian Caan (Bakhalal), 142
Zotuta, battle of, 266
state of, 224, 225
Zuyua script, 30
MESSRS JARROLDS’
Important New Books
for SPRING, 1934
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
Bj J. Leslie Mitchell
Author of “ Hatwo, or the Future of Exploration ”, “ Ancient
America ”, etc.
Foreword by Prof. G. Elliot Smith, M.A., F.R.S., Lrrr.D.
THE most remarkable people encountered by the Spaniards in the New
World of America were the Maya. In the early days of the
Christian era the Maya civilization arose mysteriously in Central America
and sent numerous offshoots north and south, for a time establishing a
great cultural empire. Four centuries later it collapsed mysteriously,
the Maya abandoning their great cities of Chiapas and Guatemala and
trekking into the nearby peninsula of Yucatan. There they partly upbuilt
their culture, till the appearance of the Spaniards ended this great racial
adventure.
Illustrated 1 St. net
INDIAN INDIA
By C. W. Waddington, C.I.E., M.V.O.
Foreword by Sir Claude Hill, K.C.S.I., C.I.E.
MR. WADDINGTON knows, perhaps more intimately than any
other man, the India which is coming to an end by Act of
Parliament, the India of the past century, during which the British
Provinces have been controlled by an all-powerful bureaucracy, while
the Indian States have been under the sway of their hereditary Rulers.
As an artist his illustrations will speak for themselves. These
delicately beautiful drawings of the fortress-palaces and cities, the tombs
and temples, the rivers and hills of the most fascinating region of old-
world India, will appeal not only to those who are familiar with the
country, but to all lovers of Art.
Illustrated i8r. net
1
JARROLDS’ IMPORTANT NEW BOOKS
WESTWARD HO ! From Cambria to Cornwall
With Stanley R. Baron and Reg Gammon
A FLEET STREET travel writer and an artist set out westward, on a
cycling and walking tour, and this is the story of their journey
and encounters—from Cambria to Cornwall.
Baron and Gammon are delightful companions to follow in their
travels, and they have conveyed in these pages all the charm and allure of
the delectable West Country with its sublime scenery : quaint old-world
hamlets : wind-swept heaths : luxuriantly leafy lanes and by-ways : and
castles and shrines of historic interest.
Illustrated ~js. Gd. net
FROM WEIMAR TO CHAOS : The Political Diary of
a Reichswehr General, 1932-33
Edited bj Dr. Helmut Klotz
THIS is the diary of a General in the German War Office, covering
the events of 1932-33 which led to the triumph of Hitler and the
National Socialists. There are intimate conversations, both actual and
reported, with Hindenburg, Hitler, von Papen, Schleicher, Goering,
Goebbels, and many other leading figures, and a vivid description of
the astonishing and intricate intrigues that ended in the establishment
of the Nazi dictatorship.
The diary is Pepysian in its piquancy and frankness and illuminating
to a degree.
Illustrated i6j\ net
THE O’GORMAN MAHON: Duellist, Adventurer and
Politician
By Denis Gwynn
Author of “ De Valera ”, etc. etc.
THE O’GORMAN MAHON, M.P., was one of the most extra¬
ordinary men of the Victorian era. He fought more duels than any
man of his time; he served in the armies of France, Russia, and Austria,
and became well known at all the Royal Courts of Europe; he became
Generalissimo in one South American Republic and Admiral of the Fleet
in Chili; he got from Bismarck the right to found an Anglo-Prussian
bank in Berlin, and in his old age he had to vindicate his honour in the
criminal courts after the failure of his financial enterprises. He entered
Parliament as M.P. for his native county, Clare, before the first Reform
Act, in 1830, and returned to it, always a tempestuous figure, at intervals
between his wanderings. He was still in the House of Commons, as a
follower of Parnell, when he died in 1891.
Illustrated 12s. 6d. net
JARROLDS’ IMPORTANT NEW BOOKS
HOW THE FOREIGN LEGION WON MOROCCO
By G. Ward Price (The famous Journalist and War Correspondent)
BEST-KNOWN of British War Correspondents, Mr. Ward Price gives
for the first time a detailed and undistorted picture of life in that
much libelled and highly sensationalized corps, the French Foreign
Legion. He has been with the Legionaries on what is likely to be
their last active service in Morocco, and describes with a graphic pen the
campaigns by which they have gradually pacified that picturesque land.
Illustrated i6.f. net
EXPRESS TO HOLLYWOOD
The Autobiography of Victor McLaglen
HE was born to be a rover; he willingly endured hardship in his
quest of adventure. Yet he ended up a rich man, turned into a
successful film star against his will. Victor McLaglen is a man who has
lived two to almost everybody else’s one, a man who has worked and
played in every corner of the world, who left school to join the Life
Guards at fourteen, who worked his way round the world. In turn he was
soldier, farmer, miner, gold prospector, policeman, wrestler, boxer, vaude¬
ville actor, pearl fisher, signwriter, physical training instructor, heavy¬
weight challenger for the British title, big-game hunter, trader, and film star.
Illustrated I2j\ Gd. net
AFRICAN INTRIGUE
By Alfred Batson
THIS most remarkable book is the record of an African adventure in
the perilous game of international intrigue.
Everyone recalls the Agadir incident in 1911. Germany and France
were then straining for territorial expansion in Africa. Paris and Berlin
were exchanging polite notes while the Krupp factories worked overtime.
East of the Gold Coast lies the port of Lome where commenced the
strange events related in this book, events still listed to-day as unfinished
business in the Foreign Offices of London, Paris, and Berlin. Four white
men and ninety blacks started out on safari. “ Big Game ” was the
object, but, in reality, big game of another sort—so big that two nations
put a price on the heads of the whites, dead or alive. The four men dis¬
appeared into the jungle—and vanished. Since the day they crossed the
Togoland-Sudan frontier their disappearance has been the subject of
speculation.
But—one escaped alive. Here, for the first time, is his story, a tale
of suffering and failure, suspense and danger, sickness and starvation,
agony and death.
ioj-. 6d. net
in
JARROLDS’ IMPORTANT NEW BOOKS
THE LURE OF THE INDUS
Bj Sir George MacMunn, K.C.B., K.C.S.I., D.S.O.
Author of “ The Romance of the Indian Frontiers ”, “ The Underworld
of India ” (5/A Impression), etc.
TOURING the first ten years of Queen Victoria’s reign in India, there
occurred five remarkable campaigns, in which the British Army in
India earned undying fame. It was these wars which, unsought for the
most part, restored Mogul India, that greatest of Turkish Empires, to
one rule, and made the prosperity and greatness of modern India possible.
This, Sir George MacMunn’s new work, and a fellow to his Indian
Mutiny in Perspective, shows this magnificent story of India in travail
as a connected panorama of British-Indian history—to which the desks
of the dead have given us detail hidden from the contemporary historian.
Illustrated i8r. net
PERMANENT WAY THROUGH THE KHYBER
By Victor Bayley, C.I.E., C.B.E., Member Inst. Civil Engineers
THIS is, in the main, the thrilling story of the building of the
Khyber Railway—that extraordinary work which was declared by
Kitchener to be an impossibility and which the tribesmen, who regarded
it as a threat to their independence, intended it to be. The overcoming
of the natural obstacles in that wild and inhospitable region, as well
as the hostility of the tribesmen, makes an exciting and fascinating
narrative.
The book abounds with thrilling incident, and sheds light on a portion
of India of vital strategic importance, about which but very little has
been written.
Illustrated 1 jr. net
WHY NOT?
By Viola Bankes
Author of “ Shadow Show ” (A Novel)
A BACKGROUND of splendour and romance gives a classic setting
d- to the modern outlook of the author of these reminiscences.
Leisurely scenes of decorous, pre-War England give place in later years
to the careless gaiety of life at home and abroad.
An incongruous collection of crowned heads, bar-tenders, lovely
women and necromancers is scattered across the pages of this fascinating
book. Men and women whose names are world-famous are familiar friends
of the author, and she writes of them with disarming ingenuousness.
Illustrated i2j\ Gd. net
IV
JARROLDS’ IMPORTANT NEW BOOKS
PEASANT EUROPE
By H. Hessell Tiltman
HERE is the first complete and detailed study of the peasant masses
of Eastern Europe to be published since the War. It is the story
of those inarticulate millions who till the soil in seven nations that
are predominantly agricultural—Austria, Hungary, Poland, Czecho¬
slovakia, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, and Rumania. The author, in special
chapters, sheds entirely new light upon peasant conditions in the U.S.S.R.
Illustrated I5J-. net
LIFE IN THE MAKING : The Story of Human Procreation
By Dr. A. F. Guttmacher {of Johns Hopkins University)
THE processes of human reproduction, since the beginning of time,
have been shrouded in mystery and hedged about by taboos and
superstitions. Yet man has an endless curiosity about them, and an
obvious right to the knowledge. In this book, written for the adult
layman. Dr. Guttmacher traces the history of man’s beliefs about his
origins; he reconstructs the amazing lore of the subject, and follows
the groping course of enlightenment up to the scientific knowledge of
to-day. Illustrated About ioa Gd. net
KAPOOT
By Carveth Wells
Author of “ Six Years in the Malay Jungle ”, etc.
A RECENT visit to Russia, unvarnished, in the raw, by that lynx-eyed
and witty world traveller, Carveth Wells, is the subject of this book.
It’s a strange story which Mr. Wells has to tell, and a grim one in
spots, but rich in adventures and entertaining always, since told with
that dry humour and penchant for curious facts which have placed
Carveth Wells in a class by himself.
Illustrated izs. Gd. net
THE CASANOVA FABLE : A Satirical Revaluation
By William Gerhardi and Hugh Kingsmill
CASANOVA’S life and personality are here presented, for the first time,
in their true perspective. Was Casanova successful with women ?
What method did he pursue ? In this book the notorious lover is laid bare
and “ the love affair ” brought to light. Mr. Hugh Kingsmill, so often said
to be but another name for William Gerhardi, here emerges as Mr.
Gerhardi’s collaborator. For the first time the two have merged in pro¬
ducing this dazzling satirical biography, revealing what is extravagantly
called “the technique of the love affair” and its most illustrious
technician in action. Illustrated 15/. net
Uimited Edition, numbered and signed by authors, 25 j. net
v
JARROLDS’ IMPORTANT NEW BOOKS
SCOTTISH SCENE: Or the Intelligent Man’s Guide to Albyn
By Lewis Grassic Gibbon and Hugh MacDiarmid
SCOTLAND is here depicted from all angles: through all forms of
literary technique—poems of a haunting beauty, plays of a sardonic
incisiveness, short stories which find and unfold the strange mixture of
tenderness and harshness in the Scottish soul, essays on the sea and
countryside, searching sketches of the Four Scots Cities, assessments
of Scottish literary achievements ; also the trends in modern Scots
politics, a psycho-analysis of Ramsay MacDonald, a daring historical
retrospect and a sober prophecy of the country’s future. . . .
Illustrated izs. 6d. net
FORTY YEARS A PRISON DOCTOR
Bj Reginald Dyer, M.D., J.P., Barrister-at-Law, Middle Temple
O^HIS absorbing book tells of the life that goes on in our great prisons.
Dr. Dyer spent nearly forty years in the prison service: first
as a doctor at Wandsworth, then at Brixton, Stafford Gaol, Dartmoor,
and then back to Brixton as Senior Medical Officer for many years before
being appointed a Medical Inspector of Prisons and subsequently a
Commissioner of Prisons at the Home Office. No one could desire
a wider or a more fascinating canvas than that provided by his experiences.
Illustrated izs. 6d. net
THE MYSTERY OF FINGER-PRINTS
By J. C. Cannell
Author of “ The Secrets of Houdini ” (fth Edition), “ A Hundred
Mysteries for Arm-chair Detectives ”, “ When Fleet Street Calls ”, etc.
IN this book, Mr. Cannell, who as a Fleet Street journalist is well
known for his crime investigations, writes about one of the most
fascinating subjects in the world, finger-prints, and other criminal matters.
Illustrated About izs. Gd. net
CREATION’S DOOM
By Desiderius Papp
^"pHIS is an absorbing study of the Future of Man and the End of the
-L World by a famous German writer, whose work has been highly
praised by such eminent people as Mr. Bernard Shaw and Professor
Einstein.
Written with astounding vision and strict logic, this book must arouse
considerable excitement and will be universal in its appeal.
Illustrated \zs. Gd. net
vi
JARROLDS’ IMPORTANT NEW BOOKS
ARCTIC VILLAGE
By Robert Marshall
(Arctic Village was the May 1933 Selection of the New York-
Literary Guild)
HERE is a vivid picture of the complete life of a small community
of 127 people—Eskimos, Indians, and whites—north of the Arctic
Circle. Their remarkable story makes one of the most human and
absorbing books of our time.
ROCKWELL KENT (New York Tribune) says : “ I am not a reviewer
of books, nor do I spend myself in generous praise of many things.
I am writing about this book because it has moved me more than any
book that I have read for years.”
Illustrated 16s. net
SECRETS OF THE FRENCH POLICE
By Georges du Parcq
THESE amazing revelations of the underworld of Paris are by a French
crime reporter who spent twenty-five years at the Parisian Police
Headquarters. The author has not only been closely associated with the
most sensational French crimes of recent years, but has made a special
study of the underworld conditions and police methods in the most
glamorous city in the world. He knows all its sinister figures and their
haunts intimately and in reality conducts the reader “ behind the scenes
He relates many stories of beautiful and mysterious women, and the
inner workings of the Surete Generale (the Scotland Yard of Paris) are
revealed.
Illustrated 15 j\ net
E.B.O. : On and Off the Pavement
By E. B. Osborn
AS Literary Editor for many years of the Morning Post, Mr. E. B„
Osborn has seen as much as any living writer of what has been called
the “ literary scrimmage
But literary activities have been only a part of his singularly full and
varied life. He has been a notable all-round athlete, and his experiences,
beginning at Magdalen College, Oxford, of cricket, rugger, the sister
arts of boxing and wrestling, and country sport, are vividly presented.
He has had his wander-years, and readers will enjoy his authentic
stories of “ wicked ” cities, gold-seeking, and hunting and trapping in.
the Far West and High North.
Illustrated izs. 6d. net
vii
JARROLDS’ IMPORTANT NEW BOOKS
MEMOIRS OF A SPY: Adventures along the Eastern Fronts
By Nicholas Snowden
IN September 1914, at the age of nineteen, Nicholas Snowden
entered the Austro-Hungarian Secret Service. This authentic record
of a spy’s daily life and adventures during the entire period of the War
and for several years after is as thrilling and full of suspense as the most
breath-taking mystery story.
12s. <od. net
SPIES I KNEW
By Marthe McKenna (Marthe Cnockaert)
Author of“ I Was a Spy ” (13/A Impression) (Filmed)
(Mrs. McKenna received the Iron Cross, was mentioned in 'British
Despatches, and was awarded the French and Belgian Orders of the Legion
of Honour)
IN these further memoirs, Marthe McKenna, “ Laura ” of the British
Intelligence, who entered upon the dangerous duties of a spy during
the War in order to play her part for the country of her birth, relates
in simple yet dramatic form the breath-taking adventures of her fellow-
spies and herself.
Illustrated tzs. 6d. net
VOODOO FIRE IN HAITI
By Richard A. Loederer
THIS is a travel book of peculiar and extraordinary charm by a
Viennese writer and artist of international renown.
Perhaps the most unforgettable episodes of this book are the amazing
anecdotes of Voodoo, the blood cult of the negro and his orgies, and
the graphic sketch of the titanic career of King Christopher, the Black
Napoleon. The author also tells of the first conquerors and of the gold
seekers, and many other weird and startling incidents from the past and
present of the Black Republic.
The volume is illustrated from a series of superb woodcuts by the Author
ns. 6d. net
HYDE PARK ORATOR
By Bonar Thompson
Foreword by Sean O’Casey
BONAR THOMPSON, the famous Hyde Park Orator, has delighted
millions of listeners at the well-known meeting-ground for many
years by his dramatic personality and oratorical flights. This book,
which is the story of his life, is a veritable human document.
1 or. 6d. net
viii
The Maya NewEmpirc
GULF OF
MEXICO
Orrandjj
..Oairo'
'KUPUL Mmjgpan
Uxmal.° •jTtbuilon ' ’ 'Tvi S5 Hamal'
*7 •io*'-r'i O • ° I, iqCarucoc j
Zaijd jTabl *... o^oruta? Tancak.c
’••.-20lUrA Tuludmj
C ^sv’j °CKacraulturv. -truAP,\
>KJHPE^: °Tantak
^KCrnpcck.] Haceba^ 1 qqcW^.-T ~
DsibiltEua b ,
Hockcb / **—•./ ) ,
^^^HampdZn / .* / aJ
rIXcmL>'"HAM
1_ BakkejallLi fW j
Kincolak .Petcri
%
••jcUPUL
Ac
GULF OF
HONDURAS
