National Library of Scotland
«
SUNSET SONG
LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
SUNSET SONG
A NOVEL
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34 Paternoster Row, E.C. 4
MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
First Published August, 1932
The Mayflower Press, Plymouth.
William Brendon & Son Ltd.
TO
JEAN BAXTER
A NOTE
IF the great Dutch language disappeared from literary usage
and a Dutchman wrote in German a story of the Lek-
side peasants, one may hazard he would ask and receive a certain
latitude and forbearance in his usage of German. He might
import into his pages some score or so untranslatable words
and idioms—untranslatable except in their context and setting;
he might mould in some fashion his German to the rhythms
and cadence of the kindred speech that his peasants speak.
Beyond that, in fairness to his hosts, he hardly could go: to
seek effect by a spray of apostrophes would be both impertinence
and mis-translation.
The courtesy that the hypothetical Dutchman might receive
from German a Scot may invoke from the great English
tongue.
L. G. G.
CONTENTS
PRELUDE
PAGE
The Unfurrowed Field 15
THE SONG
I. Ploughing 43
II. Drilling S3
III. Seed-Time 129
IV. Harvest 206
EPILUDE
The Unfurrowed Field 271
THE PRELUDE
PRELUDE
THE UNFURROWED FIELD
KINRADDIE lands had been won by a Norman childe,
Cospatric de Gondeshil, in the days of William the
Lyon, when gryphons and such-like beasts still roamed the
Scots countryside and folk would waken in their beds to hear
the children screaming, with a great wolf-beast, come through
the hide window, tearing at their throats. In the Den of
Kinraddie one such beast had its lair and by day it lay about the
woods and the stench of it was awful to smell all over the
countryside, and at gloaming a shepherd would see it, with its
great wings half-folded across the great belly of it and its head,
like the head of a meikle cock, but with the ears of a lion,
poked over a fir tree, watching. And it ate up sheep and men
and women and was a fair terror, and the King had his heralds
cry a reward to whatever knight would ride and end the mis-
chieving of the beast. So the Norman childe, Cospatric, that
was young and landless and fell brave and well-armoured,
mounted his horse in Edinburgh Town and came North, out
of the foreign south parts, up through the Forest of Fife and
into the pastures of Forfar and past Aberlemno’s Meikle Stane
that was raised when the Piets beat the Danes ; and by it he
stopped and looked at the figures, bright then and hardly faded
even now, of the horses and the charging and the rout of those
coarse foreign folk. And maybe he said a bit prayer by that
Stone and then he rode into the Mearns, and the story tells no
more of his riding but that at last come he did to Kinraddie, a
tormented place, and they told him where the gryphon slept,
down there in the Den of Kinraddie.
But in the daytime it hid in the woods and only at night,
by a path through the hornbeams, might he come at it, squatting
in bones, in its lair. And Cospatric waited for the night to
come and rode to the edge of Kinraddie Den and commended
his soul to God and came off his horse and took his boar-spear
in his hand, and went down into the Den and killed the
15
i6
SUNSET SONG
gryphon. And he sent the news to William the Lyon, sitting
drinking the wine and fondling his bonny lemans in Edinburgh
I own, and William made him the Knight of Kinraddie, and
gave to him all the wide parish as his demesne and grant to
uild him a cast e there, and wear the sign of a gryphon’s head
for a crest and keep down all beasts and coarse and wayward
folk, him and the issue of his body for ever after
So Cospatric got him the Piet folk to build a strong castle
daTh'V'J lthe ?{the hllls> with the Grampians bleak and
dark behind it, and he had the Den drained and he married a
net lady and got on her bairns and he lived there till he died
SOn , ,t,he aame Kinrad<lie, and looked out one day
from the castle wall and saw the Earl Marischal come marching
up from the south to join the Highlandmen in the battle that
was fought at Mondynes, where now the meal-mill stands ;
5“ h. t0°k outuh,s me" and there, but on which side
y do not say, but maybe it was the winning one, they were
aye gey and canny folk the Kinraddies. And the great-grandson
and whenW^ JO'ned 'he EnSl‘Sh aga'nSt the WalIace,
KinrlddTe T next,f™ "Etching up from the southlands
inraddle and other noble folk of that time they got them into
weTr'bL^'. 6 that Stands °ut in the “a beyond Sneff
well-budded and strong, and the sea splashes about it in the
M l 'here,theJdin of the gulls is a yammer nigLt Ind
y. Much of meal and meat and gear they took wit-h
xa—s-rti” a rgf *" rA
small patience with strong plac ^ ,he,had but
night, when the thunder of ’ ln the dead of one
feint, he climbed the Dunnot-t rowned tbe n°ise of his
be and the va^d Hhe ^ “">
Put to the slaughter the noble folk gathered there,“l *e
THE UNFURR0IVED FIELD
i?
English, and spoiled them of their meat and gear, and marched
away.
Kinraddie Castle that year, they tell, had but a young bride
new home and she had no issue of her body, and the months
went by and she rode to the Abbey of Aberbrothock where
the good Abbot, John, was her cousin, and told him of her
trouble and how the line of Kinraddie was like to die. So
he lay with her, that was September, and next year a boy
was born to the young bride, and after that the Kinraddies
paid no heed to wars and bickerings but sat them fast in their
Castle lithe in the hills, with their gear and bonny leman
queans and villeins libbed for service.
And when the First Reformation came and others came
after it and some folk cried Whiggam! and some cried Rome!
and some cried The King! the Kinraddies sat them quiet and
decent and peaceable in their castle, and heeded never a fig
the arguings of folk, for wars were unchancy things. But
then Dutch William came, fair plain a fixture that none would
move, and the Kinraddies were all for the Covenant then,
they had aye had God’s Covenant at heart, they said. So
they builded a new kirk down where the chapel had stood,
and builded a manse by it, there in the hiddle of the yews
where the cateran Wallace had hid when the English put him
to rout at last. And one Kinraddie, John Kinraddie, went
south and became a great man in the London court, and was
crony of the creatures Johnson and James Boswell; and once
the two of them, John Kinraddie and James Boswell, came
up to the Mearns on an idle ploy and sat drinking wine and
making coarse talk far into the small hours night after night
till the old laird wearied of them and then they would steal
away and as James Boswell set in his diary, Did get to the loft
where the maids were, and one Ileyyi AvvSas wot? </>ar iv rhe
fivTT0CK$ avS I SiS Xie wtrh hep.
But in the early days of the nineteenth century it was an
ill time for the Scots gentry, for the poison of the French
Revolution came over the seas and crofters and common folk
SUNSET SONG
18
like that stood up and cried jfway to he//! when the Auld Kirk
preached submission from its pulpits. Up as far as Kinraddie
came the poison and the young laird of that time, and he was
Kenneth, he called himself a Jacobin and joined the Jacobin
Club of Aberdeen and there at Aberdeen was nearly killed in
the rioting, for liberty and equality and fraternity, he called
it. And they carried him back to Kinraddie a cripple, but he
would still have it that all men were free and equal and he set
to selling the estate and sending the money to France, for he
had a real good heart. And the crofters marched on Kinraddie
Castle in a body and bashed in the windows of it, they thought
equality should begin at home.
More than half the estate had gone in this driblet and that
while the cripple sat and read his coarse French books ; but
nobody guessed that till he died and then his widow, poor
woman, found herself own no more than the land that lay
between the coarse hills, the Grampians, and the farms that
stood out by the Bridge End above the Denburn, straddling
the outward road. Maybe there were some twenty to thirty
holdings in all, the crofters dour folk of the old Piet stock,
they had no history, common folk, and ill-reared their big-
gings clustered and chaved amid the long, sloping fields.
The leases were one-year, two-year, you worked from the
blink of the day you were breeked to the flicker of the night
they shrouded you, and the dirt of gentry sat and ate up your
rents but you were as good as they were. So that was Kenneth’s
leaving to his lady body, she wept right sore over the pass that
things had come to, but they kittled up before her own jaw was
tied in a clout and they put her down in Kinraddie vault to lie
by the side of her man. Three of her bairns were drowned at
sea, fishing off the Bervie braes they had been, but the fourth,
the boy Cospatric, him that died the same day as the Old
Queen, he was douce and saving and sensible, and set putting
the estate to rights. He threw out half the little tenants, they
flitted off to Canada and Dundee and parts like those, the
others he couldn’t move but slowly. But on the cleared land
i9
THE UNFURROWED FIELD
he had bigger steadings built and he let them at bigger rents
and longer leases, he said the day of the fine big farm had come.
And he had woods of fir and larch and pine planted to shield
the long, bleak slopes, and might well have retrieved the Kin-
raddie fortunes but that he married a Morton quean with black
blood in her, she smitted him and drove him to drink and death,
that was the best way out. For his son was clean daft, they
locked him up at last in an asylum, and that was the end of
Kinraddie family, the Meikle House that stood where the
Piets had builded Cospatric’s castle crumbled to bits like a cheese,
all but two-three rooms the trustees held as their offices, the
estate was mortgaged to the hilt by then.
So by the winter of nineteen eleven there were no more
than nine bit places left the Kinraddie estate, the Mains the
biggest of them, it had been the Castle home farm in the long
past times. An Irish creature, Erbert Ellison was the
name, ran the place for the trustees, he said, but if you might
believe all the stories you heard he ran a hantle more silver
into his own pouch than he ran into theirs. Well might
you expect it, for once he’d been no more than a Dublin
waiter, they said. That had been in the time before Lord
Kinraddie, the daft one, had gone clean skite. He had been
in Dublin, Lord Kinraddie, on some drunken ploy, and
Ellison had brought his whisky for him and some said he had
halved his bed with him. But folk would say anything. So
the daftie took Ellison back with him to Kinraddie and made him
his servant, and sometimes, when he was real drunk and the
fairlies came sniftering out of the whisky bottles at him, he
would throw a bottle at Ellison and shout Get out, you bloody
dish-clout! so loud it was heard across at the Manse and fair
affronted the minister’s wife. And old Greig, him that had been
the last minister there, he would glower across at Kinraddie
House like John Knox at Holyrood, and say that God’s hour
20
SUNSET SONG
would come. And sure as death it did, off to the asylum they
hurled the daftie, he went with a nurse’s mutch on his head
and he put his head out of the back of the waggon and said
Cockadoodledool to some school bairns the waggon passed on the
road and they all ran home and were fell frightened.
But Ellison had made himself well acquaint with farming
and selling stock and most with buying horses, so the trustees
they made him manager of the Mains, and he moved into the
Mains farmhouse and looked him round for a wife. Some
would have nothing to do with him, a poor creature of an Irish¬
man who couldn’t speak right and didn’t belong to the Kirk,
but Ella White she was not so particular and was fell long in
the tooth herself. So when Ellison came to her at the harvest
ball in Auchinblae and cried Can I see you home to-night, me
dear? she said Och, Ay. And on the road home they lay among
the stooks and maybe Ellison did this and that to make sure of
getting her, he was fair desperate for any woman by then.
They were married next New Year’s Day, and Ellison had
begun to think himself a gey man in Kinraddie, and maybe one
of the gentry. But the bothy billies, the ploughmen and the
orra men of the Mains, they’d never a care for gentry except
to mock at them and on the eve of Ellison’s wedding they took
him as he was going into his house and took off his breeks
and tarred his dowp and the soles of his feet and stuck feathers
on them and then they threw him into the water-trough, as
was the custom. And he called them Bloody Scotch savages,
and was in an awful rage and at the term-time he had them
sacked, the whole jing-bang of them, so sore affronted he had
been.
But after that he got on well enough, him and his mistress,
Ella White, and they had a daughter, a scrawny bit quean
they thought over good to go to the Auchinblae School, so
off she went to Stonehaven Academy and was taught to be right
brave and swing about in the gymnasium there with wee black
breeks on under her skirt. Ellison himself began to get well-
stomached, and he had a red face, big and sappy, and eyes like
THE UNFURROWED FIELD
21
a cat, green eyes, and his mouser hung down each side of a
fair bit mouth that was chokeful up of false teeth, awful expensive
and bonny, lined with bits of gold. And he aye wore leggings
and riding breeks, for he was fair gentry by then; and when
he would meet a crony at a mart he would cry Sure, hot it's you,
thin, ould chep I and the billy would redden up, real ashamed, but
wouldn’t dare say anything, for he wasn’t a man you’d offend.
In politics he said he was a Conservative but everybody in
Kinraddie knew that meant he was a Tory and the bairns of
Strachan, him that farmed the Peesie’s Knapp, they would
scraich out
Inky poo, your nose is blue.
You’re awful like the Turra Coo !
whenever they saw Ellison go by. For he’d sent a subscription
to the creature up Turriff way whose cow had been sold to pay
his Insurance, and folk said it was no more than a show off, the
Cow creature and Ellison both; and they laughed at him
behind his back.
So that was the Mains, below the Meikle House, and
Ellison farmed it in his Irish way and right opposite, hidden
away among their yews, were kirk and manse, the kirk an
old, draughty place and in the winter-time, right in the middle
of the Lord’s Prayer, maybe, you’d hear an outbreak of hoasts
fit to lift off the roof, and Miss Sarah Sinclair, her that came
from Netherhill and played the organ, she’d sneeze into her
hymn-book and miss her bit notes and the minister, him that
was the old one, he’d glower down at her more like John Knox
than ever. Next door the kirk was an olden tower, built in the
time of the Roman Catholics, the coarse creatures, and it
was fell old and wasn’t used any more except by the cushat-
doves and they flew in and out the narrow slits in the upper
storey and nested there all the year round and the place was
22
SUNSET SONG
fair white with their dung. In the lower half of the tower
was an effigy-thing of Cospatric de Gondeshil, him that killed
the gryphon, lying on his back with his arms crossed and a
daft-like simper on his face; and the spear he killed the gryphon
with was locked in a kist there, or so some said, but others
said it was no more than an old bit heuch from the times of
Bonny Prince Charlie. So that was the tower, but it wasn’t
fairly a part of the kirk, the real kirk was split in two bits, the
main hall and the wee hall, and some called them the byre and
the turnip-shed, and the pulpit stood midway. Once the wee
hall had been for the folk from the Meikle House and their
guests and such-like gentry but nearly anybody that had the
face went ben and sat there now, and the elders sat with the
collection bags, and young Murray, him that blew the organ
for Sarah Sinclair. It had fine glass windows, awful old, the
wee hall, with three bit creatures of queans, not very decent-
like in a kirk, as window-pictures. One of the queans was
Faith, and faith she looked a daft-like keek for she was lifting
up her hands and her eyes like a heifer choked on a turnip
and the bit blanket round her shoulders was falling off her but
she didn’t seem to heed, and there was a swither of scrolls and
fiddley-faddles all about her. And the second quean was Hope
and she was near as unco as Faith, but had right bonny hair,
red hair, though maybe you’d call it auburn, and in the winter¬
time the light in the morning service would come splashing
through the yews in the kirkyard and into the wee hall through
the red hair of Hope. And the third quean was Charity, with
a lot of naked bairns at her feet and she looked a fine and
decent-like woman, for all that she was tied about with such
daft-like clouts.
But the windows of the main hall, though they were
coloured, they had never a picture in them and there were no
pictures in there at all, who wanted them? Only coarse
creatures like Catholics wanted a kirk to look like a grocer’s
calendar. So it was decent and bare-like, with its carved old
seats, some were cushioned and some were not, if you weren’t
THE UN FURROWED FIELD 23
padded by nature and had the silver to spend you might put in
cushions to suit your fancy. Right up in the lithe of the pulpit,
at angles-like to the rest of the kirk, were the three seats where
the choir sat and led the hymn-singing; and some called it the
cal lies’ stall.
The back door, that behind the pulpit, led out across the
kirkyard to the Manse and its biggings, set up in the time
of the Old Queen, and fair bonny to look at, but awful damp
said all the ministers’ wives. But ministers’ wives were aye
folk to complain and don’t know when they’re well off, them
and the silver they get for their bit creatures of men preaching
once or twice a Sunday and so proud they hardly know you when
they meet you on the road. The minister’s study was high
up in the house, it looked out over all Kinraddie, at night
he’d see from there the lights of the farmhouses like a sprinkling
of bright sands below his window and the flagstaff light high
among the stars on the roof of the Meikle House. But that
nineteen eleven December the Manse was empty and had been
empty for many a month, the old minister was dead and the
new one not yet voted on; and the ministers from Drumlithie
and Arbuthnott and Laurencekirk they came time about in
the Sunday forenoons and took the service there at Kinraddie ;
and God knows for all they had to say they might well have
bidden at home.
But if you went out of the kirk by the main door and took
the road east a bit, and that was the road that served kirk and
Manse and Mains, you were on to the turnpike then. It ran
north and south but opposite to the road you’d just come down
was another, that went through Kinraddie by the Bridge End
farm. So there was a cross-roads there and if you held to the
left along the turnpike you came to Peesie’s Knapp, one of the
olden places, no more than a croft of thirty-forty acres with
some rough ground for pasture, but God knows there was
SUNSET SONG
24
little pasture on it, it was just a fair schlorich of whins and
broom and dirt, full up of rabbits and hares it was, they came out
at night and ate up your crops and sent a body fair mad. But
it wasn’t bad land the most of the Knapp, there was the
sweat of two thousand years in it, and the meikle park behind
the biggings was black loam, not the red clay that sub-soiled
half Kinraddie.
Now Peesie’s Knapp’s biggings were not more than twenty
years old, but gey ill-favoured for all that, for though the
house faced on the road—and that was fair handy if it didn’t
scunner you that you couldn’t so much as change your sark
without some ill-fashioned brute gowking in at you—right
between the byre and the stable and the barn on one side and
the house on the other was the cattle-court and right in the
middle of that the midden, high and yellow with dung and
straw and sharn, and Mistress Strachan could never forgive
Peesie’s Knapp because of that awful smell it had. But Chae
Strachan, him that farmed the place, he just said Hoots, what's
a bit guff? and would start to tell of the terrible smells he’d
smelt when he was abroad. For he’d been a fell wandering
billy, Chae, in the days before he came back to Scotland and
was fee’d his last fee at Netherhill. He’d been in Alaska,
looking for gold there, but damn the bit of gold he’d seen, so
he’d farmed in California till he was so scunnered of fruit he’d
never look an orange or a pear in the face again, not even in a
tin. And then he’d gone on to South Africa and had had
great times there, growing real chief-like with the head one of a
tribe of blacks, but an awful decent man for all that. Him
and Chae had fought against Boers and British both, and
beaten them, or so Chae said, but folk that didn’t like Chae said
all the fighting he’d ever done had been with his mouth and that
as for beaten, he’d be sore made to beat the skin off a bowl of
sour milk.
For he wasn t well liked by them that set themselves up
for gentry, Chae, being a socialist creature and believing we
should all have the same amount of silver and that there shouldn’t
THE UNFURR0IVED FIELD
25
be rich and poor and that one man was as good as another.
And the silver bit of that was clean daft, of course, for if you’d
all the same money one day what would it be the next?—Rich
and Poor again! But Chae said the four ministers of Kinraddie
and Auchinblae and Laurencekirk and Drumlithie were all
paid much the same money last year and what had they this
year?—Much the same money still! TouTl have to get out of
bed slippy in the morning before you find a socialist tripping and
if you gave me any of your lip Eli clout you in the lug, my mannie.
So Chae was fell good in argy-bargying and he wasn’t the
quarrelsome kind except when roused, so he was well-liked,
though folk laughed at him. But God knows, who is it they
don’t laugh at? He was a pretty man, well upstanding, with
great shoulders on him and his hair was fair and fine and he had
a broad brow and a gey bit coulter of a nose and he twisted his
mouser ends up with wax like that creature the German
Kaiser, and he could stop a running stirk by the horns, so strong
he was in the wrist-bones. And he was one of the handiest
billies in Kinraddie, he would libb a calf or break in a horse
or kill a pig, all in a jiffy, or tile your dairy or cut the bairns’
hair or dig a well, and all the time he’d be telling you that
socialism was coming or if it wasn’t then an awful crash would
come and we’d all go back to savagery, Damn't ay, man!
But folk said he’d more need to start socialising Mistress
Strachan, her that had been Kirsty Sinclair of Netherhill,
before he began on anybody else. She had a fell tongue, they
said, that would clip clouts and yammer a tink from a door, and
if Chae wasn’t fair sick now and then for his hut and a fine
black quean in South Africa damn the hut or the quean had he
ever had. He’d fee’d at Netherhill when he came back from
foreign parts, had Chae, and there had been but two daughters
there, Kirsty and Sarah, her that played the kirk organ. Both
were wearing on a bit, sore in the need of a man, and Kirsty
with a fair let-down as it was, for it had seemed that a doctor
billy from Aberdeen was out to take up with her. So he had
done and left her in a gey way and her mother, old Mistress
26
SUNSET SONG
Sinclair, near went out of her mind with the shame of it when
Kirsty began to cry and tell her the news. Now that was
about the term-time and home to Netherhill from the feeing
market who should old Sinclair of Netherhill bring but Chae
Strachan, with his blood warmed up from living in those
foreign parts and an eye for less than a wink of invitation?
But even so he was gey slow to get on with the courting and
just hung around Kirsty like a futret round a trap with a bit
meat in it, not sure if the meat was worth the risk; and the
time was getting on and faith! something drastic would have to
be done. So one night after they had all had supper in the
kitchen and old Sinclair had gone pleitering out to the
byres, old Mistress Sinclair had up and nodded to Kirsty and
said jfh we//, Vll away to my bed. You ll not be long in making
for yours, Kirsty? And Kirsty said No, and gave her mother
a sly bit look, and off the old mistress went up to her room and
then Kirsty began fleering and flirting with Chae and he was a
man warm enough and they were alone together and maybe
in a minute he’d have had her couched down right well there
in the kitchen but she whispered it wasn’t safe. So he off with
his boots and she with hers and up the stairs they crept together
into Kirsty’s room and were having their bit pleasure together
when ouf! went the door and in burst old Mistress Sinclair
with the candle held up in one hand and the other held up in
horror. No, no, she’d said, this won't do at all, Chakie, my man,
you'll have to marry her. And there had been no escape for
Chae, poor man, with Kirsty and her mother both glowering
at him. So married they were and old Sinclair had saved up
some silver and he rented Peesie’s Knapp for Chae and Kirsty,
and stocked the place for them, and down they sat there, and
Kirsty’s bairn, a bit quean, was born before seven months
were past, well-grown and finished-like it seemed, the creature,
in spite of its mother swearing it had come fair premature.
They’d had two more bairns since then, both laddies, and
both the living spit of Chae, these were the bairns that would
sing about the Turra Coo whenever they met the brave gig
THE UN FURROW ED FIELD
27
of Ellison bowling along the Kinraddie Road, and faith, they
made you laugh.
Right opposite Peesie’s Knapp, across the turnpike, the
land climbed red and clay and a rough stone road went wander¬
ing up to the biggings of Blawearie. Out of the World and into
Blawearie they said in Kinraddie, and faith! it was coarse land
and lonely up there on the brae, fifty-sixty acres of it, forbye
the moor that went on with the brae high above Blawearie,
up to a great flat hill-top where lay a bit loch that nested snipe
by the hundred; and some said there was no bottom to it, the
loch, and Long Rob of the Mill said that made it like the
depths of a parson’s depravity. That was an ill thing to say
about any minister, though Rob said it was an ill thing to say
about any loch, but there the spleiter of water was, a woesome
dark stretch fringed rank with rushes and knife-grass; and the
screeching of the snipe fair deafened you if you stood there of
an evening. And few enough did that for nearby the bit loch
was a circle of stones from olden times, some were upright and
some were flat and some leaned this way and that, and right
in the middle three big ones clambered up out of the earth and
stood askew with flat, sonsy faces, they seemed to listen and
wait. They were Druid stones and folk told that the Druids
had been coarse devils of men in the times long syne, they’d
climb up there and sing their foul heathen songs around the
stones; and if they met a bit Christian missionary they’d gut
him as soon as look at him. And Long Rob of the Mill would
say what Scotland wanted was a return of the Druids, but that
was just a speak of his, for they must have been awful ignorant
folk, not canny.
Blawearie hadn’t had a tenant for nearly a year, but now there
was one on the way, they said, a creature John Guthrie from
up in the North. The biggings of it stood fine and compact
one side of the close, the midden was back of them, and across
28
SUNSET SONG
the close was the house, a fell brave house for a little place,
it had three storeys and a good kitchen and a fair stretch of
garden between it and Blawearie road. There were beech
trees there, three of them, one was close over against the house,
and the garden hedges grew as bonny with honeysuckle of a
summer as ever you saw ; and if you could have lived on the
smell of honeysuckle you might have farmed the bit place with
profit.
Well, Peesie’s Knapp and Blawearie were the steadings
that lay Stonehaven way. But if you turned east that winter
along the Auchinblae road first on your right was Cuddiestoun,
a small bit holding the size of Peesie’s Knapp, and old as it, a
croft from the far-off times. It lay a quarter-mile or so from
the main road and its own road was fair clamjamfried with
glaur from late in the harvest till the coming of Spring. Some
said maybe that accounted for Munro’s neck, he could never
get the glaur washed out of it. But others said he never tried.
He was on a thirteen years’ lease there, Munro, a creature from
down south, Dundee way, and he was a good six feet in height
but awful coarse among the legs, like a lamb with water on
the brain, and he had meikle feet that aye seemed in his way.
He was maybe forty years or so in age, and bald already, and his
skin was red and creased in cheeks and chin and God! you
never saw an uglier brute, poor stock. For there were worse
folk than Munro, though maybe they were all in the jail, and
though he could blow and bombast till he fair scunnered you.
He farmed his bit land in a then and now way, and it was land
good enough, the most of it, with the same black streak of loam
that went through the Peesie parks, but ill-drained, the old
stone drains were still down and devil the move would the
factor at Meikle House make to have them replaced, or mend
the roof of the byre that leaked like a sieve on the head of
Mistress Munro when she milked the kye on a stormy night.
THE UN FURROW ED FIELD
29
But if anybody, chief-like, were to say, God, that's an awful
byre you have, mistress, she would flare up in a minute It's fine,
and good enough for the like of us. And if that body, not knowing
better, poor billy, were to agree that the place was well enough
for poor folk, she’d up again Who's poor? Let me tell you we've
never needed anybody come to our help, though we don't boast
and blow about it all over the countryside, like some I could
mention. So the body would think there was no pleasing of the
creature, and she was right well laughed at in all Kinraddie,
though not to her face. And that was a thin one and she had
black hair and snapping black eyes like a futret, and a voice that
fair set your hackles on edge when she girned. But she was the
best midwife for miles around, right often in the middle of the
night some poor distracted billy would come chapping at her
window Mistress Munro, Mistress MunroJ will you get up and
come to the wife? And out she’d get, and into her clothes
before you could whistle, and out into the cold of Kinraddie
night and go whipping through it like a futret, and soon be
snapping her orders round the kitchen of the house she’d
been summoned to, telling the woman in childbed she might
easily be worse, and being right brisk and sharp and clever.
And the funny thing about the creature was that she believed
none spoke ill of her, for if she heard a bit hint of such, dropped
sly-like, she’d redden up like a stalk of rhubarb in a dung
patch and look as though she might start to cry, and the body
would feel real sorry for her till next minute she’d be screeching
at Andy or Tony, and fleering them out of the little wits they
had, poor devils.
Now, Andy and Tony were two dafties that Mistress Munro
had had boarded out on her from an Asylum in Dundee, they
weren’t supposed to be dangerous. Andy was a meikle slum¬
mock of a creature, and his mouth was aye open, and he dribbled
like a teething foal, and his nose wabbled all over his face and
when he tried to speak it was just a fair jumble of foolishness.
He was the daftest one, but fell sly, he’d sometimes run away
to the hills and stand there with his finger at his nose, making
SUNSET SONG
30
faces at Mistress Munro, and she’d scraich at him and he’d
yammer back at her and then over the moor he’d get to the
bothy at Upperhill where the ploughmen would give him
cigarettes and then torment him till he fair raged; and once
tried to kill one with an axe he caught up from a hackstock.
And at night he’d creep back to Cuddiestoun, outside he’d
make a noise like a dog that had been kicked, and he’d snuffle
round the door till the few remaining hairs on the bald pow
of Munro would fair rise on end. But Mistress Munro
would up and be at the door and in she’d yank Andy by the
lug, and some said she’d take down his breeks and skelp him,
but maybe that was a lie. She wasn’t feared at him and he wasn’t
feared at her, so they were a gey well-matched pair.
And that was the stir at Cuddiestoun, all except Tony, for
the Munros had never a bairn of their own. And Tony,
though he wasn’t the daftest, he was the queer one, too, right
enough. He was small-bulked and had a little red beard and
sad eyes, and he walked with his head down and you would
feel right sorry for him for sometimes some whimsy would
come on the creature, right in the middle of the turnpike it
might be or half-way down a rig of swedes, and there he
would stand staring like a gowk for minutes on end till some¬
body would shake him back to his senses. He had fine soft
hands, for he was no working body; folk said he had once been
a scholar and written books and learned and learned till his
brain fair softened and right off his head he’d gone and into
the poorhouse asylum. Now Mistress Munro she’d send
Tony errands to the wee shop out beyond the Bridge End,
and tell him what she wanted, plain and simple-like, and maybe
giving him a bit clout in the lug now and then, as you would a
bairn or a daftie. And he’d listen to her and make out he minded
the messages and off to the shop he’d go, and come back without
** single mistake. But one day, after she’d told him the things
she wanted, Mistress Munro saw the wee creature writing on
a bit of paper with a pencil he’d picked up somewhere. And
she took the paper from him and looked at it and turned it this
THE UN FURROW ED FIELD
31
way and that, but feint the thing could she make of it. So she
gave him a bit clout in the lug and asked him what the writing
was. But he just shook his head, real gowked-like, and reached
out his hand for the bit of paper, but Mistress Munro would
have none of that and when it was time for the Strachan bairns
to pass the end of the Cuddiestoun road on their way to school
down there she was waiting and gave the paper to the eldest, the
quean Marget, and told her to show it to the Dominie and ask
him what it might mean. And at night she was waiting for the
Strachan bairns to come back and they had an envelope for her
from the Dominie; and she opened it and found a note saying
the writing was shorthand and that this was what it read when
put in the ordinary way of writing: Two pounds of sugar The
People's Journal half an ounce of mustard a tin of rat poison a
pound of candles and 1 don't suppose I can swindle her out of tup¬
pence change for the sake of a smoke, she's certainly the meanest
hitch unhung this side of Tweed. So maybe Tony wasn’t so
daft, but he got no supper that night; and she never asked to
see his notes again.
Now, following the Kinraddie road still east, you passed by
Netherhill on your left, five places had held its parks in the
crofter days before Lord Kenneth. But now it was a fair bit
farm on its own, old Sinclair and his wife, a body that was
wearing none so well—soured up the creature was that her
eldest daughter Sarah still bided all unwed—lived in the farm¬
house, and in the bothy was foreman and second man and third
man and orra lad. The Denburn lay back of the Netherhill,
drifting low and slow and placid in its hollow, feint the fish
had ever been seen in it and folk said that was just as well,
things were fishy enough at Netherhill without the Denburn
adding to them. Through the rank schlorich of moor that
lay between the place and Peesie’s Knapp were the tracks of
an old-time road, some said it was old as Calgacus, him that
32 SUNSET SONG
chased the Romans all to hell at the battle of Mons Graupius,
others said it was a Druid work, laid by them that set the stones
above Blawearie loch. And God! there must have been an
unco few idle masons among the creatures, they’d tried their
hands at another stone circle in the Netherhill moor, right
midway the old-time road. But there were no more than two-
three stones above the ground in this later day, NetherhilPs
ploughmen swore the rest must have been torn up and broad¬
cast over the arable land, the parks were as tough and stony
as the heart of the old wife herself.
But it was no bad place for turnips and oats, the Netherhill,
sometimes the hay was fair to middling but the most of the
ground was red clay and over coarse and wet for barley, if it
hadn’t been for the droves of pigs old Mistress Sinclair fed and
sold in Laurencekirk maybe her man would never have sat
where he did. She came of Gourdon stock, the old wife, and
every body knows what they are, the Gourdon fishers, they’d
wring silver out of a corpse’s wame and call stinking haddocks
perfume fishes and sell them at a shilling a pair. She’d been a
fishing quean before she took up with old Sinclair, and when
they settled down in Netherhill on borrowed money it was
she that would drive to Gourdon twice a week in the little pony
lorry and come back with it stinking out the countryside for
miles around with its load of rotten fish to manure the land.
And right well it manured it and they’d fine crops the first six
years or so and then the land was fair bled white and they’d
to stop the fish-manure. But by then the pig-breeding was fine
and paying, their debts were gone, they were coining silver of
their own. He was a harmless stock, old Sinclair, and had
began to doiter and Mistress Sinclair would push him into his
chair at night and take off his boots and put slippers on him
there in front of the kitchen fire and say to him Tou’ve tired
yourself out again, my lad. And he’d put his hand below her
chin and say Och, Vm fine, don't vex yourself. . . . Aye your
lad still, am 1, lass? And they’d look at each other, daft-like
two wrinkled old fools, and their daughter Sarah that was so
THE UNFURROWED FIELD 33
genteel would be real affronted if there were visitors about.
But Sinclair and his old wife would just shake their heads at her
and in their bed at night, hiddling their old bones close for
warmth, give a bit sigh that no brave billy had ever show
inclination to take Sarah to his bed. She’d hoped and peeked
and preened long years, and once there had seemed some
hope with Long Rob of the Mill, but Rob wasn’t the marrying
sort. God! if Cuddiestoun’s dafties were real dafties what
would you say of a man with plenty of silver that bided
all by his lone and made his own bed and did his own
baking when he might have had a wife to make him
douce and brave?
But Rob of the Mill had never a thought of what Kinraddie
said of him. Further along the Kinraddie road it stood, the
Mill, on the corner of the side-road that led up to Upperhill,
and for ten years now had Rob bided there alone, managing the
Mill and reading the books of a coarse creature Ingersoll that
made watches and didn’t believe in God. He’d aye two-
three fine pigs about the Mill had Rob, and fine might well they
be for what did he feed them on but bits of corn and barley he’d
nicked out of the sacks folk brought him to the Mill to grind?
Nor could a body deny but that Long Rob’s boar was one of the
best in the Mearns; and they’d bring their sows from as far
afield as Laurencekirk to have them set by that boar of his, a
meikle, pretty brute of a beast. Forbye the Mill and his
swine and hens Rob had a Clydesdale and a sholtie beast he
ploughed his twenty acres with, and a cow or so that never
calved, for he’d never time to send them to the bull though
well might he have taken the time instead of sweating and
chaving like a daft one to tear up the coarse moorland behind
the Mill and turn it into a park. He’d started that three years
before and wasn’t half through with it yet, it was filled with
great holes and ponds and choked with meikle broom-roots
SUNSET SONG
34
thick as the arm of a man, you never saw a dafter ploy. They’d
hear Rob out in that coarse ground hard at work when they
went to bed, the rest of Kinraddie, whistling away to himself
as though it were nine o’clock in the forenoon and the sun
shining bravely. He’d whistle Ladies of Spain and There was
a young maiden and The lass that made the bed to me^ but devil
the lass he’d ever taken to his bed, and maybe that was as
well for the lass; she’d have seen feint the much of him in it
beside her.
For after a night of it like that he’d be out again at the keek
of day, and sometimes he’d have the Clydesdale or the sholtie
out there with him and they’d be fine friends, the three of them,
till the ^beasts would move off when he didn’t want them or
wouldn’t move when he did; and then he’d fair go mad with them
and ^call them all the coarsest names he could lay tongue to till
you’d think he’d be heard over half the Mearns; and he’d leather
the horses till folk spoke of sending for the Cruelty, though he’d
a way with the beasts too, and would be friends with them
again in a. minute and when he’d been away at the smithy in
rumlithie or the joiner’s in Arbuthnott they’d come running
from the other end of the parks at sight of him and he’d get off
is bicycle and feed them with lumps of sugar he bought and
carried about with him. He thought himself a gey man with
horses, did Rob, and God! he’d tell you stories about horses
till you’d fair be grey in the head, but he never wearied of them
himself, the long, rangy childe. Long he was, with small
bones maybe, but gey broad for all that, with a small head on
him and a thin nose and eyes smoky blue as an iron coulter on a
winter morning, aye glinting, and a long mouser the colour of
ripe corn it was, hanging down the sides of his mouth so that
the old minister had told him he looked like a Viking and
he d said Ah well, minister, as long as 1 don't look like a parson
111 wrestle through the world right content, and the minister
said he was a fool and godless, and his laughter like the thorns
crackling under a pot. And Rob said he’d rather be a thorn
than a sucker any day, for he didn’t believe in ministers or kirks,
THE UNFURROWED FIELD 35
he’d learned that from the books of Ingersoll though God
knows if the creature’s logic was as poor as his watches he was
but a sorry prop to lean on. But Rob said he was fine, and if
Christ came down to Kinraddie he’d be welcome enough to
a bit meal or milk at the Mill, but damn the thing he’d get at
the Manse. So that was Long Rob and the stir at the Mill,
some said he wasn’t all there but others said Ay, that he was,
and a bit over.
Now Upperhill rose above the Mill, with its larch woods
crowning it, and folk told that a hundred years before five of
the crofter places had crowded there till Lord Kenneth threw
their biggings down and drove them from the parish and built
the fine farm of Upperhill. And twenty years later a son of
one of the crofters had come back and rented the place, Gordon
was the name of him, they called him Upprums for short and
he didn’t like that, being near to gentry with his meikle farm
and forgetting his father the crofter that had cried like a bairn
all the way from Kinraddie that night the Lord Kenneth drove
them out. He was a small bit man with a white face on him,
and he’d long, thin hair and a nose that wasn’t straight but peeked
away to one side of his face and no moustache and wee feet and
hands; and he liked to wear leggings and breeks and carry a bit
stick and look as proud as a cock on a midden. Mistress
Gordon was a Stonehaven woman, her father had been a bit
post-office creature there, but God! to hear her speak you’d
think he’d invented the post office himself and taken out a
patent for it. She was a meikle sow of a woman, but aye well-
dressed, and with eyes like the eyes of a fish, fair cod-like they
were, and she tried to speak English and to make her two
bit daughters, Nellie and Maggie Jean, them that went to
Stonehaven Academy, speak English as well. And God!
they made a right muck of it, and if you met the bit things
on the road and said IVell, Nellie^ and how are your mother’s
SUNSET SONG
36
hens laying? the quean would more than likely answer you
Not very meikle the day and look so proud it was all you could
do to stop yourself catching the futret across your knee and
giving her a bit skelp.
Though she’d only a dove’s flitting of a family herself you’d
think to hear Mistress Gordon speak that she’d been decking
bairns a litter a month since the day she married. It was Now,
how I brought up Nellie—or Jnd the specialist in Aberdeen^
said about Maggie Jean—till folk were so scunnered they’d
never mention a bairn within a mile of Upperhill. But Rob
of the Mill, the coarse brute, he fair mocked her to her face
and he’d tell a story Now, when I took my boar to the specialist
in Edinburgh, he up and said 'Mister Rob, this is a gey unusual
boar, awful delicate, but SO intelligent, and you should send him to
the Academy and some day he'll be a real credit to you' And
Mistress Gordon when she heard that story she turned as red
as a fire and forget her English and said Rob was an orra tink
brute.
Forbye the two queans there was the son, John Gordon, as
coarse a devil as you’d meet, he’d already had two-three queans
in trouble and him but barely eighteen years old. But with one
of them he’d met a sore stammy-gaster, her brother was a gar¬
dener down Glenbervie way and when he heard of it he came
over to Upperhill and caught young Gordon out by the cattle-
court. You'll be Jock? he said, and young Gordon said Keep
your damned hands to yourself and the billy said Ay, but first
I'll wipe them on a dirty clout, and with that he up with a handful
of sharn and splattered it all over young Gordon and then
rolled him in the greip till he was a sight to sicken a sow from
its supper. The bothy men heard the ongoing and came tearing
out but soon as they saw it was only young Gordon that was
being mischieved they did no more than laugh and stand around
and cry one to the other that here was a real fine barrow¬
load of dung lying loose in the greip. So the Drumlithie
billy, minding his sister and her shame, wasn’t sharp to finish
with his tormenting, young Gordon looked like a half-dead
THE UNFURROWED FIELD
37
cat and smelt like a whole-dead one for a week after, a sore
affront to Upperhill’s mistress. She went tearing round to the
bothy and made at the foreman, a dour young devil of a High-
landman, Ewan Tavendale, Why didn’t you help my Johnnie?
and Ewan said 7 was fee’d as the foreman here, not as the nurse¬
maid, he was an impudent brute, calm as you please, but an
awful good worker, folk said he could smell the weather and
had fair the land in his bones.
Now the eighth of the Kinraddie places you could call hardly
a place at all, for that was Pooty’s, midway along the Kinraddie
road between the Mill and Bridge End. It was no more than
a butt and a ben, with a rickle of sheds behind it where old
Pooty kept his cow and bit donkey that was nearly as old as
himself and faith! twice as good-looking; and folk said the
cuddy had bided so long with Pooty that whenever it opened
its mouth to give a bit bray it started to stutter. For old Pooty
was maybe the worst stutterer ever heard in the Mearns and
the worst of that worst was that he didn’t know it and he’d clean
compel any minister creature organising a concert miles around
to give him a platform part. Then up he’d get on the platform,
the doitered old fool, and recite Weeeee, ssss-leek-ed, ccccccowering
HMROUS BEHSTIE or such-like poem and it was fair
agony to hear him. He’d lived at Pooty’s a good fifty years
they said, his father the crofter of the Knapp before that
time, hardly a soul knew his name, maybe he’d forgotten it
himself. He was the oldest inhabitant of Kinraddie and fell
proud of it, though what there was to be proud of in biding all
that while in a damp, sour house that a goat would hardly
have stopped to ease itself in God knows. He was a shoe¬
maker, the creature, and called himself the Sutor, an old-
fashioned name that folk laughed at. He’d grey hair aye falling
about his lugs and maybe he washed on New Year’s Days and
birthdays, but not oftener, and if anybody had ever seen him
SUNSET SONG
38
in anything but the grey shirt with the red neck-band he’d
kept the fact a dead secret all to himself.
Alec Mutch was farmer of Bridge End that stood beyond the
Denburn head, he’d come there up from Stonehaven way,
folk said he was head over heels in debt, and damn it you
couldn’t wonder with a slummock of a wife like that to weigh
him down. A grand worker was Alec and Bridge End not the
worst of Kinraddie, though wet in the bottom up where its
parks joined on to Upperhill. Two pairs of horses it was
stabled for but Alec kept no more than three bit beasts, he’d
say he was waiting for his family to grow up before he com¬
pleted the second pair. And fast enough the family came, if
she couldn’t do much else, Mistress Mutch, fell seldom a year
went by but she was brought to bed with a bairn, Mutch fair
grew used to dragging himself out in the middle of the night
and tearing off to Bervie for the doctor. And the doctor, old
Meldrum he was, he’d wink at Alec and cry Man, Man, have
you been at it again? and Alec would say Damn it, you've hardly
to look at a woman these days but she's in the family way.
So some said that he must glower at his mistress a fell lot,
and that was hard enough to believe, she was no great beauty,
with a cock eye and a lazy look and nothing worried her, not
a mortal thing, not though her five bairns were all yammering
blue murder at the same minute and the smoke coming down
the chimney and spoiling the dinner and the cattle broken
into the yard and eating up her clean washing. She’d say
Ah well, it'll make no difference a hundred years after I'm dead,
and light up a bit cigarette, like a tink, for aye she carried l
packet of the things about with her, she was the speak of half
the Mearns, her and her smoking. Two of the five bairns
were boys, the oldest eleven, and the whole five of them had
the Mutch face, broad and boney and tapering to a chinny
point, like the face of an owlet or a fox, and meikle lugs on them
THE UNFURROTVED FIELD
39
/ike the handles on a cream-jar. Alec himself had such lugs
that they said he flapped them against the flies in the summer¬
time, and once he was coming home on his bicycle from
Laurencekirk, and he was real drunk and at the steep brae
above the Denburn bridge he mistook the flow of the water
for the broad road and in between coping and bank he went
and head over heels into the clay bed twenty feet below; and
often he’d tell that if he hadn’t landed on a lug he might well
have been brained, but Long Rob of the Mill would laugh
and say Brained? God Almighty, Mutch, you were never in
danger of that!
So that was Kinraddie that bleak winter of nineteen eleven
and the new minister, him they chose early next year, he was
to say it was the Scots countryside itself, fathered between a
kailyard and a bonny brier bush in the lee of a house with
green shutters. And what he meant by that you could guess
at yourself if you’d a mind for puzzles and dirt, there wasn’t
a house with green shutters in the whole of Kinraddie.
THE SONG
I
PLOUGHING
BELOW and around where Chris Guthrie lay the June
moors whispered and rustled and shook their cloaks,
yellow with broom and powdered faintly with purple, that
was the heather but not the full passion of its colour yet. And
in the east against the cobalt blue of the sky lay the shimmer of
the North Sea, that was by Bervie, and maybe the wind would
veer there in an hour or so and you’d feel the change in the
life and strum of the thing, bringing a streaming coolness out
of the sea. But for days now the wind had been in the south,
it shook and played in the moors and went dandering up the
sleeping Grampians, the rushes pecked and quivered about the
loch when its hand was upon them, but it brought more heat
than cold, and all the parks were fair parched, sucked dry,
the red clay soil of Blawearie gaping open for the rain that
seemed never-coming. Up here the hills were brave with the
beauty and the heat of it, but the hayfield was all a crackling
dryness and in the potato park beyond the biggings the shaws
drooped red and rusty already. Folk said there hadn’t been
such a drought since eighty-three and Long Rob of the Mill
said you couldn’t blame this one on Gladstone, anyway, and
everybody laughed except father, God knows why.
Some said the North, up Aberdeen way, had had rain enough,
with Dee in spate and bairns hooking stranded salmon down
in the shallows, and that must be fine enough, but not a flick
of the greeve weather had come over the hills, the roads you
walked down to Kinraddie smithy or up to the Denburn
were fair blistering in the heat, thick with dust so that the
motor-cars went shooming through them like kettles under
steam. And serve them right, they’d little care for anybody,
the dirt that rode in motors, folk said; and one of them had
nearly run over wee Wat Strachan a fortnight before and had
skirled to a stop right bang in front of Peesie’s Knapp, Wat
had yowled like a cat with a jobe under its tail and Chae had
43
44 SUNSET SONG
gone striding out and taken the motorist man by the shoulder.
And What the hell do you think you're up to? Chae had asked.
And the motorist, he was a fair toff with leggings and a hat
cocked over his eyes, he’d said Keep your damn children off the
road in future. And Chae had said! Keep a civil tongue tn your
head and had clouted the motorist man one in the ear and
down he had flumped in the stour and Mistress Strachan, her
that was old NetherhilPs daughter, she’d gone tearing out
skirling Mighty, you brute, you've killed the man! and Chae
had just laughed and said Damn the fears! and off he’d gone.
But Mistress Strachan had helped the toff up to his feet and
shook him and brushed him and apologised for Chae, real
civil-like. And all the thanks she got was that Chae was
summonsed for assault at Stonehaven and fined a pound, and
came out of the courthouse saying there was no justice under
capitalism, a revolution would soon sweep away its corrupted
lackeys. And maybe it would, but faith! there was as little sign
of a revolution, said Long Rob of the Mill, as there was of rain.
Maybe that was the reason for half the short tempers over
the Howe. You could go never a road but farmer billies
were leaning over the gates, glowering at the weather, and
road-menders, poor stocks, chapping away at their hillocks
with the sweat fair dripping off them, and the only folk that
seemed to have a fine time were the shepherds up in the hills
But they swore themselves dry when folk cried that to them
the hill springs about a shepherd’s herd would dry up or seep
away all in an hour and the sheep go straying and baying and
driving the man fair senseless till he’d led them weary miles
to the nearest burn.. So every body was fair snappy, staring up at
the sky, and the ministers all over the Howe were offering up
prayers for rain in between the bit about the Army and the
Prince of Wales’ rheumatics. But feint the good it did for
rain ; and Long Rob of the Mill said he’d heard both Army
and rheumatics were much the same as before. 7
PLOUGHING
45
Maybe father would have done better to keep a civil tongue
in his head and stayed on in Echt, there was plenty of rain
there, a fine land for rain, Aberdeen, you’d see it by day and
night come drenching and wheeling over the Barmekin and the
Hill of Fare in the fine northern land. And mother would
sigh, looking out from Blawearie’s windows, There's no land
like Aberdeen or folk so fine as them that bide by Don.
She’s bidden by Don all her life, mother, she’d been born in
Kildrummie, her father a ploughman there, he’d got no more
than thirteen shillings a week and he’d had thirteen of a family, to
work things out in due ratio, maybe. But mother said they all
got on fine, she was never happier in her life than those days
when she tramped bare-footed the roads to the little school
that nestled under the couthy hills. And at nine she left the
school and they packed a basket for her and she bade her mother
ta-ta and set out to her first fee, no shoes on her feet even then,
she hadn’t worn shoes till she was twelve years old. It hadn’t
been a real fee that first one, she’d done little more than scare
the crows from the fields of an old bit farmer and sleep in
a garret, but fine she’d liked it, she’d never forget the singing
of the winds in those fields when she was young or the daft
crying of the lambs she herded or the feel of the earth below
her toes. Oh, Chris, my lass, there are better things than your
books or studies or loving or bedding, there's the countryside your
own, you its, in the days when you're neither bairn nor woman.
So mother had worked and ran the parks those days, she
was blithe and sweet, you knew, you saw her against the sun
as though you peered far down a tunnel of the years. She
stayed long on her second fee, seven or eight years she was there
till the day she met John Guthrie at a ploughing-match at
Pittodrie. And often once she’d tell of that to Chris and Will,
it was nothing grand of a match, the horses were poor and the
ploughing worse and a coarse, cold wind was soughing across
the rigs and half Jean Murdoch made up her mind to go home.
Then it was that it came the turn of a brave young childe
with a red head and the swackest legs you ever saw, his horses
SUNSET SONG
46
were laced in ribbons, bonny and trig, and as soon as he began
the drill you saw he’d carry off the prize. And carry it off he
did, young John Guthrie, and not that alone. For as he rode
from the park on one horse he patted the back of the other
and cried to Jean Murdoch with a glint from his dour, sharp
eye Jump up if you like. And she cried back I like fine! and
caught the horse by its mane and swung herself there till
Guthrie’s hand caught her and set her steady on the back of
the beast. So out from the ploughing match at Pittodrie the
two of them rode together, Jean sitting upon the hair of her,
gold it was and so long, and laughing up into the dour, keen
face that was Guthrie’s.
So that was beginning of their lives together, she was sweet
and kind to him, but he mightn’t touch her, his face would go
black with rage at her because of that sweetness that tempted
his soul to hell. Yet in two-three years they’d chaved and
saved enough for gear and furnishings, and were married at
last, and syne Will was born, and syne Chris herself was born,
and the Guthries rented a farm in Echt, Cairndhu it was, and
sat themselves down there for many a year.
Winters or springs, summers or harvests, bristling or sun¬
ning the sides of Barmekin, and life ploughed its rigs and drove
its teams and the dourness hardened, hard and cold, in the
heart of Jean Guthrie’s man. But still the glint of her hair could
rouse him, Chris would hear him cry in agony at night as he
went with her, mother’s face grew queer and questioning, her
eyes far back on those Springs she might never see again, dear
and blithe they had been, she could kiss and hold them still a
moment alone with Chris or Will. Dod came, then Alec
came, and mother’s fine face grew harder then. One night
they heard her cry to John Guthrie Four of a family's fine;
there'll he no more. And father thundered at her, that way he
had Fine? IVe'll have what God in His mercy may send to us,
woman. See you to that.
He wouldn’t do anything against God’s will, would father,
and sure as anything God followed up Alec with the twins,
PLOUGHING
47
born seven years later. Mother went about with a queer look
on her face before they came, she lost that sweet blitheness that
was hers, and once, maybe she was ill-like, she said to father
when he spoke of arranging a doctor and things, Don't worry
about that. No doubt your friend Jehovah will see to it all.
Father seemed to freeze up, then, his face grew black, he said
never a word, and Chris had wondered at that, seeing how
mad he’d been when Will used the word, thoughtless-like,
only a week before.
For Will had heard the word in the kirk of Echt where the
elders sit with shaven chins and the offering bags between
their knees, waiting the sermon to end and to march with slow,
sleeked steps up through the pews, hearing the penny of penury
clink shy-like against the threepenny of affluence. And Will
one Sunday, sitting close to sleep, heard fall from the minister’s
lips the word Jehovah^ and treasured it for the bonniness and
the beauty of it, waiting till he might find a thing or a man
or beast that would fit this word, well-shaped and handed and
grand.
Now that was in summer, the time of fleas and glegs and
golochs in the fields, when stirks would start up from a drowsy
cud-chewing to a wild and feckless racing, the glegs biting
through hair and hide to the skin below the tail-rump. Echt
was alive that year with the thunder of herds, the crackle
of breaking gates, the splash of stirks in tarns, and last with the
groans of Nell, the old horse of Guthrie’s, caught in a daft
swither of the Highland steers and her belly ripped like a rotten
swede with the stroke of a great, curved horn.
Father saw the happening from high in a park where the hay
was cut and they set the swathes in coles, and he swore out
Damn't to hell! and started to run, fleetly as was his way, down
to the groaning shambles that was Nell. And as he ran he
picked up a scythe-blade, and as he neared to Nell he unhooked
the blade and cried Poor quean! and Nell groaned, groaning
blood and sweating, and turned away her neck, and father
thrust the scythe at her neck, sawing till she died.
48
SUNSET SONG
So that was the end of Nell, father waited till the hay was
coled and then tramped into Aberdeen and bought a new
horse, Bess, riding her home at evening to the raptured starings
of Will. And Will took the horse and watered her and led her
into the stall where Nell had slept and gave to her hay and a
handful of corn, and set to grooming her, shoulder to heel, and
her fine plump belly and the tail of her, long and curled. And
Bess stood eating her corn and Chris leant against the door¬
jamb, her Latin Grammar held in her hand. So, working with
fine, strong strokes, and happy, Will groomed till he finished
the tail, and then as he lifted the brush to hit Bess on the flank
that she might move to the other side of the stall and he com¬
plete his grooming there flashed in his mind the fine word he
had treasured. Come over, Jehovah! he cried, smiting her
roundly, and John Guthrie heard the word out across the yard
and came fleetly from the kitchen, wiping oatcake from his
beard, and fleetly across the yard into the stable he came 
But he should not have stricken Will as he did, he fell below
the feet of the horse and Bess turned her head, dripping corn,
and looked down at Will, with his face bloody, and then
swished her tail and stood still. And then John Guthrie
dragged his son aside and paid no more heed to him, but picked
up brush and curry-comb and cried JVhoa, lass! and went on
with the grooming. Chris had cried and hidden her face but
now she looked again, Will was sitting up slowly, the blood on
his face, and John Guthrie speaking to him, not looking at
him, grooming Bess.
dnd mind, my mannie, if I ever hear you again take your
Maker's name in vain, if 1 ever hear you use that word again.
I'll libb you. Mind that. Libb you like a lamb.
So Will hated father, he was sixteen years of age and near
a man, but father could still make him cry like a bairn. He
would whisper his hate to Chris as they lay in their beds at
PLOUGHING 49
night in the loft room high in the house and the harvest moon
came sailing over the Barmekin and the peewits wheeped above
the lands of Edit. And Chris would cover her ears and then
listen, turning this cheek to the pillow and that, she hated also
and she didn’t hate, father, the land, the life of the land—oh,
if only she knew!
For she’d met with books, she went into them to a magic
land far from Edit, out and away and south. And at school
they wrote she was the clever one and John Guthrie said she
might have the education she needed if she stuck to her lessons.
In time she might come out as a teacher then, and do him credit,
that was fine of father the Guthrie whispered in her, but the
Murdoch laughed with a blithe, sweet face. But more and more
she turned from that laughter, resolute, loving to hear of the
things in the histories and geographies, seldom thinking them
funny, strange names and words like Too-long and Too-loose
that convulsed the classes. And at arithmetic also she was
more than good, doing great sums in her head so that always
she was first in the class, they made her the dux and they gave
her prizes, four prizes in four years she had.
And one book she’d thought fair daft, J/ice in Wonderland
it was, and there was no sense in it. And the second, it was
What Katy did at School, and she loved Katy and envied her
and wished like Katy she lived at a school, not tramping back
in the spleiter of a winter night to help muck the byre, with
the smell of the sharn rising feuch! in her face. And the
third book was Rienzi, the Last of the Roman Tribunes, and
some bits were good and some fair wearying. He had a right
bonny wife, Rienzi had, and he was sleeping with her, her
white arms round his neck, when the Romans came to kill
him at last. And the fourth book, new given her before the
twins came to Cairndhu, was The Humours of Scottish Life and
God! if that stite was fun she must have been born dull.
And these had been all her books that weren’t lesson-books,
they were all the books in Cairndhu but for the Bibles grand¬
mother had left to them, one to Chris and one to Will, and in
50 SUNSET SONG
Chris’s one were set the words To my dawtie Chris: Trust in
God and do the right. For grandmother, she’d been father’s
mother, not mother’s mother, had been fell religious and every
Sunday, rain or shine, had tramped to the kirk at Echt, sitting
below some four-five ministers there in all. And one minister
she’d never forgiven, for he’d said not GAWD, as a decent
man would, but GO HD, and it had been a mercy when he
caught a bit cold, laid up he was, and quickly passed away;
and maybe it had been a judgment on him.
So that was Chris and her reading and schooling, two
Chrisses there were that fought for her heart and tormented
her. You hated the land and the coarse speak of the folk and
learning was brave and fine one day; and the next you’d waken
with the peewits crying across the hills, deep and deep, crying
in the heart of you and the smell of the earth in your face,
almost you’d cry for that, the beauty of it and the sweetness of
the Scottish land and skies. You saw their faces in firelight,
father’s and mother’s and the neighbours’, before the lamps
lit up, tired and kind, faces dear and close to you, you wanted the
words they’d known and used, forgotten in the far-off young¬
ness of their lives, Scots words to tell to your heart how they
wrung it and held it, the toil of their days and unendingly their
fight. And the next minute that passed from you, you were
English, back to the English words so sharp and clean and true—
for a while, for a while, till they slid so smooth from your
throat you knew they could never say anything that was
worth the saying at all.
But she sat for her bursary, won it, and began the conjugating
Latin verbs, the easy ones only at first, Jmo, amasy I love a lass
and then you laughed out loud when the Dominie said that
and he cried JVhisty whist but was real pleased and smiled at you
and you felt fine and tingly and above all the rest of the queans
who weren’t learning Latin or anything else, they were kitchen-
maids in the bone. And then there was French, fair difficult,
the u was the worst; and an inspector creature came to Echt
and Chris near dropped through the schoolroom floor in shame
PLOUGHING
5i
when he made her stand out in front of them all and say o-oo,
0-00, o-oo-butin. And he said Put your mouth as though you were
going to weesely but don't do it, and say ‘o-oo, 0-00, 0-00.' And
she said it, she felt like a hen with a stone in its thrapple, after
the inspector creature, an Englishman he was with an awful
belly on him and he couldn’t say whistle, only weesel. And
he went away, down to the gig that was waiting to drive him
to the station he went, and he left his brave leather bag behind,
and the Dominie saw it and cried Whist, Chrissie, run after the
Inspector man with his bag. So she did and caught him up at
the foot of the playground, he gowked at her and said Haw?
and then gave a bit laugh and said Haw? again and then
Thenks. And Chris went back to the Dominie’s room, the
Dominie was waiting for her and he asked if the Inspector
had given her anything, and Chris said No, and the Dominie
looked sore disappointed.
But everybody knew that the English were awful mean
and couldn’t speak right and were cowards who captured
Wallace and killed him by treachery. But they’d been beaten
right well at Bannockburn, then, Edward the Second hadn’t
drawn rein till he was in Dunbar, and ever after that the
English were beaten in all the wars, except Flodden and they
won at Flodden by treachery again, just as it told in The
Flowers of the Forest. Always she wanted to cry when she
heard that played and a lot of folk singing it at a parish concert
in Echt, for the sadness of it and the lads that came back never
again to their lasses among the stooks, and the lasses that
never married but sat and stared down south to the English
border where their lads lay happed in blood and earth, with
their bloodied kilts and broken helmets. And she wrote an
essay on that, telling all how it happened, the Dominie said
it was fine and that sometime she should try to write poetry; like
Mrs. Hemans.
52
SUNSET SONG
But then, just after writing the essay, the twins were born
and mother had as awful a time as she’d always had. She was
sobbing and ill when she went to bed, Chris boiled water in
kettles for hours and hours and then towels came down, towels
clairted with stuff she didn’t dare look at, she washed them
quick and hung them to dry. The doctor came in with the
evening, he stayed the whole night, and Dod and Alec shivered
and cried in their room till father went up and skelped them
right sore, they’d something to cry for then but they didn’t dare.
And father came down the stairs again, fleet as ever, though he
hadn’t been in bed for forty hours, and he closed the kitchen
door and sat with his head between his hands and groaned and
said he was a miserable sinner, God forgive him the lusts of
the flesh. Something about the bonny hair of her also he said
and then more about lust, but he hadn’t intended Chris to hear
for he looked up and saw her looking at him and he raged at
her, telling her to spread a table with breakfast for the doctor—
through in the parlour there, and boil him an egg.
And then mother began to scream, the doctor called down
the stairs Man, it s a fair tough case, I doubt Til need your help,
and. at that father turned grey as a sheet and covered his face
again and cried I dare not, I dare not! Then the doctor childe
called him again Guthrie man, do you hear me? and father
jumped up in a rage and cried Damn't to hell. Pm not deafl
and ran up the stairs, fleet as ever, and then the door in the
room closed fast and Chris could hear no more.
Not that she wanted to hear, she felt real ill herself, cooking
the egg and laying a meal in the parlour, with a white cloth
spread above the green plush cloth and all the furniture dark
and shadowed and listening. Then Will came down the stair
he couldn’t sleep because of mother, they sat together and Will
said the old man was a fair beast and mother shouldn’t be having
a baby, she was far too old for that. And Chris stared at him
with horrified imaginings in her mind, she hadn’t known
better then, the English bit of her went sick, she whispered
What has father to do with it? And Will stared back at her,
PLOUGHING 53
shamed-faced, Don't you know? INhat's a bull to do with a
calf, you fool?
But then they heard an awful scream that made them leap
to their feet, it was as though mother were being torn and
torn in the teeth of beasts and couldn’t thole it longer; and
then a little screech like a young pig made followed that scream
and they tried not to hear more of the sounds above them,
Chris boiled the egg over and over till it was as hard as iron.
And then mother screamed again, Oh God! your heart stopped
to hear it, and that was when the second twin came.
Then quietness followed, they heard the doctor coming
down the stairs, the morning was close, it hung scared beyond
the stilled parks and listened and waited. But the doctor
cried Hot water, jugs of it, pour me a basin of water, Chris, and
put plenty of soap near by it. She cried Ay, doctor, to that but
she cried in a whisper, he didn’t hear and was fell angry.
D'you hear me? And Will said to him, calling up the stair,
Ay, doctor, only she's feared, and the doctor said She'll have a
damned sight more to fear when she's having a bairn of her own.
Pour out the water, quick! So they poured it and went through
to the parlour while the doctor passed them with his hands
held away from them, and the smell of his hands was a horror
that haunted Chris for a day and a night.
That was the coming of the twins at Cairndhu, there d
been barely room for them all before that time, now they d
have to live like links. But it was a fell good farm, John
Guthrie loath to part with it though his lease was near its end,
and when mother came down from her bed in a fortnight s
time with the shine of the gold still in the sweet hair of her
and her eyes clear eyes again, he raged and swore when she
spoke to him. More rooms? IVhat more room do we want than
ive have? Do you think we're gentry? he cried, and went on
again to tell that when he was a bairn in Pittodrie his mother
SUNSET SONG
54
had nine bairns all at home, nought but a butt and ben they
had and their father nought but a plough-childe. But fine
they’d managed, God-fearing and decent all he’d made them,
and if one of Jean Murdoch’s bairns were half as good the shame
need never redden the face of her. And mother looked at him
with the little smile on her lips, lEe//, well, we're to bide on here,
then? and father shot out his beard at her and cried Ay, that
we are, content yourself.
But the very next day he was driving back from the mart, old
Bob in the cart, when round a corner below the Barmekin
came a motor-car spitting and barking like a tink dog in dis¬
temper. Old Bob had made a jump and near landed the cart
in the ditch and then stood like a rock, so feared he wouldn’t
move a step, the cart jammed fast across the road. And as
father tried to haul the thrawn beast to the side a creature of
a woman with her face all clamjamfried with paint and powder
and dirt, she thrust her bit head out from the window of the
car and cried You're causing an obstruction, my man. And
John Guthrie roused like a lion: I'm not your man, thank God,
for if 1 was I'd have your face scraped with a dart and then a
scavenger wash it well. The woman nearly burst with rage
at that, she fell back in the car and said You've not heard the
last of this. Take note of his name-plate, James, d'you hear?
And the shover looked out, fair shamed he looked, and
keeked at the name-plate underneath Bob’s shelvin, and
quavered Yes, madam, and they turned about and drove
off. That was the way to deal with dirt like the gentry, but
when father applied for his lease again he was told he couldn’t
have it.
So he took a look at the People's Journal and got into his
fine best suit, Chris shook the moth-balls from it and found
him his collar and the broad white front to cover his working
sark; and John Guthrie tramped into Aberdeen and took a
train to Banchory to look at a small place there. But the rent
was awful high and he saw that nearly all the district was land
of the large-like farm, he’d be squeezed to death and he’d stand
PLOUGHING 55
no chance. It was fine land though, that nearly shook him,
fine it looked and your hands they itched to be at it; but the
agent called him Guthrie, and he fired up at the agent: Who
the hell are you Guthrie-ing? Mister Guthrie to you. And the
agent looked at him and turned right white about the gills and
then gave a bit laugh and said Jh well, Mr. Guthrie, Vm afraid
you wouldn't suit us. And John Guthrie said It's your place
that doesn't suit me, let me tell you, you wee, dowp-licking clerk.
Poor he might be but the creature wasn’t yet decked that
might put on its airs with him, John Guthrie.
So back he came and began his searchings again. And
the third day out he came back from far in the south. He d
taken a place, Blawearie, in Kinraddie of the Mearns.
Wild weather it was that January and the night on the
Slug road smoring with sleet when John Guthrie crossed his
family and gear from Aberdeen into the Mearns. Twice the
great carts set with their shelvins that rustled still stray binder-
twine from September’s harvest-home laired in drifts before the
ascent of the Slug faced the reluctant horses. Darkness came
down like a wet, wet blanket, weariness below it and the
crying of the twins to vex John Guthrie. Mother called him
from her nook in the leading cart, there where she sat with
now one twin at the breast and now another, and her skin bare
and cold and white and a strand of her rust-gold hair draped
down from the darkness about her face into the light of the
swinging lantern: W^e'd better loosen up at Portlethen and not
try the Slug this night. ,
But father swore at that Damn't to hell, do you think I m made
of silver to put up the night at Portlethen? and mother sighed
and held off the wee twin, Robert, and the milk dripped creamily
from the soft, sweet lips of him: No, we're not made of silver,
but jnaybe we'll lair again and all die of the night.
Maybe he feared that himself, John Guthrie, his rage was
SUNSET SONG
56
his worriment with the night, but he’d no time to answer her
for a great bellowing arose in the road by the winding scurry
of peat-moss that lined the dying light of the moon. The
cattle had bunched there, tails to the wind, refusing the Slug
and the sting of the sleet, little Dod was wailing and crying at
the beasts, Polled Angus and Shorthorns and half-bred Highland
stirks who had fattened and feted and loved their life in the
haughs of Edit, south there across the uncouthy hills was a world
cold and unchancy. But John Guthrie dropped the tarpaulin
edge that shielded his wife and the twins and the furnishings
of the best room and gear good and plentiful enough; and
swiftly he ran past the head of the horse till he came to where
the cattle bunched. And he swung Dod into the ditch with
one swipe of his hand and cried Have you got no sense, you brat?
and uncoiled from his hand the length of hide that served him
as a whip. Its crackle snarled down through the sting of the
sleet, the hair rose in long serrations across the backs of the
cattle, and one in a minute, a little Highland steer it was, mooed
and ran forward and fell to a trot, and the rest followed after,
slipping and sprawling with their cloven hooves, the reek of
their dung sharp and bitter in the sleet smore of the night.
Ahead Alec saw them coming and turned himself about again,
and fell to a trot, leading up the Slug to Mearns and the
south.
So, creaking and creaking, and the shelvins skirling under
the weight of their loads, they passed that danger point, the
carts plodded into motion again, the first with its hooded light
and house gear and mother suckling the twins. In the next,
Clyde’s cart, the seed was loaded, potato and corn and barley*
and bags of tools and implements, and graips and forks fast tied
with esparto twine and two fine ploughs and a driller, and dairy
things and a turnip machine with teeth that cut as a guillotine
cuts. Head down to the wind and her reins loose and her bonny
coat all mottled with sleet went Clyde, the load a nothing to her
fine and clean and sonsy she marched, following John Guthrie’s
cart with no other thing or soul to guide but that ever and now,
PLOUGHING 57
in this half-mile and that she heard his voice cry cheerily Fine,
Clyde, fine. Come on then, lass.
Chris and Will with the last cart, sixteen Will and fifteen
Chris, the road wound up and up, straight and unwavering,
and sometimes they hiddled in the lithe and the sleet sang past
to left and right, white and glowing in the darkness. And
sometimes they clambered down from the shelvins above the
laboured drag of old Bob and ran beside him, one either side,
and stamped for warmth in their feet, and saw the whin bushes
climb black the white hills beside them and far and away the
blink of lights across the moors where folk lay happed and warm.
But then the upwards road would swerve, right or left, into this
steep ledge or that, and the wind would be at them again and they’d
gasp, climbing back to the shelvins, Will with freezing feet and
hands and the batter of the sleet like needles in his face, Chris in
worse case, colder and colder at every turn, her body numb and
unhappy, knees and thighs and stomach and breast, her breasts
ached and ached so that nearly she wept. But of that she told
nothing, she fell to a drowse through the cold, and a strange
dream came to her as they plodded up through the ancient hills.
For out of the night ahead of them came running a man,
father didn’t see him or heed to him, though old Bob in the
dream that was Chris’s snorted and shied. And as he came he
wrung his hands, he was mad and singing, a foreign creature,
black-bearded, half-naked he was; and he cried in the Greek
The ships of Pytheas! The ships of Pytheas! and went by into the
smore of the sleet-storm on the Grampian hills, Chris never
saw him again, queer dreaming that was. For her eyes were
wide open, she rubbed them with never a need of that, if
she hadn’t been dreaming she must have been daft. They’d
cleared the Slug, below was Stonehaven and the Mearns, and
far beyond that, miles through the Howe, the twinkling point
of light that shone from the flagstaff of Kinraddie.
58
SUNSET SONG
So that was their coming to Blawearie, fell wearied all of
them were the little of the night that was left them, and slept
late into the next morning, coming cold and drizzly up from
the sea by Bervie. All the darkness they heard that sea, a
shoom-shoom that moaned by the cliffs of lone Kinneff. Not
that John Guthrie listened to such dirt of sounds, but Chris
and Will did, in the room where they’d made their shake-
down beds. In the strangeness and cold and the sighing of
that far-off water Chris could fine no sleep till Will whispered
Let's sleep together. So then they did, oxtering one the other
till they were real warm. But at the first keek of day Will
slipped back to the blankets of his own bed, he was feared what
father would say if he found them lying like that. Chris
thought of that angrily, puzzled and angry, the English Chris
as sleep came on her again. Was it likely a brother and a sister
would do anything if they slept together? And besides, she
didn’t know how.
But Will back in his bed had hardly a minute to get warm
or a wink of sleep when John Guthrie was up and about the
place, rousing them all, and the twins were wakened and
crying for the breast, and Dod and Alec trying to light the fire.
Father swore up and down the strange Blawearie stairs, chap¬
ping from door to door, weren’t they sick with shame lying
stinking in bed and half the day gone? Then out he went, the
house quietened down as he banged the door, and he cried back
that he was off up the brae to look at the loch in Blawearie
moor—Get out and get on with the breakfast and get your work
done ere I come back else I'll warm your lugs for you.
And faith! it was queer that the notion took father to climb
the brae at that hour. For as he went up through the broom
he heard a shot, did John Guthrie, cracking the morning so
dark and iron-like, and he stood astounded, was not Blawearie
his and he the tenant of it? And rage took him and he ceased
to dander. Up through the hill among the dead broom he
sped like a hare and burst in sight of the loch, grass-fringed and
chill then under the winter morning, with a sailing of wild
PLOUGHING
59
geese above it, going out east to the sea. All but one winged
east in burnished strokes under the steel-grey sky, but that one
loped and swooped and stroked the air with burnished pinions,
and John Guthrie saw the feathers drift down from it, it gave a
wild cry like a bairn smored at night below the blankets, and
down it plonked on the mere of the loch, not ten yards from
where the man with the gun was standing. So John Guthrie
he went cannily across the grass to this billy in the brave leggings
and with the red face on him, and who was he standing so sure-
like on Guthrie’s land? He gave a bit jump, hearing Guthrie
come, and then he swithered a laugh inside the foolish face of
him, but John Guthrie didn’t laugh. Instead, he whispered,
quiet-like, Ay, man, you re been shooting^ and the creature said
Ay, just that. And John Guthrie said Ay, you'll be a bit poacher,
then? and the billy said No, Vll not be that, Vm Maitland, the
foreman at Mains, and John Guthrie whispered You may be the
archangel Gabriel, but you're not to shoot on MY land, d'you
hear?
The Standing Stones reared up above the two, marled and
white-edged with snow they were, and a wind came blowing
fit to freeze the chilblains on a brass monkey as they stood and
glowered one at the other. Then Maitland muttered Ellison
at Mains will see about this, and made off for all the world as
if he feared the crack of a kick in the dowp of him. And right
fairly there, midmost his brave breeks John Guthrie might
well have kicked but that he restrained himself, cannily, for
the goose was still lying by the side of the loch, jerking and
slobbering blood through its beak; and it looked at him with
terror in its slate-grey eyes and he waited, canny still, till
Maitland was out of sight, syne he wrung the neck of the bird
and took it down to Blawearie. And he told them all of the
meeting with Maitland, and if ever they heard a shot on the
land they were to run to him at once and tell him, he’d deal
with any damn poacher—Jew, Gentile, or the Prince of Wales
himself.
So that was how father made first acquaintance with the
6o SUNSET SONG
Standing Stones, and he didn’t like them, for one evening
in Spring after a day’s ploughing and tired a bit maybe, he
went up on a dander through the brae to the loch and found
Chris lying there, just as now she lay in the summer heat.
Tired though he was he came to her side right fleet enough,
his shoulders straight and his frightening eyes on her, she
had no time to close the story-book she read and he snatched
it up and looked at it and cried Dirt! IToiCve more need to
be down in the house helping your mother ivash out the hippens.
And he glanced with a louring eye at the Standing Stones and
then Chris had thought a foolish thing, that he kind of shivered,
as though he were feared, him that was feared at nothing
dead or alive, gentry or common. But maybe the shiver came
from his fleetness caught in the bite of the cold Spring air, he
stood looking at the Stones a minute and said they were coarse,
foul things, the folk that raised them were burning in hell,
skin-clad savages with never a skin to guard them now. And
Chris had better get down to her work, had she heard any
shooting that evening?
But Chris said No, and neither she had, nor any other
evening till John Guthrie himself got a gun, a second-hand thing
he picked up in Stonehaven, a muzzle-loader it was, and as he
went by the Mill on the way to Blawearie Long Rob came out
and saw it and cried Ay, man 1 didn't mind you were a veteran
of the 45* And father cried Losh, Rob, were you cheating folk
at your Mill even then? for sometimes he could take a bit joke,
except with his family. So home he brought the old gun and
loaded it up with pellets and stuffed in wadding with a ram¬
rod; and by night he would go cannily out in the gloaming, and
shoot here a rabbit and there a hare, no other soul must handle
the gun but himself. Nor did any try till that day he went
off to the mart at Laurencekirk and then Will took down the
gun and laughed at the thing and loaded it and went out and shot
at a mark, a herring box on the top of a post, till he was fell
near perfect. But he wished he hadn’t, for father came home
and counted his pellets that evening and went fair mad with
PLOUGHING
61
rage till mother grew sick of the subject and cried Hold your
whist, you and your gun, what harm was in Will that he used it?
Father had been sitting at the neuk of the fire when he
heard that, but he got to his feet like a cat then, looking at
Will so that the blood flowed cold in Chris’s veins. Then he
said, in the quiet-like voice that was his when he was going to
leather them, Come out to the barn with me. Will. Mother
laughed that strange, blithe laugh that had come out of the Springs
of Kildrummie with her, kind and queer in a breath it was,
looking pityingly at Will. But Chris burned with shame because
of him, he was over-old for that, she cried out Father, you can't!
As well have cried to the tides at Kinneff to keep away from
the land, father was fair roused by then, he whispered Be quiet,
quean, else Vll take you as well. And up to the barn he went
with Will and took down his breeks, nearly seventeen though
he was, and leathered him till the weals stood blue across his
haunches; and that night Will could hardly sleep for the pain
of it, sobbing into his pillow, till Chris slipped into his bed and
took him into her arms and held him and cuddled him and put
out her hand below his shirt on to his body and made gentle
her fingers to pass and repass across the torn flesh of his body,
soothing him, and he stopped from crying after a while and fell
asleep, holding to her, strange it seemed then for she knew him
bigger and older than she was, and somehow skin and hair and
body stranger than once they had been, as though they were no
longer children. She minded then the stories of Marget Strachan,
and felt herself in the darkness blush for shame and then think of
them still more and lie awake, seeing out of the window as it wore
on to midnight a lowe in mauve and gold that crept and slipt and
wavered upon the sky, and that was the lowe of the night-time
whin-burning up on the Grampians; and next morning she
was almost too sleepy to stiter into her clothes and set out across
the fields to the station and the College train for Duncairn.
62 SUNSET SONG
For to the College she’d been sent and found it strange
enough after the high classes in Echt, a little ugly place it was
below Duncairn Station, ugly as sin and nearly as proud,
said the Chris that was Murdoch, Chris of the land. Inside
the main building of it was carved the head of a beast like a
calf with colic, but they swore the creature was a wolf on a
shield, whatever the brute might be doing there.
Every week or so the drawing master, old Mr. Kinloch,
marched out this class or that to the playground in front
of the wolf-beast; and down they’d all get on the chairs they’d
brought and try and draw the beast. Right fond of the
gentry was Kinloch, if you wore a fine frock and your hair was
well brushed and your father well to the fore he’d sit beside you
and stroke your arm and speak in a slow sing-song that made
everybody laugh behind his back. Noooooooooooo, that's not
quate raight, he would flute, More like the head of one of Chris si e's
faaaaaaaather s pigs than a heraaaaaaaaaaldic animal, Tm
afraaaaaaaaaaaaaaaid. So he loved the gentry, did Mr.
Kinloch, and God knows he was no exception among the
masters there. For the most of them were sons and daughters
of poor bit crofters and fishers themselves, up with the gentry
they felt safe and unfrightened, far from that woesome pit
of brose and bree and sheetless beds in which they had been
reared. So right condescending they were with Chris, daughter
of a farmer of no account, not that she cared, she was douce
and sensible she told herself. And hadn’t father said that in the
sight of God an honest man was as good as any school-teacher
and generally a damned sight better?
But it vexed you a bit all the same that a creature like the For-
dyce girl should be cuddled by Mr. Kinloch when she’d a face
like a broken brose-cap and a voice like a nail on a slate. And
but little cuddling her drawing warranted, her father’s silver
had more to do with it, not that Chris herself could draw like
an artist, Latin and Ftench and Greek and history were the
things in which she shone. And the English master set their
class an essay on Deaths of the Great and her essay was so goo 1
PLOUGHING 63
that he was forced to read it aloud to all the class, and the
Fordyce quean had snickered and sniffed, so mad she was
with jealousy.
Mr. Murgetson was the English master there, not that he
was English himself, he came from Argyll and spoke with a
funny whine, the Highland whine, and the boys swore he had
hair growing up between his toes like a Highland cow, and
when they’d see him coming down a corridor they’d push their
heads round a corner and cry Moo! like a lot of cattle. He’d
fly in an awful rage at that, and once when they’d done it he
came into the class where Chris was waiting her lesson and
he stood and swore, right out and horrible, and gripped a black
ruler in his hands and glared round as if he meant to murder a
body. And maybe he would if the French teacher, her that
was bonny and brave, hadn’t come simpering into the room,
and then he lowered the ruler and grunted and curled up his
lip and said Eh? Canaille? and the French teacher she simpered
some more and said May swee.
So that was the college place at Duncairn, two Chrisses
went there each morning, and one was right douce and studious
and the other sat back and laughed a canny laugh at the antics
of the teachers and minded Blawearie brae and the champ
of horses and the smell of dung and her father’s brown, grained
hands till she was sick to be home again. But she made friends
with young Marget Strachan, Chae Strachan’s daughter, she
was slim and sweet and fair, fine to know, though she spoke
about things that seemed awful at first and then weren’t awful
at all; and you wanted to hear more and Marget would laugh
and say it was Chae that had told her. Always as Chae she
spoke of him and that was an unco-like thing to do of your
father, but maybe it was because he was socialist and thought
that Rich and Poor should be Equal. And what was the sense
of believing that and then sending his daughter to educate
herself and herself become one of the Rich ?
But Marget cried that wasn’t what Chae intended, she
was to learn and be ready for the Revolution that was some
SUNSET SONG
64
day coming. And if come it never did she wasn’t to seek out
riches anyway, she was off to be trained as a doctor, Chae
said that life came out of women through tunnels of pain and
if God had planned women for anything else but the bearing
of children it was surely the saving of them. And Marget’s
eyes, that were blue and so deep they minded you of a well
you peeped into, they’d grow deeper and darker and her sweet
face grow so solemn Chris felt solemn herself. But that would
be only a minute, the next and Marget was laughing and
fleering, trying to shock her, telling of men and women, what
fools they were below their clothes; and how children came
and how you should have them; and the things that Chae had
seen in the huts of the blacks in Africa. And she told of a
place where the bodies of men lay salted and white in great
stone vats till the doctors needed to cut them up, the bodies of
paupers they were—so take care you don't die as a pauper^ Chris,
for I d hate some day if I rang a bell and they brought me up
out of the vat your naked body, old and shrivelled and frosted
with salt, and I looked in your dead, queer face, standing there
with the scalpel held in my hand, and cried ‘But this is Chris
Guthrie!'
That was awful, Chris felt sick and sick and stopped midway
the shining path that led through the fields to Peesie’s Knapp
that evening in March. Clean and keen and wild and clear,
the evening ploughed land’s smell up in your nose and your
mouth when you opened it, for Netherhill’s teams had been out
in that park all day, queer and lovely and dear the smell Chris
noted. And something else she saw, looking at Marget, sick
at the thought of her dead body brought to Marget. And
that thing was a vein that beat in Marget’s throat, a little blue
gathering where the blood beat past in slow, quiet strokes
it would never do that when one was dead and still under
grass, down in the earth that smelt so fine and you’d never
smell; or cased in the icy darkness of a vat, seeing never
again the lowe of burning whins or hearing the North Sea
thunder beyond the hills, the thunder of it breaking through a
PLOUGHING
65
morning of mist, the right things that might not last and so
soon went by. And they only were real and true, beyond
them was nought you might ever attain but a weary dream
and that last dark silence—Oh, only a fool loved being
alive!
But Marget threw her arms around her when she said
that, and kissed her with red, kind lips, so red they were that
they looked like haws, and said there were lovely things in the
world, lovely that didn’t endure, and the lovelier for that.
IPait till you find yourself in the arms of your lad, in the harvest
time it'll he with the stocks round about you, and he'll stop from
joking—they do, you know, and that's just when their blood-
pressure alters—and he'll take you like this—wait, there's not a
body to see us!—and hold you like this, with his hands held so,
and kiss you like this!
It was over in a moment, quick and shameful, fine for all
that, tingling and strange and shameful by turns. Long after
she parted with Marget that evening she turned and stared
down at Peesie’s Knapp and blushed again; and suddenly she
was seeing them all at Blawearie as though they were strangers
naked out of the sea, she felt ill every time she looked at father
and mother. But that passed in a day or so, for nothing
endures.
Not a thing, though you’re over-young to go thinking of
that, you’ve your lessons and studies, the English Chris, and
living and eating and sleeping that other Chris that stretches
your toes for you in the dark of the night and whispers a drowsy
I'm you. But you might not stay from the thinking when all
in a day, Marget, grown part of your life, came waving to you
as you neared the Knapp with the news she was off to Aberdeen
to live with an auntie there—it's a better place for a scholar,
Chae says, and I'll be trained all the sooner.
And three days later Chae Strachan and Chris drove down
to the station with her, and saw her off at the platform, and
she waved at them, bonny and young, Chae looked as numb as
Chris felt. He gave her a lift from the station, did Chae, and
E
66
SUNSET SONG
on the road he spoke but once, to himself it seemed, not Chris:
Jy, Mar get lass, you'll do fine, if you keep the lads at bay from
kissing the bonny breast of you.
So that was your Marget gone, there seemed not a soul in
Kinraddie that could take her place, the servant queans of an
age with Chris were no more than gowks and gomerils a-screech
round the barn of the Mains at night with the ploughmen
snickering behind them. And John Guthrie had as little use
for them as Marget herself. Friends? Stick to your lessons
and let's see you make a name for yourself, you've no time for
friends.
Mother looked up at that, friendly-like, not feared of him at
all, she was never feared. Take care her head doesn't soften
with lessons and dirt, learning in books it was sent the wee red
daftie at Cuddiestoun clean skite, they say. And father poked
out his beard at her. Say? IVould you rather see her skite
with book-learning or skite with—and then he stopped and began
to rage at Dod and Alec that were making a noise in the kitchen
corner. But Chris, a-pore above her books in the glow of the
paraffin lamp, heeding to Caesar’s coming in Gaul and the
stour the creature raised there, knew right well what father
had thought to speak of—lust was the word he’d wanted,
perhaps. And she turned a page with the weary Caesar man
and thought of the wild career the daftie Andy had led one day
in the roads and woods of Kinraddie.
Marget had barely gone when the thing came off, it was
fair the speak of the place that happening early in April. The
sowing time was at hand, John Guthrie put down two parks
with grass and corn, swinging hand from hand as he walked
and sowed and Will carried the corn across to him from the
sacks that lined the rigs. Chris herself would help of an early
morning when the dew had lifted quick, it was blithe and light¬
some in the caller air with the whistle of the blackbirds in
PLOUGHING
67
Blawearie’s trees and the glint of the sea across the Howe
and the wind blowing up the braes with a fresh, wild smell
that caught you and made you gasp. So silent the world
with the sun just peeking above the horizon those hours that
you’d hear, clear and bright as though he paced the next field,
the ringing steps of Chae Strachan—far down, a shadow and a
sunlit dot, sowing his parks behind the steadings of Peesie’s
Knapp. There were larks coming over that morning, Chris
minded, whistling and trilling dark and unseen against the blaze
of the sun, now one lark, now another, till the sweetness of the
trilling dizzied you and you stumbled with heavy pails corn¬
laden, and father swore at you over the red beard of him
Damnt to hell, are you fair a fool, you quean?
That morning it was that the daftie Andy stole out of Cuddie-
stoun and started his scandalous rampage through Kinraddie.
Long Rob of the Mill was to say he’d once had a horse that
would do that kind of thing in the early Spring, leap dykes and
ditches and every mortal thing it would if it heard a douce
little mare go by. Gelding though it was, the horse would do
that, and what more was Andy, poor devil, than a gelding?
Not that Mistress Ellison had thought him that—faith, no!
It was said she ran so fast after her meeting with the daftie
she found herself down two stone in weight. The coarse
creature chased her nearly in sight of the Mains and then
scrabbled away into the rough ground beyond the turnpike.
She’d been out fell early for her, Mistress Ellison, and was
just holding along the road a bit walk to Fordoun when out of
some bushes Andy jumped, his ramshackle face all swithering
and his eyes all hot and wet. She thought at first he was hurted
and then she saw he was trying to laugh, he tore at her frock
and cried You cornel She nearly fainted, but didn’t, her umbrella
was in her hand, she broke it over the daftie’s head and then
turned and ran, he went louping after her along the road,
like a great monkey he leapt, crying terrible things to her.
When sight of the Mains put an end to that chase he must have
hung back in the hills for an hour or so and seen Mistress Munro,
68
SUNSET SONG
the futret, go sleeking down the paths to the Mains and Peesie’s
Knapp and Blawearie, asking sharp as you like, as though
she blamed every soul but herself, Have you seen that creature
Andy?
While she was up Blawearie way he must have made his
road back across the hills, high up above the Cuddiestoun, till
Upperhill came in sight. For later one of the ploughmen
thought he’d seen the creature, shambling up against the skyline,
picking a great bunch of sourocks and eating them. Then
he got into the Upperhill wood and waited there, and it was
through that wood at nine o’clock that Maggie Jean Gordon
would hold her way to the station—close and thick larch
wood with a path through it, where the light fell hardly at all
and the cones crunched and rotted underfoot and sometimes
a green barrier of whin crept up a wood ditch and looked out
at you, and in the winter days the deer came down from the
Grampians and sheltered there. But in the April weather
there were no deer to fright Maggie Jean, even the daftie didn’t
frighten her. He’d been waiting high in the wood before he
took her, but maybe before that he ran alongside the path she
was taking, keeping hidden from view of the lass, for she heard
a little crackle rise now and then, she was to remember, and
wondered that the squirrels were out so early. Gordon she
was, none the better for that it might be, but a blithe little
thing, thin body and bonny brown hair, straight to walk and
straight to look, and you liked the laugh of her.
So through the wood and right into the hands of the daftie
she went, and when he lifted her in his hands she was frightened
not even then, not even when he bore her far back into the
wood, the broom-branches whipped their faces and the wet of
the dew sprayed on them, coming into a little space, broom-
surrounded, where the sun reached down a long finger into the
dimness. She stood up and shook herself when he set her down,
and told him she couldn’t play any longer, she must really
hurry else she’d miss her train. But he paid no heed, crouching
on one knee he turned his head this way and that, jerking
PLOUGHING 69
round and about, listening and listening, so that Maggie Jean
listened as well and heard the ploughmen cry to their horses
and her mother at that moment calling the hens to feed—
Tickie-ae! Tickie-ae! —Well, I must go, she told him and
caught her bag in her hand and hadn’t moved a step when he
had her in his hands again; and after a minute or so, though she
wasn’t frightened even then, she didn’t like him, telling him
mother only was allowed to touch her there, not anyone else,
and please she’d have to go. And she looked up at him, pushing
him away, his mad, awful head, he began to purr like a great,
wild cat, awful it must have been to see him and hear him.
And God alone knows the next thing he’d have done but that
then, for it was never such a morning before for that bright
clearness, far away down and across the fields a man began to
sing, distant but very clear, with a blithe lilt in the voice of him.
And he broke off and whistled the song and then he sang it
again:
Bonny wee thing,
Canty wee thing.
Lovely wee thing,
IVert thou mine
I would clasp thee
In my bosom
Lest my jewel
I should tyne !
And at that, crouching and listening, the daftie took his
hands from Maggie Jean and began to sing the song himself;
and he took her in his arms again, but gently, fondling her as
though she were a cat, and he set her on her feet and tugged
straight the bit frock she wore; and stood up beside her and took
her hand and guided her back to the path through the larch
wood. And she went on and left him and once she looked
back and saw him glowering after her; and because she saw he
was weeping she ran back to him, kind thing, and patted his
hand and said Don't cry! and she saw his face like that of a tor¬
mented beast and went on again, down to the station. And
SUNSET SONG
70
only when she came home that night did she tell the story of
her meeting with Cuddiestoun’s Andy.
But as the day wore on and Long Rob, working in that
orra field above the Mill, still sang and sweated and swore at
his horses, the singing must have drawn the Andy creature
down from the larch wood, by hedges creeping and slipping
from the sight of the Upperhill men in the parks. And once
Rob raised his head and thought he saw a moving shadow in a
ditch that bounded the orra ground. But he thought it a dog
and just heaved a stone or so in case it was some beast in heat
or on chicken-killing. The shadow yelped and snarled at
that, but was gone from the ditch when Rob picked up another
stone; so he went on with his work; and the daftie, tearing
along the Kinraddie road out towards the Bridge End, with
the blood red trickling down his woesome face, was all unseen
by him.
But right at the corner, close where the road jerked round
by Booty’s place, he near ran full tilt into Chris herself, coming
up from Auchinblae she was with the messages her mother
had sent her on, her basket over her arm and her mind far off
with the Latin verbs in -art. He slavered at her, running
towards her, and she screamed, though she wasn’t over¬
frightened; and then she threw the basket clean at his head and
made for Booty’s. Booty himself was sitting just inside the
door when she reached it, the louping beast was close behind,
she heard the pant of his breath and was to wonder often
enough in later times over that coolness that came on her then.
For she ran fleet as a bird inside the door and banged it right in
the daftie’s face and dropped the bar and watched the planks
bulge and crack as outside the body of the madman was flung
against them again and again. Booty mouthed and stuttered
at her in the dimness, but he grew real brave when she made
him understand, he sharpened two of his sutor’s knives and
prowled trembling from window to window—the daftie left
them untouched. Then Chris took a keek from one window
and saw him again: he was raking about in the basket she’d
PLOUGHING 71
thrown at his head, he made the parcels dirl on the road till he
found a great bar of soap; and then he began to eat that, feuch!
laughing and yammering all to himself, and running back to
throw himself against the door of Pooty’s again, the foam
burst yellow through the beard of him as he still ate and ate
at the soap.
But he soon grew thirsty and went down to the burn, Pooty
and Chris stood watching him, and then it was that Cuddie-
stoun himself came ben the road. He sighted Andy and
cried out to him, and Andy leapt the burn and was off, and
behind him went Munro clatter-clang, and out of sight they
vanished down the road to Bridge End. Chris unbarred the
door in spite of Pooty’s stutterings and went and repacked
the bit basket, and everything was there except the soap; and
that was down poor Andy’s throat.
Feint the thing else he’d to eat that day, he was near the
end of his tether; for though he ran like a hare and Cuddie-
stoun behind him was more than coarse in the legs, yet luck
would have it that Mutch of Bridge End was just guiding his
team across the road to start harrowing his yavil park when the
two runners came in sight, real daft-like both of them, Andy
running near double, soap and madness a-foam on his face,
Cuddiestoun bellowing behind. So Mutch slowed down his
team and called out to Andy, Ay, man, you mustn t run near
as fast as that, and when Andy was opposite threw out a foot and
tripped him up, and down in the stour went Andy, and Cuddie¬
stoun was on top of him in a minute, bashing in the face of him,
but Alec Mutch just stood and looked on, maybe working his
meikle ears a bit, it was no concern of his. Xhe daftie s hands
went up to his face as the bashings came and then Cuddiestoun
gripped him right in the private parts, he screamed and went
slack, like a sack in Cuddiestoun’s hands. And that was the
end of Andy’s ploy, for back to the Cuddiestoun he was driven
and they said Mistress Munro took down his breeks and lea¬
thered him sore; but you never know the lies they tell, for others
said it was Cuddiestoun himself she leathered, him having
SUNSET SONG
72
let the daftie out of the house that morning to scandalise her
name with his coarse on-goings. But he’d no chance more of
them, poor stock, next day the asylum officials came out and
took him away in a gig, his hands fast tied behind his back;
and that was the last they ever saw of Andy in Kinraddie.
Father raged when he heard the story from Chris, queer
raging it was, he took her out to the barn and heard the story
and his eyes slipped up and down her dress as she spoke, she felt
sickened and queer. He shamed you then? he whispered; and
Chris shook her head and at that father seemed to go limp
and his eyes grew dull. Jh welly it’s the kind of thing that
would happen in a godless parish like this. It can hardly happen
again with the Reverend Gibbon in charge.
Three minister creatures came down to Kinraddie to try
for its empty pulpit. The first preached early in March, a
pernickety thing as ever you saw, not over five feet in height,
or he didn’t look more. He wore a brave gown with a purple
hood on it, like a Catholic creature, and jerked and pranced
round the pulpit like a snipe with the staggers, working himself
up right sore about Latter-Day Doubt in the Kirk of Scotland.
But Kinraddie had never a doubt of him, and Chris coming out
of the kirk with Will and father heard Chae Strachan say
he’d rather sit under a clucking hen than that for a minister.
The second to try was an old bit man from Banff, shaking and
old, and some said he’d be best, he’d have quietened down at
his age, not aye on the look for a bigger kirk and a bigger
stipend. For if there’s a body on earth that would skin a tink
for his sark and preach for a pension in purgatory it’s an Auld
Kirk minister.
But the poor old brute from Banff seemed fair sucked dry.
He’d spent years in the writing of books and things, the spunk
of him had trickled out into his pen, forbye that he read his
sermon; and that fair settled his hash to begin with. So hardly
PLOUGHING
73
a soul paid heed to his reading, except Chris and her father, she
thought it fine; for he told of the long dead beasts of the Scottish
land in the times when jungle flowered its forests across the
Howe and a red sun rose on the steaming earth that the feet of
man had still to tread: and he pictured the dark, slow tribes that
came drifting across the low lands of the northern seas, the
great bear watched them come, and they hunted and fished
and loved and died, God’s children in the morn of time; and he
brought the first voyagers sailing the sounding coasts, they
brought the heathen idols of the great Stone Rings, the Golden
Age was over and past and lust and cruelty trod the world;
and he told of the rising of Christ, a pin-point of the cosmic
light far off in Palestine, the light that crept and wavered and
did not die, the light that would yet shine as the sun on all the
world, nor least the dark howes and hills of Scotland.
So what could you make of that, except that he thought
Kinraddie a right coarse place since the jungles had all dried
up? And his prayers were as short as you please, he’d hardly
a thing to say of the King or the Royal Family at all, had the
Reverend Colquohoun. So that fair put him out with Ellison
and Mutch, they were awful King’s men both of them, ready
to die for the King any day of the week and twice on Sundays,
said Long Rob of the Mill. And his preaching had no pleasure
at all for Chae Strachan either, he wanted a preacher to praise
up socialism and tell how Rich and Poor should be Equal.
So the few that listened thought feint the much of the old
book-writer from Banff, he stood never a chance, pleasing
Chris and her father only, Chris didn’t count, John Guthrie
did, but his vote was only one and a hantle few votes the Banff
man got when it came to the counting.
Stuart Gibbon was the third to make try for Kinraddie
manse, and that Sunday when Chris sat down in the kirk and
looked up at him in the pulpit she knew as well as she knew her
own hand that he was to please all of them, though hardly
more than a student he was, with black hair on him and a fine
red face and shoulders strong and well-bulked, for he was a
SUNSET SONG
74
pretty man. And first his voice took them, it was brave and
big like the voice of a bull, and fine and rounded, and he said
the Lord’s Prayer in a way that pleased gentry and simple.
For though he begged to be forgiven his sins as he forgave those
that sinned against him—instead, as was more genteel, crying
to be forgiven his trespasses as he forgave those that trespassed
against him—still he did it with a fine solemnity that made every¬
body that heard right douce and grave-like; and one or two
joined in near the end of the prayer, and that’s a thing gey
seldom done in an Auld Kirk kirk. Next came his sermon, it
was out of the Song of Solomon and well and rare he preached on
it, showing that the Song had more meaning than one. It was
Christ’s description of the beauty and fine comeliness of the
Auld Kirk of Scotland, and as such right reverently must it
be read; and it was a picture of womanly beauty that moulded
itself in the lithe and grace of the Kirk, and as such a perpetual
manual for the women of Scotland that so they might attain
to straight and fine lives in this world and salvation in the next.
And in a minute or so all Kinraddie kirk was listening to him
as though he were promising to pay their taxes at the end of
Martinmas.
For it was fair tickling to hear about things like that read
out from a pulpit, a woman’s breasts and thighs and all the
rest of the things, in that voice like the mooing of a holy bull;
and to know it was decent Scripture with a higher meaning as
well. So every body went home to his Sunday dinner well
pleased with the new minister lad, no more than a student
though he was; and on the Monday Long Rob of the Mill was
fair deaved with tales of the sermon and put two and two
together and said IVell, preaching like that's a fine way of having
your bit pleasure by proxy, right in the stalls of a kirk, 1 prefer
to take mine more private-like. But that was Rob all over, folk
said, a fair caution him and his Ingersoll that could neither
make watches nor sense. And feint the voter it put off from
tramping in to vote for Kinraddie’s last candidate.
So in he went with a thumping majority, the Reverend
PLOUGHING 75
Gibbon, by mid-May he was at the Manse, him and his wife, an
English creature he’d married in Edinburgh. She was young
as himself and bonny enough in a thin kind of way, with a
voice as funny as Ellison’s, near, but different, and big, dark
eyes on her, and so sore in love were they that their servant
quean said they kissed every time he went out a bit walk, the
minister. And one time, coming back from a jaunt and finding
her waiting him, the minister picked up his wife in his arms
and ran up the stairs with her, both cuddling one the other
and kissing, and laughing in each other’s faces with shining
eyes; and into their bedroom they went and closed the door
and didn’t come down for hours, though it was bare the middle
of the afternoon. Maybe that was true and maybe it wasn t
for the servant quean was one that old Mistress Sinclair had
fee’d for the Manse in Gourdon, and before a Gourdon quean
speaks the truth the Bervie burn will run backwards through
the Howe.
Now every minister since Time was decked in Kinraddie
had made a round of the parish when he was inducted. Some
did it quick, some did it slow, the Reverend Gibbon was
among the quick. He came up to Blawearie just after the
dinner hour on a Saturday and met in with John Guthrie
sharpening a hoe in the close, weeds yammered out of Blawearie
soil like bairns from a school at closing time, it was coarse,
coarse land, wet, raw, and red day, father’s temper grew
worse the more he saw of it. So when the minister came on
him and cried out right heartily IVell, yoiill be my neighbour
Guthrie, man? father cocked his red beard at the minister and
glinted at him like an icicle and said Ay, ALISTER Gibbon,
Vll be that. So the minister held out his hand and changed his
tune right quick and said quiet-like You've a fine-kept farm
here, Mr. Guthrie, trig and trim, though I hear you ve sat down
a bare six months. And he smiled a big, sappy smile.
76 SUNSET SONG
So after that they were chief enough, sitting one the other
on a handle on the sharn-barrow right in the middle of the
close, the minister none feared for his brave, black clothes; and
father told him the coarse land it was in Kinraddie, and the
minister said he well believed him, it was only a man from the
North could handle it so well. In a minute or so they were
chief as brothers, father brought him over into the house,
Chris stood in the kitchen and father said jfnd this quean's my
daughter, Chris. The minister smiled at her with his glinting
black eyes and said 1 hear you're right clever, Chrissie, and go up
to the Duncairn College. How do you like it? And Chris
blushed and said Fine, sir, and he asked her what she was to be,
and she told him a teacher, and he said there was no profession
more honourable. Then mother came ben from putting the
twins to sleep and was quiet and friendly, just as she always
was with loon or laird, crowned with gold with her lovely
hair. And she made the minister some tea and he praised it
and said the best tea in his life he’d drunk in Kinraddie, it
was the milk. And father asked whose milk they got at the
Manse and the minister said The Mains^ and father shot out
his beard and said IVell may it he good, it's the best land in the
parish they've a hold of, the dirt^ and the minister said Nnd now
I'll have to be dandering down to the Manse. Come over and see
us some evening, Chrissie, maybe the wife and I'll be able to lend
you some books to help in your studies. And off he went, swack
enough, but no more fleet than father himself who swung along
side him down to where the turnip-park broke off from the
road.
Chris made for the Manse next Monday night, she thought
maybe that would be the best time, but she said nothing to
father, only told mother and mother smiled and said Surely;
far-off she seemed and dreaming to herself as so often in the
last month or so. So Chris put on the best frock that she
used for Sundays, and her tall lacing boots, and prigged out her
hair in front of the glass in the parlour, and went up across the
hill by Blawearie loch, with the night coming over the Gram-
PLOUGHING
77
plans and the snipe crying in their hundreds beyond the loch’s
grey waters—still and grey, as though they couldn’t forget last
summer nor hope for another coming. The Standing Stones
pointed long shadow-shapes into the east, maybe just as they’d
done of an evening two thousand years before when the wild
men climbed the brae and sang their songs in the lithe of those
shadows while the gloaming waited there above the same quiet
hills. And a queer, uncanny feeling came on Chris then, she
looked back half-feared at the Stones and the whiteness of the
loch, and then went hurrying through the park paths till she
came out above kirkyard and Manse. Beyond the road the
Meikle House rose up in its smother of trees, you saw the
broken walls of it, the flagstaff light was shining already, it
would soon be dark.
She unsnecked the door of the kirkyard wall, passing through
to the Manse, the old stones rose up around her silently, not
old when you thought of the Standing Stones of Blawearie
brae but old enough for all that. Some went back to the old,
unkindly times of the Covenanters, one had a skull and crossed
bones and an hour-glass on it and was mossed half over so that
but hardly you could read the daft-like script with its esses like
effs, and it made you shudder. The yews came all about
that place of the oldest stone and Chris going past put out her
hand against it and the low bough of a yew whispered and gave
a low laugh behind her, and touched her hand with a cold,
hairy touch so that a daft-like cry started up on her lips, she
wished she’d gone round by the plain, straightforward road,
instead of this near-cut she’d thought so handy.
So she whistled to herself, hurrying, and just outside the
kirkyard stood the new minister himself, leaning over the
gate looking in among the stones, he saw her before she saw
him and his voice fair startled her. IVell, Chrissie, you’re very
gay^ he said, and she felt ashamed to have him know she whistled
in a kirkyard; and he stared at her strange and queer and seemed
to forget her a minute; and he gave an unco half-laugh and
muttered to himself, but she heard him, One’s enough for one
SUNSET SONG
78
day. Then he seemed to wake up, he mooed out at her Jnd
now you'll be needing a book, no doubt. Well, the Manse is fair in
a mess this evening, spring-cleaning or something like that, but if
you just wait here a minute Til run in and pick you something
light and cheerful.
Off he set, she was left alone among the black trees that
bent over the greyness of the kirkyard. Unendingly the
unseen grasses whispered and rustled above the stones’ dim,
recumbent shapes, and she thought of the dead below those
stones, farmers and ploughmen and their wives, and little
bairns and new-born babes, their bodies turned to skeletons
now so that if you dug in the earth you’d find only their bones,
except the new-buried, and maybe there in the darkness worms
and awful things crawled and festered in flesh grown rotten and
black, and it was a terrifying place. But at last came the
minister, not hurrying at all but just drifting towards her, he
held out a book and said Well, here it is, and 1 hope you'll like it.
She took the book and looked at it in the dying light, its name
was Religio Medici^ and she mastered her shyness and asked
Did you, sir? and the minister stared at her and said, his voice
just even as ever, Oh, like helll and turned about and left her to
go back through the terror of the yews. But they didn’t terrify
at all, climbing home and thinking of that word he used, swearing
it had been and nothing else, should she tell of it to father?
No, that wouldn’t do, a minister was only a man, and he’d
loaned her a book, kind of him though he looked so queer.
And besides, father didn’t know of this errand of hers down
t° the Manse, maybe’d he’d think she was trying to hold in
with gentry and would swear himself. Not that he swore
often, father, she told herself as she hurried across the brae,
and, hurrying, climbed out of the dimness into the last of the
May daylight with the sunset a glow and a glimmer that
danced about her feet, waiting for herj not often, except when
things went clean over him, as that day in the sowing of the
park below Blawearie when first the cart-shaft had broken
and then the hammer had broken and then he’d watched the
PLOUGHING
79
rain come on, and he’d gone nearly mad, raging at Will and Chris
that he’d leather them till they hadn’t enough skin to sit a
threepenny bit on; and at last, fair skite, he’d shaken his fist
at the sky and cried Ay, laugh, you Muckerl
Chris took a bit peep or so in Religio Medici and nearly
yawned her head off with the reading of it, it was better fun
on a spare, slow day to help mother wash the blankets. In the
sun of the red, still weather Jean Guthrie had every bed in
Blawearie cleared and the blankets piled in tubs half-filled with
lukewarm water and soap, and Chris took off her boots and her
stockings and rolled her knickers far up her white legs and
stepped in the grey, lathered folds of blankets and tramped them
up and down. It felt fine with the water gurgling blue and
iridescent up through your toes and getting thicker and thicker;
then into the next tub while mother emptied the first, lovely
work, she felt she could trample blankets forever, only it grew
hot and hot, a red forenoon while they did the washing. So
next time mother was indoors she took off her skirt and then
her petticoat and mother coming out with another blanket
cried God, you've stripped! and gave Chris a slap in the knickers,
friendly-like, and said You'd make a fine lad, Chris quean, and
smiled the blithe way she had and went on with the washing.
But John Guthrie came home from the fields then, him
and Will, and as soon as he saw her father’s face went all
shrivelled up and he cried Get out of that at once, you shameful
limmer, and get on your clothes! And out she got, white and
ashamed, shamed more for father than herself, and Will turned
red and led off the horses, awkward-like, but John Guthrie
went striding across the close to the kitchen and mother and
began to rage at her. What would folk say of the quean if they
saw her sit there, near naked? We'd be the speak and laughing¬
stock of the place. And mother looked at him, sweet and cold,
Ah, well, it wouldn't be the first time you've seen a naked lass
8o SUNSET SONG
yourself; and if your neighbours haven't they must have fathered
their own bairns with their breeks on.
Father had been in a fair stamash at that, he left mother and
went out with his face dead-white, not red, and he didn’t say
another word, he didn’t speak to mother all that evening nor
all the next day. Chris went to her bed that night and thought
of the happening, lying close-up and alone, it had been as though
she saw a caged beast peep from her father’s eyes as he saw her
stand in the tub. Like a fire that burned across the close, it
went on and on as though she still stood there and he glowered
at her. She hid her face below the blankets but she couldn’t
forget, next morning she was able to bear thinking of it no longer,
the house had quietened with the folk gone out, she went to
mother and asked her straight, she’d never asked anything
of the kind before.
And then an awful thing happened, mother’s face went
grey and old as she stopped from her work at the kitchen table,
she went whiter and whiter second on second, Chris near went
out of her mind at the sight. Oh, mother, I didn't mean to vex^
she cried and flung hef arms round mother and held her tight,
seeing her face then, so white and ill-looking it had grown in
the last month. And mother smiled at her at last, putting her
hands on her shoulders. Not you, Chris quean, just life. I
cannot tell you a thing or advise you a thing, my quean. You'll
have to face men for yourself when the time comes, there's none
can stand and help you. And then she said something queerer,
kissing Chris, Mind that for me sometime if I cannot thole it
longer—and stopped and laughed and was blithe again. We're
daft,, the two of us, run out and bring me a pail of water. And
Chris went out with the pail, out and up to the pump in the hot
red weather, and then something came on her, she crept back
soft-footed and there mother stood as she’d left her, white and
lovely and sad, Chris didn’t dare go into her, just stood and looked.
PLOUGHING
81
Something was happening to mother, things were happening
to all of them, nothing ever stayed the same except maybe
this weather and if it went on much longer the Reverend
Colquohoun’s bit jungles would soon be sprouting back across
the parks of the Howe. The weary pleiter of the land and its
life while you waited for rain or thaw! Glad she’d be when
she’d finished her exams and was into Aberdeen University,
getting her B.A. and then a school of her own, the English
Chris, father and his glowering and girning forgotten, she’d
have a brave house of her own and wear what she liked and
have never a man vexed with sight of her, she’d take care of
that.
Or maybe she wouldn’t, queer that she never knew herself
for long, grown up though she was, a woman now, near.
Father said that the salt of the earth were the folk that drove
a straight drill and never looked back, but she was no more
than ploughed land still, the furrows went criss and cross, you
wanted this and you wanted that, books and the fineness of them
no more than an empty gabble sometimes, and then the sharn
and the snapping that sickened you and drove you back to
books 
She turned over on the grass with a jerk when she came
to that troubled thinking. The sunset was painting the loch,
but hot as ever it was, breaking up for one of those nights
when you couldn’t bear a blanket above you and even the
dark was a foul, black blanket. It had died off, the wind,
while she lay and thought, feint the loss was that, but there
was sign of nothing in the place of it, the broom stood up in
the late afternoon, not moving, great faces massed and yellow
like the faces of an army of yellow men, looking down across
Kinraddie, watching for the rain. Mother below would be
needing her help, Dod and Alec back from the school already,
father and Will soon in from the fields.
There somebody was crying her already!
She stood up and shook out her frock and went through
the grass to the tail of the brae, and looked down and saw
82 SUNSET SONG
Dod and Alec far below waving up at her. T hey were crying
her name excitedly, it sounded like the lowing of calves that
had lost their mother, she went slow to tease them till she saw
their faces.
It was then, as she flew down the hill with her own face
white, that the sky crackled behind her, a long flash zig-zagged
across the Grampian peaks, and far across the parks by the hills
she heard the hiss of rain. The drought had broken at last.
II
DRILLING
LYING down when her climb up the cambered brae
j was done, panting deep from the rate she’d come at—
skirt flying and iron-resolute she’d turn back for nothing that
cried or called in all Blawearie—no, not even that whistle of
father’s!—Chris felt the coarse grass crackle up beneath her
into a fine quiet couch. Neck and shoulders and hips and
knees she relaxed, her long brown arms quivered by her side as
the muscles slacked away, the day drowsed down an aureal
light through the long brown lashes that drooped on her cheeks.
As the gnomons of a giant dial the shadows of the Standing
Stones crept into the east, snipe called and called 
Just as the last time she’d climbed to the loch: and when
had that been? She opened her eyes and thought, and tired
from that and closed down her eyes again and gave a queer
laugh. The June of last year it had been, the day when mother
had poisoned herself and the twins.
So long as that and so near as that, you’d thought of the
hours and days as a dark, cold pit you’d never escape. But
you’d escaped, the black damp went out of the sunshine and
the world went on, the white faces and whispering ceased from
the pit, you’d never be the same again, but the world went on
and you went with it. It was not mother only that died with
the twins, something died in your heart and went down with
her to lie in Kinraddie kirkyard—the child in your heart died
then, the bairn that believed the hills were made for its play,
every road set fair with its warning posts, hands ready to snatch
you back from the brink of danger when the play grew over¬
rough. That died, and the Chris of the books and the dreams
died with it, or you folded them up in their paper of tissue and laid
them away by the dark, quiet corpse that was your childhood.
83
84 SUNSET SONG
So Mistress Munro of the Cuddiestoun told her that awful
night she came over the rain-soaked parks of Blawearie and
laid out the body of mother, the bodies of the twins that had
died so quiet in their crib. She nipped round the rooms right
quick and pert and uncaring, the black-eyed futret, snapping
this order and that, it was her that terrified Dod and Alec
from their crying, drove father and Will out tending the
beasts. And quick and cool and cold-handed she worked,
peeking over at Chris with her rat-like face. Ton'll be leaving the
College now. Til warrant, education's dirt and you're better
clear of it. You'll find little time for dreaming and dirt when
you're keeping the house at Blawearie.
And Chris in her pit, dazed and dull-eyed, said nothing,
she minded later; and some other than herself went searching
and seeking out cloths and clothes. Then Mistress Munro
washed down the body that was mother’s and put it in a night¬
gown, her best, the one with blue ribbons on it that she hadn’t
worn for many a year; and fair she made her and sweet to look
at, the tears came at last when you saw her so, hot tears wrung
from your eyes like drops of blood. But they ended quick,
you would die if you wept like that for long, in place of tears a
long wail clamoured endless, unanswered inside your head Oh,
mother, mother, why did you do it?
And not until days later did Chris hear why, for they tried
to keep it from her and the boys, but it all came out at the
inquest, mother had poisoned herself, her and the twins, because
she was pregnant again and afraid with a fear dreadful and
calm and clear-eyed. So she had killed herself while of unsound
mind, had mother, kind-eyed and sweet, remembering those
Springs of Kildrummie last of all things remembered, it may
be, and the rooks that cried across the upland parks of Don
far down beyond the tunnels of the years.
DRILLING 85
A month later Dod and Alec went back to school and as they
left to go home that night first one scholar cried after them
and others took it up Daftie, daftie! Whose mother was a
daftie? They ran for Blawearie and came stumbling into the
house weeping and weeping, father went fair mad at the sight
of them and skelped them both, but skelping or not they
wouldn’t go back to the school next day.
And then Will spoke up, he cared not a fig for father now.
All in a night it seemed the knowledge had come on him
father wouldn’t dare strike him again, he bought an old bicycle
and would ride off in an evening as he pleased, his face cold
and hard when he caught the glint of father’s eye. Of a morn¬
ing John Guthrie grumbled and girned at him, crying Where
do you wander each night like a tink? But Will would say never
a word, except once when John Guthrie made at him and then
he swung round and whispered Take care. And at that father
stopped and drew back, Chris watched them witn angry eyes,
angry and frightened in a breath as now when Will spoke up
for his brothers. }
Why should they go back? I wouldn't. Oh, and you needn t
glovoer at me. You take damn good care you never go near a mart
or a market yourself nowadays—I’ve to do all your dirty work
for you!
Father louped to his feet at that, Will was on his as well,
they stood with fists clenched in the kitchen and Dod and Alec
stopped from their greeting and stared and stared. But Chris
thrust the table in between the two, she made out she wanted
it there for baking; and they dropped their fists and John
Guthrie swore, but soft; and Will reddened up and looked
foolish.
But father that night, he said never a word to the rest of them
in Blawearie, he was over-proud for that, wrote off to his sister
Janet in Auchterless and asked that she take Dod ana Alec
in her care and give them an Aberdeen schooling. In a week
she was down from the North, Auntie Janet and her man,
Uncle Tam he was, big and well-bulked and brave, and his
86
SUNSET SONG
watch-chain had rows and rows of wee medals on it he’d gotten
for playing quoits. And they were fell kind, the two of them,
Alec and Dod were daft with delight when they heard of the
Auchterless plan. But Auntie and Uncle had never a bairn of
their own and soon made plain if the boys went with them it
would be for aye, they wanted to adopt the pair of them.
Father sneered and thrust out his beard at that So you'd like
to steal the flesh of my body from me? and Auntie Janet nodded,
right eye to eye, Aye, John, just that, we've never a wean of our
own, though God knows it's not for ivant of the trying; and father
said III blood breeds ill; and Auntie said Ay, it'll be long ere I have
to kill myself because my man beds me like a breeding sow; and
father said You dirty bitch.
Chris stuck the dirl of the row till her head near burst and
then ran out of the kitchen, through the close into the cornyard,
where Will was prowling about. He’d heard the noise and he
laughed at them, but his eyes were angry as his arm went
round her. Never heed the dirty old devils, one's bad as the
ether, father, auntie, or that midden that's covered with its wee
tin medals. Come ojf to the park with me and we'll bring home the
kye.
Deep in clover the cows as they came on them, Chris and
\fyill; and they went in no hurry at all, unanxious to be back
in Blawearie. And Will seemed angry and gentle and kind
all at once. Don't let them worry you, Chris, don't let father
make a damned slave of you, as he d like to do. EAe've our own
lives to lead. And she said What else can I do but bide at home
now?
He said he didn t know, but he d be libbed and pole-axed
and gutted if he did for long, soon as he’d saved the silver he
was off to Canada, a man was soon his own master there.
Chris listened to that with eyes wide opened, she caught at
the hope of it and forgot to smack at the kye that loitered and
boxed and galumphed in their cloverful-foolishness up the
brae. Oh, Will, and you could send for me as your housekeeper!
He turned a dull red and smacked at the kye and Chris sighed
DRILLING 87
and the hope went out, he’d no need to answer Ay, maybe,
bat maybe it would hardly suit you.
So then she knew for sure he’d a lass somewhere in Drum-
lithie, it was with her he planned to share a bed and a steading
in the couthy lands of Canada.
And when they got back to Blawearie they found the row
ended, father’d given in to his sister Janet, ill the grace though
he did it with. In three days time but three of them were
sitting to meat at the kitchen table, Chris listened for days for
voices of folk that were dead or gone, both far enough from
Blawearie. But even that lost strangeness in time, the harvest
drew on, she went out to the park to help with it, lush and
heavy enough it had sprung and yellowed with the suns and
rains of the last two months.
He’d no binder, father, wouldn’t hear of the things, but he’d
brought an old reaper from Echt and with that they cut the
corn; though Will swore he’d be the fool of Kinraddie seen
driving a thing like that. Father laughed at him over his
beard, like a spitting cat, If Kinraddie's laughing can make
you a bigger fool than nature made you it'll be a miracle; and
don't fret the sark from your dowp, my mannie, I'LL do the
driving. And though Will muttered at that he gave in all
the same, for every harvest there came something queer and
terrible on father, you couldn’t handle the thing with a name,
it was as if he grew stronger and crueller then, ripe and strong
with the strength of the corn, he’d be fleeter than ever and his
face filled out, and they’d hear him come up from the parks,
astride the broad back of Bess, singing hymns, these were the
only things that he ever sang, singing with a queer, keen
shrillness that brought the sweat in the palms of your hands.
Now in the park below Blawearie, steading and house,
the best crop, and that was the ley, was the first they cut, a
great swither of a crop with straw you could hardly break and
88
SUNSET SONG
twist into bands for sheaves. Sore work Chris found it to keep
her stretch of each bout cleared for the reaper’s coming, the
weather cool and grey though it was. But a sun was behind
the greyness and sometimes when you raised your head from
the sheaves you’d see a beam of light on the travel far over the
parks of Upperhill or lazing across the moor or dancing a-top
the Cuddiestoun stocks, a beam from the hot, grey haze of that
sky that watched and waited above the sweat of the harvesting
Howe.
First ere the cutting in the ley began there’d been roads
to clear all round the corn, wide bouts that father scythed
himself, he swore that the scythe would yet come back to its
own when the binders and reapers rotted in rust and folk
bred the old breed again. But it’s time was past or was yet to
come, the scythe’s, out the reaper was driven and yoked,
Chris followed down at the tail of it. The best of weather for
harvest, folk said, it was ill to cut in a swither of heat; and so
still was the air by morn and noon it reminded you of the days
in Spring, you’d hear the skirl of the blades ring down the Howe
for mile on mile, the singing of Long Rob of the Mill, the
Cuddiestoun creatures swearing at Tony as he stood and
gowked at the stocks. Then Blawearie’s reaper clanged in
through the gates with Bess and Clyde at the pole, and the
blades flashed and brightened like the teeth of a beast and
snarled in a famished freedom. And then John Guthrie cried
Get up! and swung the horses down the bout, and the hungry
snarl changed to a deep, clogged growling as the corn was
driven on the teeth by the swinging reaper flails; and down the
bout, steady and fine, sped the reaper, clean-cutting from top
to bottom, with never a straggling straw as on other farms,
John Guthrie saw to that.
But feint the time had you for glowering at rig or reaper,
soon as the horses were off and the flail drove the first sheaf
from the tail-board Chris had pounced on that sheaf and gathered
and bound it and flung it aside before you could say Glenbervie!
and had run to the next and twisted its band, and gathered and
DRILLING
89
bound and bound and gathered with her hands like a mist
below her eyes, so quick they were. Midway the bout Will
met with her, working up from the foot, and flicking the sweat
from his face. And just as they straightened and stretched and
looked up to the head of the park the clong, clong of the empty
reaper would change to the snarling engaging whirr as father
guided the horses to the cutting again. Still the sun smouldered
behind its mists and out by KinnefF the fog-horn moaned all
hours, you felt like moaning like that yourself long ere the
day was out and your back near cracked and broke with the
strain of the bending.
But in three days time the ley was cut, the yavil glowed
yellow across the dykes and they moved to that without stop.
And then suddenly the mists cleared up and the fog-horn
stopped from its droning, it came on real blistering weather of
heat, but hardly you’d bear to touch on the wood of the reaper
shaft when you loosed the horses, so hot it grew. Kinraddie
gasped and then bent to its chaving again, this heat wouldn’t
last, the rain was due, God help the crops that waited cutting
then.
The second day of the yavil cutting a tink climbed up the
Blawearie road from the turnpike and cried to John Guthrie
for work, and father said Maybe, maybe. Let's see the work
that you've in you first, and the tink said Ay, fine that. And he
off with his coat and took the middle of the bout, and was up
it in a jiffy, gathering and binding to the manner born, you might
say, and giving Chris a bit smile when he met with her. So,
coming down the next bout father cried to the tink that he d
take him on for a day or so, if the weather held; and Chris
could get up to the house and see to the supper—no idling,
quean, mind that. He was a black-like, gypsy childe, the tink,
father wouldn’t have him into the kitchen for meat, the creature
might be all lice; and he wouldn’t have him sleep in the house.
So Chris made him a shake-down out in the barn, he said
he was real content with that. But when she carried him his
supper over to the barn the first night she felt shamed for him
SUNSET SONG
90
suddenly, and told him she’d have had him eat in the house if it
hadn’t been father. And he said Don't let that fash you, lass,
I’m as little anxious for his company as he is for mine. Forbye,
he's only a Kinraddie clown] Chris felt her face flame at that,
it just showed you there was no good doing kindness to tinks,
but she made out she hadn’t heard and turned back to go over
the close. Then it was the tink put out his arm, round her
legs before she could move, almost he pulled her down on the
hay beside him. You've never lain with a man yet, lass, 1 can
see, and that's a sore waste of hot blood like yours. So mind I'm
here if you want me, I've deflowered more queans than I've years
to my name and sent none of them empty away. He loosed her
then, laughing low, she couldn’t do anything but stare and stare
at him, sick and not angry, something turned in her stomach
and her knees felt weak. The tink put out his hand and patted
her leg again, Mind, if you want me I'll be here, and Chris
shook her head, she felt too sick to speak, and slipped out of the
barn and crossed the close and washed and washed at her hands
and face with hot water till father lowered his paper and asked
Have you gone clean daft?
But up in her room that night, the room that was hers and
hers only now, Will slept where his brothers had slept, she saw
a great moon come over the Grampians as she undressed for
bed. She opened the window then, she liked to sleep with it
open, and it was as though the night had been waiting for that,
a waft of the autumn wind blew in, it was warm and cool and it
blew in her face with a smell like the smell of late clover and
the smell of dung and the smell of the stubble fields all com¬
mingled. She leant there breathing it, watching the moon
with the hills below it but higher than Blawearie, Kinraddie
slept like a place in a picture-book, drifting long shadows that
danced a petronella across the night-stilled parks. And without
beginning or reason a strange ache came in her, in her breasts,
so that they tingled, and in her throat, and below her heart,
and she heard her heart beating, and for a minute the sound of
the blood beating through her own head. And she thought
DRILLING
91
of the tink lying there in the barn and how easy it would be
to steal down the stairs and across the close, dense black in its
shadows, to the barn.
But it was only for a second she thought of that, daftly,
then laughed at herself, cool and trim and trig, and closed the
window, shutting out the smells of the night, and slowly took
off her clothes, looking at herself in the long glass that had
once stood in mother’s room. She was growing up limber
and sweet, not bonny, perhaps, her cheek-bones were over high
and her nose over short for that, but her eyes clear and deep and
brown, brown, deep and clear as the Denburn flow, and her
hair was red and was brown by turns, spun fine as a spider’s web,
wild, wonderful hair. So she saw herself and her teeth clean-
cut and even, a white gleam in that grave brown stillness of
face John Guthrie’s blood had bequeathed to her. And below
face and neck now her clothes were off was the glimmer of
shoulders and breast and there her skin was like satin, it tickled
her touching herself. Below the tilt of her left breast was a
dimple, she saw it and bent to look at it and the moonlight
ran down her back, so queer the moonlight she felt the running
of that beam along her back. And she straightened as the
moonlight grew and looked at the rest of herself, and thought
herself sweet and cool and fit for that lover who would some day
come and kiss her and hold her, so.
And Chris saw the brown glimmer of her face grow sweet
and scared as she thought of that—how they’d lie together, in a
room with moonlight, and she’d be kind to him, kind and kind,
giving him all and everything, and he’d sleep with his head
here on her breast or they’d lie far into the mornings whispering
one to the other, they’d have so much to tell! And maybe
that third and last Chris would find voice at last for the whimsies
that filled her eyes, and tell of rain on the roof at night, the
terror and the splendour of it across the long slate roofs ; and the
years that faded and fell, dissolved as a breath, before those third
clear eyes; and mother’s face, lying dead; and the Standing
Stones up there night after night and day after day by the loch
SUNSET SONG
92
of Blawearie, how around them there gathered things that wept
and laughed and lived again in the hours before the dawn, till
far below the cocks began to crow in Kinraddie and day had come
again. And all that he’d believe, more than so often she believed
herself, not laugh at, holding and kissing her, so. And faith!
no more than a corpse he’d hold if she didn’t get into her bed¬
gown and into her bed, you may dream of a lad till you’re frozen
as a stone, but he’ll want you warmer than that.
So that was the harvest madness that came on Chris, mild
enough it had been, she fell fast asleep in the middle of it.
But it scored her mind as a long drill scores the crumbling
sods of a brown, still May, it left neither pleasure nor pain, but
she’d know that track all the days of her life, and its dark, long
sweep across the long waiting field. Binder and reaper clattered
and wheeped through the brittle weather that held the Howe,
soon the weather might break and the stooking was far behind
in Blawearie. But Will would have nothing to do with night¬
time work, he laughed in John Guthrie’s face at the mention
of it and jumped on his bicycle and rode for Drumlithie evening
on evening. Father would wander out by the biggings and stare
at the parks and then come glinting into the house and glower
at Chris, Get off to your hed tvhen you’ve milked the kye; and she
made little protest at that, she was tired enough at the end of
a day to nearly sleep in the straw of the byre.
But one night she didn’t dare sleep, for up in the room he’d
shared with mother she heard John Guthrie get out of bed
and go slow padding about in his stocking soles, like a great
cat padding there, a beast that sniffed and planned and smelled
at the night. And once he came soft down the cowering creak
of the. stairs and stopped by her door, and she held her breath,
near sick with fright, though what was there to be feared of?
And she heard his breath come quick and gasping, and the scuffle
of his hand on the sneck of the door; and then that stopped,
DRILLING
93
he must have gone up or down, the house was quiet, but she
didn’t dare sleep again till Will came clattering home in the
still, small hours.
For the harvest madness was out in Kinraddie if Chris had
been quick to master hers. And though a lad and a quean
might think their ongoings known to none but themselves,
they’d soon be sore mistaken, you might hide with your lass
on the top of Ben Nevis and have your bit pleasure there, but
ten to one when you got up to go home there’d be Mistress
Munro or some claik of her kidney, near sniggering herself
daft with delight at your shame. First it was Sarah Sinclair
and the foreman at Upperhill, Ewan Tavendale he was, that
the speak rose round: they’d been seen coming out of the larch
wood above the Upperhill, that wood where the daftie had
trapped Maggie Jean, and what had they been doing there on
their lone? It was Alec Mutch of Bridge End that met them,
him taking a dander over the moor to the smithy with a broken
binder-blade for mending. The two hardly saw him at first,
Miss Sinclair’s face was an unco sight, raddled with blushing
it was like the leg of a tuberculous rabbit when you skinned the
beast, Ewan slouched along at her side, hang-dog he looked as
though it was his mother he’d bedded with, said Alec, and
maybe that’s how it had felt. Alec cried a Good night! to
the pair, they near jumped out of their skins, and went on
with the story to the smithy beyond the moor. And from
there you may well be sure it went through Kinraddie fast
enough, the smith could tell lies faster than he could shoe
horses; and he was fell champion at that.
Truth or no, Chae Strachan got hold of the story and went
over to Upperhill to see Ewan Tavendale and ask in a friendly
way what he meant to do about Sarah, his sister-in-law, the
daft old trollop. And maybe he’d have settled things canty
and fine but that he came on Ewan at the wrong bit minute,
he was sitting outside the bothy door with the rest of the bothy
billies; and when Chae came up there rose a bit snigger, that
fair roused Chae, he stopped bang in front of them and asked
SUNSET SONG
94
what the hell they were laughing at? And Sam Gourlay said
Little, damned little, looking Chae from head to foot; and Ewan
said he felt more in the way of weeping than laughing at such a
sight, and he spoke in a slow, impudent way that fair roused
Chae’s dander to the boiling point. So, being a fell impatient
man, and skilly with his hands, he took Sam Gourlay a clout
in the lug that couped him down in the stour and then before
you could wink he and Ewan were at it, ding-dong, like a pair
of tinks, all round the Upperhill close; and Upprums came
running in his leggings, the creature, fair scandalised, but he
got a shove in the guts that couped him right down in the
greip where once his son Jock had been so mischieved; and that
was the end of his interfering. In a minute or so it was plain
that Ewan, fight though he might, was like to have the worst
of the sett, he was no match for that madman Chae. So the
rest of the bothy lads up and went for Chae; and when he got
back to Peesie’s Knapp he’d hardly a stitch on his back. But
Ewan, the coarse, dour brute, had a cut in the face that stopped
his mouth for a while, and a black eye big enough to sole the
boots on Cuddiestoun’s meikle feet, folk said.
And faith! if it shouldn’t be Cuddiestoun himself that began
the next story, running into the middle of it himself, you might
say, going up to the Manse to get a bit signature on some
paper or other for his lawyer man. But Mr. Gibbon they
told him wasn’t at home, Mistress Gibbon herself came out to
tell him that, kind and fine as she was, but he didn’t like her,
the English dirt. So, fair disgruntled he turned from the door,
maybe the poor brute’s big sweating feet were fell sore already
with a hot day’s stocking. But just down at the end of the
Manse’s garden, where the yews bent thick above the lush
grass their boughs that had sheltered the lost childe Wallace in
the days before the coarse English ran him to earth and took him
to London and there hanged and libbed him and hewed his
body in four to hang on the gates of Scotland—there, in that
grass in the half-dark was a rustling and squealing as though a
drove of young pigs was rootling there. And Cuddiestoun
DRILLING
95
stopped and picked up a handful of gravel from the minister’s
walk and flung it into the grass and cried Jway with you! for
maybe it was dogs in heat that were chaving there, big collies
are none so chancy to meet when the creatures are set for
mating. But instead of a collie up out of the grass rose the
Gourdon quean, her that old Mistress Sinclair had fee’d for
the Manse; and Munro saw her face then with a glazed look
on it, like the face of a pig below the knife of its killer; and she
brushed the hair from her face, daft-like, and went trailing
past Munro, without a word from her, as though she walked
half-asleep. But past him, going into the Manse, she began
to whistle, and laughed a loud scraich of a laugh—as though
she’d tried right desperately for something, and won, and
beaten all the world in the winning of it. So it seemed to
Cuddiestoun, and faith! you couldn’t put that down to imagina¬
tion, for he’d never had any, the ugly stock; so fair queer it
must well have been, he stood and stared after her, dumb-
foundered-like, and was just turning at last, to tramp down to
the road, when he found Mr. Gibbon himself at his elbow.
It had grown fell dark by then but not so dark that Cuddie¬
stoun couldn’t see the Minister was without a hat and was
breathing in great deep paichs as though he’d come from the
running of a race. And he barked out, Well, speak up, man,
what do you ivant? Munro was sore took aback at hearing a
fine childe like the minister snap at him that way. So he just
said IVell, well, Mr. Gibbon, you've surely been running a bit
race? and then wished he hadn’t, for the minister went by him
without another word, and then flung over his shoulder If
you want me, come to-morrow.
And into the Manse he went and banged the door with a
clash that fair made Cuddiestoun loup in his meikle boots.
So there was nothing for him but to taik away home to Mistress
Munro, and faith! you might well believe the story lost nothing
in the telling she gave it, and soon every soul in Kinraddie had
a different version, Long Rob’s was cried to John Guthrie as
he went by the Mill. He never spread scandal about folk,
96 SUNSET SONG
Long Rob—only horses, was the joke they told of him—but
maybe he classed ministers lower than them.
It seemed like enough to John Guthrie, the story, though
he’d no coarse notions like Rob and his Ingersoll, the world
was rolling fast to a hell of riches and the old slave days come
back again, ministers went with it and whored with the rest.
For the bitterness had grown and eaten away into the heart
of him in his year at Blawearie. So coarse the land proved in
the turn of the seasons he’d fair been staggered, the crops had
fared none so bad this once, but he saw in a normal year the
corn would come hardly at all on the long, stiff slopes of the
dour red clay. Now also it grew plain to him here as never in
Echt that the day of the crofter was fell near finished, put by,
the day of folk like himself and Chae and Cuddiestoun, Pooty
and Long Rob of the Mill, the last of the farming folk that
wrung their living from the land with their own bare hands.
Sign of the times he saw Jean Guthrie’s killing of herself to
shame him and make of his name a by-word in the mouths
of his neighbours, sign of a time when women would take their
own lives or flaunt their harlotries as they pleased, with the
country-folk climbing on silver, the few, back in the pit, the
many; and a darkness down on the land he loved better than
his soul or God.
And next it was Will himself that started the claiks of
Kinraddie, him and his doings in Drumlithie. But Chris met
the story ere it reached Kinraddie, she met it in Drumlithie
itself, in the yard of the gardener Galt. The tink had been
gone from Blawearie that day she set out with her basket, no
sign of the rain showed even then, the heat held still as the
white, dull heat from a furnace door. Down in the turnpike
the motor-cars went whipping by as she set her feet for Mon¬
dynes, there where the battle was fought in the days long syne.
Below the bridge went the wash of the burn west to the Bervie
DRILLING
97
Water, bairns cried and splashed in the bridge’s lithe, they went
naked there when they dared, she saw them glance white and
startled in the shelter of the stones. Soon the heat grew such that
she took off her hat and swung that in her hand and so climbed
the road, and there to the left rose Drumlithie at last, some
called it Skite to torment the folk and they’d get fell angry at
that in Skite. No more than a rickle of houses it was, white
with sunshine below its steeple that made of Skite the laugh
of the Howe, for feint the kirk was near it. Folk said for a joke
that every time it came on to rain the Drumlithie folk ran out
and took in their steeple, that proud they were of the thing,
it came from the weaver days of the village when damn the
clock was there in the place and its tolling told the hour.
So that was Skite, it rose out of its dusts and its ancient
smells, the berries hung ripe in the yard of the gardener Galt
and he looked at Chris in a queer kind of way when he heard
her name. Syne he began a sly hinting and joking as he weighed
her berries, a great sumph of a man the creature was, fair
running with creash in that hot weather, you near melted your¬
self as you looked at him. jl7td how's Will? he asked, We
haven't seen much of him here of late—faith, the roses are fair
fading from Mollie Douglas' cheeks. And Chris said Oh?
right stiff-like, and then Jnd I'll have two pounds of your black¬
berries too. So he packed her that, hinting and gleying like a
jokesome fat pig, she could have taken him a clout in the face,
but didn’t, it would only stir up more scandal, there seemed
enough and to spare of that. Whatever could Will have
been doing; and what had he done to his quean that he’d
left her?
Right glad she was to be out from the stink of Skite with
the road of Mondynes in front of her. Then she heard the
bell of a bicycle far down the road behind and drew to one
side, but the thing didn’t pass, it slowed down and somebody
called out, timid-like, Jre you Will Guthrie's sister? Chris
turned and saw her then, knew her at once Will’s quean,
young and white-faced and fair, and heard her own voice near
SUNSET SONG
98
troubled as the eyes that looked at her as she answered, Tes;
and you'll be Mollie Douglas?
The face of the girl blushed slow at that, slow and sweet,
and she looked away back at the steeple of Skite as though she
feared the thing spied on them: and then suddenly, near crying,
she was asking Chris to tell Will he must ride over and see her
again, come again that night, she couldn’t bear it longer—
she didn’t care were she shameless or not, she couldn’t! And
then she seemed to read the question in Chris’s eyes, the blood
drained off from her face in a minute and then came back, it
seemed to Chris she must be blushing all over under her clothes,
right down to the soles of her feet as she herself sometimes
blushed. But she cried Oh, you think THJT, like all of them,
but it isn't true! Staring at her surprised and shamed Chris
found she just couldn’t speak up and deny that THAT was
indeed what she’d thought, what else was a body to think?
Then she found Mollie Douglas’ face bent close to hers, sweet
and troubled and shamed as her own. And Mollie tried to
look at her and then looked away, blushing as though she’d
sink into the ground, such a fool of herself she was making.
It's not that at all, only I love him so sore 1 can't live if I don't see
mm
So there they were in the middle of the road, so shamed to
look one at the other they’d nothing to say; and then a gig
came spanking along from the station, at sight of it Mollie
jumped on her bicycle again, and wheeled it about, and looked
over her shoulder with a smile you couldn’t forget, and stam¬
mered and cried Ta-ta!
But Chris couldn’t forget that look in her eyes, she went
home with that in her mind and at supper that night couldn’t
take her own eyes from Will. She saw him then for the first
time in years, almost a man, with his fair hair waving across
his head and spreading to his cheeks in a rust-red down, like
the down on a new-hatched chick; and his eyes blue and dark
as a quean’s, and kind when they looked at her, sulky when they
turned on father. Not that they turned there often, there was
DRILLING
99
never a word between Will and father unless they were clean
compelled to it; like dumb folk working and eating together
that needed no speech for hate.
Father ate his supper and climbed down the hill with his gun,
Will loitered from door to window, whistling and idle, till he
saw right across the Howe, up on Drumtochty hills, something
that rose and coiled ash-grey and then darker against the autumn
sky, a great shape like a snake there in the quiet of the evening
air, with its tail a glimmer that wasn’t the sunset, burning up
red in the lithe of the hills. Whin-burning, he called to Chris,
they're burning the whins up Drumtochty way, come on up the
moor and have a try at ours. They're damned sore in the need of
it. But I've my jelly to make, you gowk! Oh, to hell
with your jelly, we'll soon be jelly and bones in a grave ourselves,
come on!
So she went, they gathered great piles of old papers for
twisting in torches, and made up the brae to the moor. They
sat down on the grass and breathed a while, Kinraddie below
them all cut and close-stooked, waiting the coming of the night,
the lowe of the Bervie lights as the glow of another whin¬
burning there by the sea. They they spread out to left and right
below the moor-gate, Chris held to the left and ran through the
whins, stopping to kick holes down close to the ground wherever
a meikle bush rose up. Then far round the knowe Will cried
he was starting, she saw him a long way off with the sky behind
him, and called back Jll right! and knelt by the biggest bush
she’d struck; and kindled her torch and set its light to the crack¬
ling dryness of the grass.
It whoomed in an instant, the whin, she set her torch into
it and ran to the next and fired that: and so in and out, back¬
wards and forwards worked round the brae, you’d to speed
quick as your legs could carry you to fire the frontward bushes
when those behind raged out with their flames and smoke at
your hair. In the dry, quiet evening the fire crackled up and
spread and roared through the bushes and caught on the grass
and crept and smoked on quick, searching trains to bushes
100
SUNSET SONG
unlit, and fired them, half you thought those questing tongues
alive and malignant as they lapped through the grass. By
the time Chris met with Will at the moor-gate there spread
before them a park like an upland sea on fire, sweeping the
hill, now the sun had quite gone and the great red roaring
beast of a thing hunted and postured unchallenged, all Kin-
raddie was lit with its glare.
Will was black as a nigger, his eyebrows scorched, he pulled
Chris down to rest on the grass. By God, I hope the fire doesn't
catch on the fence up there, else old Guthrie will be casting me out
of Blawearie for bringing his grey hairs in sorrow to the grave!
He said that sneering-like, mocking at father’s Aberdeen¬
shire voice, and Chris stirred half-angry, and sighed, and then
asked IVhat would you do if he did put you out? and Will said Go.
 Would you get a fee? Damn the fears of that.
But he didn’t sound over-confident, Chris knew right well
that he’d find it none so easy if it came to the push, with the
harvest over now in the Howe. And then, for she’d clean
forgot her in the excitement of the fires, she minded the quean
Mollie Douglas—it was as though she saw her white face
by Will’s in the firelit dark. I met Mollie Douglas in Drum-
lithie to-day, she asked me to ask you to go down and see her.
He sat stock-still, he mightn’t have heard, she pushed at his
elbow Willi And at that he shook off her hand, Oh, I hear.
What's the good? I can't have a quean like other folk—1 haven't
even a fee. Maybe she doesn't want your fee, just you. Will,
they're saying things about her and you in Drumlithie-Galt
and coarse tinks like that. Saying things? What things? 
What they aye say—that she's ivith a baby to you and you're
biding away from her notv. Galt said that? Hinted
at it, but he'll do more than hint when he's not speaking to a
sister of yours.
She’d never heard him swear as he did then, jumping to his
feet with his fists tight-clenched. That about Mollie—they
said that, the orra swine! I'll mash that bloody Galt's head
till his own mother won't know it! But Chris told him that
DRILLING
ioi
wouldn’t help much, folk would just snigger and say there was
something, sure, in the story of Mollie’s condition. Then
what am 1 to do? Will asked, raging still, and Chris blushed and
said IVait. Do you love her, Will? But she might have known
well enough how he’d take that question, maybe he blushed
himself in the lithe of the dark, he threw down the paper
torches he’d saved and muttered Fm away to Drumlithie, and
was running down the hill before she could stop him.
Maybe, as he told Chris later, he went with no other inten¬
tion than seeing his Mollie herself. But as luck would have it,
who should he near run down with his bicycle outside the
Drumlithie Hotel but Galt himself, the great creash, gey
drunk, and Alec Mutch in his company. And Alec cried,
Fine night. Will, but Galt cried Don't take her out to-night.
Will lad, the grass is overwet for lying on. Will stopped and
jumped off and left his bicycle lying in the road and went up
to Galt—Speaking to me? And the fat creash, panting like a
sow in litter and sweating all down the great face of him,
hiccoughed drunken-like Who else? Well take that then,
Will said and let drive at the great belly of Galt; but Mutch
caught his arm and cried Young Guthrie, you've fair gone daft,
the man's old enough to he your father. Will said if he’d a father
like that he’d kill him and then go and drown himself; and
tried to break away from Mutch and get at the Galt creash
again. But Galt was right unkeen for that, in a minute he’d
turned, for all his fat, and made off like a hare up the Drum¬
lithie lanes, real swack with his girth and all, and was out of
sight in a second.
Well, sure you may be there were claiks enough in Skite
for Mutch to get all the story and drive home with it to the
Bridge End. In a day or so it was all about the place, Will
was the laughing-stock of Kinraddie. Father heard it first
from the postman, who waved him down to the road to tell
him, and soon’s he heard it John Guthrie went back to Will
stooking in the yavil field and said What's this that I hear about
you and some orra tink bitch in Drum’.ithie?
i02 SUNSET SONG
Now Will had been in a fair fine temper all that day from
seeing his Mollie again: and she’d made him swear he’d not
fly in a rage or go making a fool of himself if he heard their
coarse hinting at her. So he just went on with the stooking
and said JVhat the devil are you blithering about? Father shot
out his beard and cried Answer my question, Willi and Will
said Tut a question with sense in it, then. How am I to know
what you've been hearing? Vm not a thought-reader, and
father said Damn't to hell, you coarse brute, am I to stand your
lip as well as your whoring every night? Is't true there's a tink
called Mollie Douglas that's with a bairn by you? and Will said
If you call Mollie Douglas a tink again, I'll knock the damned
teeth down the throat of you, father though you be.
And they stopped their stooking, glaring at each other, and
father made to strike at Will but Will caught his arm and cried
Mind! So father lowered his arm, white as a ghost he’d turned,
and went on with the stooking, Will stared at him, white him¬
self, and then went on with the stooking as well. And that
might well have been the end of it so far as Blawearie went;
but that evening they heard a clatter outside in the close and
there was the minister’s bicycle and Mr. Gibbon himself new
off it; and into the kitchen he came and said Good evening,
Chris, good evening Mr. Guthrie. Can I have a word with Will?
So Chris was sent to bring Will from the byre where he
bedded the kye, he came back with her grey in the gills, there
sat the minister and father, solemn as two owls in the loft of a
barn, it was plain they’d been taking the matter through hand
together. Father said Chris, go to your room^ and there was
nothing else for her but go; and what happened after that she
was never sure, for Will wouldn’t tell her, but she heard the
sound of the three of them, all speaking at once and Will getting
in a rage: and then suddenly the kitchen-door banged and there
was Will striding across the close to the barn where he stored
his bicycle. Mr. Gibbon’s voice cried after him, angry-like,
with a boom, Just a minute. Will, where are you going? and
Will looked back and said You're so anxious I should lie with my
DRILLING 103
lass and get her with a bairn that I'm off to try and oblige you.
And he wheeled his bicycle out by the honeysuckle hedge and
pedalled away down the road and didn’t come back to Blawearie
till one o’clock in the morning.
Chris hadn’t been able to sleep, she lay listening for him,
and when she heard him come up the stairs she cried his name
in a whisper Willi He stopped uncertain outside her door
and then lifted the sneck and came in soft-footed and sat on
the side of her bed. Chris raised herself on an elbow and peered
at him, there was little light in the room and no moon that night
though the sky was white with stars, and Will no more than a
shadow hunched on her bedside there, with a whitish blotch for
a face. And Chris whispered Will, I heard what you said
when you went away. But you didnt do it? and Will gave a low
laugh, he wasn’t in a rage, It wouldn't be for want of prigging
by half the holy muckers in Kinraddie if I had. But you needn t be
feared for that, Vd as soon cut my own throat as do hurt to HER.
So the minister’s interfering brought no harm, faith! he’d
more need to roust round his own bit byre with a clart if Cud-
diestoun’s story of the Gourdon quean were true. And soon
enough after that a worse scandal went on the rounds about him,
folk shook their heads and made out they were fell affronted:
all but Long Rob of the Mill, and he swore B’God, it was the
best he’d heard since Nebuchadnezzar went out to grass!
And the way of it was that in early November a bit daughter
was born to the Manse, and the Reverend Gibbon was proud
as punch, he preached a grand sermon that Sunday, For unto us
a child is born; and it was so affecting that old Mistress Sinclair
of the Netherhill broke down and cried in her hanky about it}
but Long Rob of the Mill, when he heard that, said: She
shouldn't take whisky sweeties to the kirk with her. Everybody
else was fell impressed, folk who’d been a bit off the Manse
for months agreed he’d maybe his faults, the Gibbon childe,
SUNSET SONG
104
but who hadn’t these days? and feint the many could wag a pow
like that in a Mearns pulpit. But damn’t! if the next day he
didn’t go off and spoil the whole thing, the Monday it was, he
was just setting out for the train to Aberdeen, Mr. Gibbon,
when the nurse cried out to him he might bring a small chamber¬
pot for the girlie, none in the Manse was suitable. He gave a
bit blush, the big, curly bull, and said Uery well, nurse, in a bull¬
like voice, and off to the station he went, it was Fordoun, and
left his bicycle there and caught his train.
About what happened after that some told one thing and
some another and some told both together. But it seems that
fair early in the day in Aberdeen the Reverend Gibbon fell
in with some friends of his; and they’d have it that a dram there
must be to celebrate the occasion. So off the whole lot of them
went to a public house and had their dram and syne another
on top of that to keep the first one down, syne two-three more
to keep the wind out, it was blov/y weather on the edge of
winter. Some said that midway the carouse Mr. Gibbon had
got up to make a bit prayer: and one of the barmaids had
laughed at him and he chased her out of the bar up to her room
and finished his prayer with her there. But you couldn’t believe
every lie you heard.
Sometime late in the afternoon he minded his train, the min¬
ister, and hired a cab and bought the bit chamber, and caught
the train by the skin of the teeth. No sooner was he down in
his carriage than, fell exhausted, he went fast asleep and blithely
snored his way south through many a mile, right dead to the
world he was.
Most of the story till then was maybe but guessing, ill-
natured guessing at that, but the porter at the Bridge of Dunn,
a good twenty miles south from Fordoun, swore to the rest.
He was just banging the doors of the old 7.30 when out of a
carriage window came a head, like a bull’s head out of the
straw, he’d fair a turn, had the porter, when he saw the flat hat
that topped it. Is this Fordoun? the meikle head mooed, and the
porter said No, man, if s a damned long way from being that.
DRILLING 105
So he opened the door for Kinraddie’s minister, and Mr.
Gibbon came stumbling out and rubbed his eyes, and the
porter pointed to a platform where he d find a slow train back
to Fordoun. This platform lay over a little bridge and the
minister set out to cross : and the first few steps he managed
fell well, but near the top he began to sway and missed his
footing and flung out his hands. The next thing that the
porter saw was the chamber-pot, burst from its paper, rolling
down the steps of the bridge with the minister s hat in competi¬
tion and the minister thundering behind.
And then, when the porter had picked him up and was
dusting him, the Reverend Gibbon broke down and sobbed
on the porter’s shoulder what a bloody place was Kinraddie!
And how’d the porter like to live ’tween a brier bush and a rotten
kailyard in the lee of a house with green shutters? And the
minister sobbed some more about the shutters, and he said
you couldn’t lie down a minute with a quean in Kinraddie
but that some half-witted clod-hopping crofter began to throw
stones at you, they’d feint the respect for God or kirk or minister
down in Kinraddie. And the porter said it was awful the way
the world went, he’d thought of resigning from the railway
himself and taking to preaching, but now he wouldn’t.
Syne he helped the minister over to an up-going train and
went home to his wife and told her the tale; and she told it
to her sister from Auchenblae: and she told it to her man who
told it to Mutch; and so the whole thing came out. And
next time he rode down by the Peesie’s Knapp, the minister,
a head shot out of a hedge behind him, it was wee Wat Strachan,
and cried loud as you like Any chambers to-day?
Not that they’d much to shout for that winter themselves,
the Strachans; folk said it was easy to see why Chae was so
strong on Rich and Poor being Equal: he was sore in need of
the sharing out to start ere he went clean broke himself. Maybe
io6
SUNSET SONG
old Sinclair or the wife were tight with the silver that year,
but early as December Chae had to sell his corn, he brought
the first threshing of the season down in Kinraddie. John
Guthrie and Will were off at the keek of dawn when they saw
the smoke rise from the engines, Chris followed an hour later
to help Chae’s wife with the dinner and things. And faith!
broke he might be but he wasn’t mean, Chae, when the folk
came trampling in to eat there was broth and beef and chicken
and oat-cakes, champion cakes they made at the Knapp; and
loaf and jelly and dumpling with sugar and milk; and if any
soul were that gutsy he wanted more he could hold to the
turnip-field, said Chae.
The first three men to come in Chris hardly saw, so busied
she was pouring their broth for them. Syne, setting the
plates, she saw Alec Mutch, his great lugs like red clouts hung
out to dry: and he cried Ay, Chris! and began to sup as though
he hadn’t seen food for a fortnight. Beside him was Munro
of the Cuddiestoun, he was eating like a colie ta’en off its chain,
Chae’s thresh was a spree to the pair of them. Then more
trampling and scraping came from the door, folk came drifting
in two-three at a time, Chris over-busied to notice their
faces, but some watched her and gave a bit smile and
Cuddiestoun cried to father, Losh, man, she's fair an expert
getting, the daughter. The kitchen's more her style than the
College.
Some folk at the tables laughed out at that, the ill-nature
grinned from the faces of them, and suddenly Chris hated the
lot, the English Chris came back in her skin a minute, she saw
them the yokels and clowns everlasting, dull-brained and crude.
Alec Mutch took up the card from Cuddiestoun then and began
on education and the speak ran round the tables. Most said
it was a coarse thing, learning, just teaching your children a
lot of damned nonsense that put them above themselves,
they’d turn round and give you their lip as soon as look at you.
But Chae was sitting down himself by then and he wouldn’t
have that. Damn't man, you're clean wrong to think that.
DRILLING
107
Education's the thing the working man wants to put him up
level with the Rich. And Long Rob of the Mill said I'd have
thought a bit balance in the bank would do that. But for once
he seemed right in agreement with Chae—the more education
the more of sense and the less of kirks and ministers. Cuddiestoun
and Mutch were fair shocked at that, Cuddiestoun cried out
Well, well, we'll hear nothing coarse of religion^ as though he
didn’t want to hear anything more about it and was giving
out orders. But Long Rob wasn’t a bit took aback, the long
rangy childe, he just cocked an eye at Cuddiestoun and cried
Well, well, Munro, we'll turn to the mentally afflicted in general,
not just in particular. How's that foreman of yours getting on,
Tony? Is he still keeping up with his shorthand? There was a
snicker at that, you may well be sure, and Cuddiestoun closed
up quick enough, here and there folk had another bit laugh
and said Long Rob was an ill hand to counter. And Chris
thought of her clowns and yokels, and was shamed as she
thought—Chae and Long Rob they were, the poorest folk in
Kinraddie!
At a quarter past six the mill loosed off again from its bumble¬
bee hum, the threshers came trooping down to the tables again.
More dumpling there was, cut up for tea, and bread and butter
and scones and baps from the grocer, and rhubarb and black¬
berry jam, and syrup for them that preferred it, some folk liked
to live on dirt out of tins. Most of the mill folk sat down in a
right fine tune, well they might, and loosed out their waist¬
coats. Will was near last to come in from the close, a long,
dark young childe came in at his heels, Chris hadn’t set eyes
on him before, nor he on her by the way he glowered. The
two of them stood about, lost-like and gowked, looking for
seats in the crowded kitchen till Mistress Strachan cried over
to Chris Will you lay them places ben in the room?
So she did and took them their supper there, Will looked up
and cried Hello, Chris, how have you gotten on? and Chris said
Fine, how've you? Will laughed Well, God, my back would feel
a damned sight easier if I'd spent the day in my bed. Eh,
io8
SUNSET SONG
Tcvendclc? And then he minded his manners. This is
Ewan Tavendale from Upprums, Chris.
So that was who; Chris felt queer as he raised his head
and held out his hand, and she felt the blood come in her face and
saw it come dark in his. He looked over young for the coarse,
dour brute folk said he was, like a wild cat, strong and quick,
she half-liked his face and half-hated it, it could surely never
have been him that did THAT in the larch wood of Upperhill?
But then if you could read every childe’s nature in the way he
wiped his nose, said Long Rob of the Mill, it would be a fine
and easy world to go through.
So she paid him no more heed and was out of the Knapp a
minute later and ran nearly all the way up to Blawearie to see
to the milking there. The wind was still up but the frost was
crackling below her feet as she ran, the brae rose cold and
uncanny with Blawearie’s biggings uncertain shadows high up
in the coid mirk there. She felt tingling and blithe from her
run, she said to herself if she’d only the time she’d go out
every winter night and run up over hills with frost and the night
star coming in the sky.
But that night as Blawearie went to its bed Will opened
his bedroom door and cried Father! Chris! See that light
down there in the Knapp!
Chris was over at her window then in a minute, barefooted
site ran and peered by the shadow of the great beech tree.
And there was a light right plain enough, more than a light, a
lowe that crackled to yellow and red and rose in the wind that
had come with the night. Peesie’s Knapp would be all in a blaze
in a minute, Chris knew; and then father came tearing down
the stairs, crying to Will to get on his clothes and follow him,
Chris was to bide at home, mind that. They heard him open the
front door and go out and go running right fleetly down the
night of Eiawearie hill, Chris cried to Will Wait for me, Tm
DRILLING
109
coming as well, and he cried back All right, but for Christ's
sake hurry!
She couldn’t find her stockings then, she was trembling
and daft; and when found they were, her corsets were missing,
slipped down the back of the kist they had, Will came knocking
at the door Come on! Light a match and come in, she called
and in he came, knotting his muffleiyand lighted a match and
looked at her in her knickers and vest, reaching out for the
new-seen corsets. Leave the damn things where they are,
you're fine, you should never have been born a quean. She was
into her skirt by then, and said 1 wish 1 hadn't, and pulled on
her boots and half-laced them, and ran down the stairs after
Will and put on her coat at the foot. In a minute they were
out in the dimness then, under the starlight, it was rimed with
frost, and running like mad down to the lowe that now rose
like a beacon against the whole of Kinraddie. God, I hope
they've wakened! Will panted, for every soul knew the Strachans
w'ent straight to bed at the chap of eight. Running, they could
see by then it was the barn itself that had taken alight, the
straw sow seemed burned to a cinder already, and the barn had
caught and maybe the house. And all over Kinraddie lights
were springing up, as they ran Chris lifted her eyes and saw
Cuddiestoun’s blink and shine bright down through the dark.
And faith, quick though they were, it was father that saved
Chae Strachan’s folk. He was first down at the blazing Knapp,
John Guthrie; and he ran round the biggings and saw the flames
lapping and lowing at the kitchen end of the house, not a soul
about or trying to stop them though the noise was fair awful,
the crackling and burning, and the winter air bright with
flying sticks and straw. He banged at the door and cried
Damn'i to hell do you want to be roasted? and when he got no
answer he smashed in the window, they heard him then and
the bairns scraiched, there was never such a lot for sleep, folk
said, Chae’d have slept himself out of this world and into hell
in his own firewood if John Guthrie hadn’t roused him then.
But out he came stumbling at last, he’d only his breeks on;
I 10
SUNSET SONG
and he took a keek at John Guthrie and another at the fire
and cried out Kirsty, we're all to hell! and off he tore to the
byre.
But half-way across the close as he ran the barn swithered
and roared and fell, right in front of him, and he’d to run back,
there was no way then of getting at the byre. By then Long
Rob of the Mill came in about, he’d run over the fields, louping
dykes like a hare, and his lungs were panting like bellows, he
was clean winded. He it was that helped Mrs. Strachan with
the bairns and such clothes as they could drag out to the road
while Chae and John Guthrie tried to get at the byre from
another angle: but that was no good, the place was already roar¬
ing alight. For a while there was only the snarling of the fire
eating in to the wooden couplings, the rattle of falling slates
through the old charred beams, and then, the first sound that
Will and Chris heard as they came panting down the road, a
scream that was awful, a scream that made them think one of
the Strachans was trapped down there. And at that sound
Chae covered his ears and cried Oh God, that's old Clytie,
Clytie was his little horse, his sholtie, and she screamed and
screamed, terrible and terrible, Chris ran back to the house
trying not to hear and to help poor Kirsty Strachan, snivelling
and weeping, and the bairns laughing and dancing about as
though they were at a picnic, and Long Rob of the Mill
smoking his pipe as cool as you please, there was surely enough
smell and smoke without that? But pipe and all he dived in
and out of the house and saved chairs and dishes and baskets of
eggs; and Mistress Strachan cried Oh, my sampler! and in Rob
tore and rived that off a blazing wall, a meikle worsted thing in a
cracked glass case that Mistress Strachan had made as a bairn
at school.
And then came the clip-clop of a gig, it was Ellison down
from the Mains, him and two of his men, and God! he might
be little more than a windy Irish brute but he’d sense for all
that, the gig was crammed with ropes and pails, Ellison strung
out the folk and took charge, the pails went swinging from hand
DRILLING
111
to hand over the close from the well to the childe that stood
nearest the fire, and he pelted the fire with water. But feint the
much good that did for a while and then there was an awful
sound from the byre, the lowing of the cattle with the flames
among them, and Long Rob of the Mill cried out I can’t
stand it! and took a pick-axe and ran round the back of the close;
and there he found the sow was nothing but a black heap then,
hardly burning at all, and he cried back the news and himself
louped through the smoke and came at the back wall of the
byre and started to smash it in fast as he could. Chae followed
and John Guthrie, and the three of them worked like madmen
there, Ellison’s men splashed water down on the roof above them
till suddenly the wall gave way before them and Chae’s oldest
cow stuck out its head and said Moo! right in Chae’s face.
The three scrambled through into the byre then, that was fell
dangerous, the rafters were crumbling and falling all about
the stalls, and it was half-dark there in spite of the flames.
But they loosed another cow and two stirks before the fire
drove them out, the others they had to leave, their lowing was
fair demented and the smell of their burning sickening in your
throat, it was nearly a quarter of an hour later before the roof
fell in and killed the cattle. Long Rob of the Mill sat down by
the side of the road and was suddenly as sick as could be, and
he said By God, I never want to smell roasting beef again.
So that was the burning of the Peesie’s Knapp, there was
a great throng of folk in about by then, the Netherhill folk
and the Upperhill, and Cuddiestoun, and Alec Mutch with his
great lugs lit up by the fire, some had come on bicycles and some
had run across half Kinraddie and two had brought their gigs.
But there was little to do now but stand and glower at the
fire and its mischief, Ellison drove off to the Mains with
Mistress Strachan and the bairns, there for the night they were
bedded. The cattle he’d saved from the byre Chae drove to
Netherhill, folk began to put on their jackets again, it was little
use waiting for anything else, they’d away home to their beds.
Chris could see nothing of either father or Will, she turned
I 12
SUNSET SONG
to make for Blawearie then. Outside the radiance of the
burning Knapp it was hard and cold, starless but clear, as though
the steel of the ground glowed faintly of itself; beyond rose the
darkness as a black wall, still and opaque. On the verge of its
embrasure it was that she nearly ran into two men tramping
back along the road, she hardly saw them till she was on them.
She cried Oh, Fm sorry, and one of them laughed and said some¬
thing to the other, next instant before she knew what was
happening that other had her in his arms, rough and strong, and
had kissed her, he had a face with a soft, grained skin, it was the
first time a man had ever kissed her like that, dark and frighten¬
ing and terrible in the winter road. The other stood by, Chris,
paralysed, heard him breathing and knew he was laughing,
and a far crackle rose from the last of the lowe in the burning
biggings. Then she came to herself and kicked the man that
held her, young he was with his soft, grained face, kicked him
hard with her knee and then brought her nails down across his
face. As he swore You bitch! and let go of her she kicked him
again, with her foot this time, and he swore again, but the other
said Hist! Here's somebody coming, and the two of them began
to run, the cowardly tinks, it was father and Will on the road
behind them.
And when Chris told Will of what happened, next morning
it was that she told him when father wasn’t by, he looked at her
queerly, half-laughing, half-solemn, and made out he thought
nothing of the happening, all ploughmen were like that, aye
ready for fun. But it hadn’t seemed fun to her, dead earnest
rather; and lying that night in her bed between the cold sheets,
curled up so that she might rub her white toes to some warmth
and ease, it was in her memory like being chased and bitten by
a beast, but worse and with something else in it, as though
half she’d liked the beast and the biting and the smell of that
sleeve around her neck and that soft, unshaven face against her
own. Sweet breath he had had anyway, she thought, and
laughed to herself, that was some consolation, the tink. And
then she fell asleep and dreamed of him, an awful dream that
DRILLING 113
made her blush even while she knew she was dreaming, she
was glad when the morning came and was sane and cool and
herself again.
But that dream came to her often while the winter wore on
through Kinraddie, a winter that brought hardly any snow
till New Year’s Eve and then brought plenty, darkening the
sky with its white cascading. It was funny that darkening the
blind fall and wheep of the snow should bring, like the loosening
of a feather pillow above the hills, night came as early as three
in the afternoon. They redd up the beasts early that evening,
father and Will, feeding them well with turnips and straw
and hot treacle poured on the strawj and then they came in to
their supper and had it and sat close round the fire while Chris
made a fine dumpling for New Year’s Day. None of them
spoke for long, listening to that whoom and blatter on the
window-panes, and the clap-clap-clap of some loose slate far
up on the roof, till father whispered and looked at them, his
whisper hurt worse than a shout, God, I wonder why Jean
left us?
Chris cried then, making no sound, she looked at Will and
saw him with his face red and shamed, all three of them thinking
of mother, her that was by them so kind and friendly and
quick that last New Year, so cold and quiet and forgotten
now with the little dead twins in the kirkyard of Kinraddie,
piling black with the driving of the snow it would be under the
rustle and swing and creak of the yews. And Will stared at
father, his face was blind with pity, once he made to speak,
but couldn’t, always they’d hated one the other so much and
they’d feel shamed if they spoke in friendship now.
So father took up his paper again and at ten o’clock Chris
went out to milk the kye and Will went with her over the close,
carrying the lantern, the flame of it leapt and starred and
quivered and hesitated in the drive of the snow. In the light
H
114 SUNSET SONG
of it, like a rain of arrows they saw the coming of the storm
that night swept down from the Grampian heuchs, thick and
strong it was in Blawearie, but high in the real hills a smoring,
straight wall must be sweeping the dark, blinding down against
the lone huts of the shepherds and the faces of lost tinks tramping
through it looking for lights the snow’d smothered long before.
Chris was shaking, but not with cold, and inside the byre she
leant on a stall and Will said God, you look awful, what is’t?
And she shook herself and said Nothing. Why haven't you gone
to see Mollie to-night?
He said he was going next day, wasn’t that enough, he’d be
a corpse long ere he reached Drumlithie to-night—listen to
the wind, it'll blow the damn place down on our lugs in a minute!
And the byre shook, between the lulls it seemed to set its
breath to rise and take from the hill-side into the air, there was
such straining and creaking. Not that the calves or the stirks
paid heed, they slept and snored in their stalls with never a
care, there were worse things in the world than being a beast.
Back in the house it seemed to Chris she’d but hardly sieved
the milk when the great clock ben in the parlour sent peal after
peal out dirling through the place. Will looked at Chris and the
two at father, and John Guthrie was just raising up his head
from his paper, but if he’d been to wish them a happy New
Year or not they were never to know, for right at that minute
there came a brisk chap at the door and somebody lifted the
sneck and stamped the snow from his feet and banged the
door behind him.
And there he was, Long Rob of the Mill, muffled in a great
grey cravat and with leggings up to the knees, covered and
frosted from head to foot in the snow, he cried Happy New
Tear to you all! Am I the first? And John Guthrie was up
on his feet, Ay, man, you're fairly that, out of that coat of yours!
They stripped off the coat between them, faith! Rob’s mouser
was nearly frozen, but he said it was fine and laughed, and
waited the glass of toddy father brought him and cried Tour
health! And just as it went down his throat there came a new
DRILLING
ii5
knock, damn’t if it wasn’t Chae Strachan, he’d had more than
a drink already and he cried Happy New Tear, Vm the first foot
in am 1 not? And he made to kiss Chris, she wouldn’t have
minded, laughing, but he slithered and couped on the floor,
Long Rob peered down at him and cried out, shocked-like,
God Almighty, Chae, you can't sleep there!
So he was hoisted into a chair and was better in a minute
when he’d had another drink; and he began to tell what a hell
of a life it was he’d to live in Netherhill now, the old mistress
grew worse with the years, she’d near girn the jaws from her
face if the Strachan bairns so much as gave a bit howl or had a
bit fight—fell unreasoning that, no bairns there were but
fought like tinks. And Long Rob said Ay, that was true, as
it said in the hymn ’twas dog’s delight to bark and bite, and
faith! the average human could out-dog any cur that ever was
pupped. Now, horses were different, you’d hardly ever meet
a horse that was naturally a quarteller, a coarse horse was a beast
they’d broken in badly. He’d once had a horse—a three-four
years come Martinmas that would have been, or no! man, it
was only two—that he bought up in Auchinblae at the fall of
the year, a big roan, coarse as hell, they said, and he’d nearly
kicked the guts out of an old man there. Well, Rob had bor¬
rowed a bridle and tried to ride home the beast to the Mill,
and twice in the first mile the horse threw him off with a snort
and stood still, just laughing, as Rob picked himself up from the
stour. But Rob just said to himself, All right, mymannie, we'll
see who'll laugh last: and when he’d got that horse home he
tied him up in his stall and gave him such a hammering, by
God he nearly kicked down the stable. Every night for a week
he was walloped like that, and damn’t man! in the shortest
while he’d quietened down and turned into a real good worker,
near human he was, that horse, he’d turn at the end of a rig
as it drew to eleven o’clock and begin to nicker and neigh, he
knew the time fine. Ay, a canty beast that, he’d turned, and
sold at a profit in a year or so, it just showed you what a handless
man did with a horse, for Rob had heard that the beast’s new
SUNSET SONG
116
owner had let the horse clean go over him. A sound bit
leathering and a pinch of kindness was the only way to cure a
coarse horse.
Chae hiccupped and said Damn't ay, man, maybe you’re
right. It’s a pity old Sinclair never thought of treating his fish¬
wife like that, she’d deave a door-nail with her whines and plaints,
the thrown old Tory bitch. And Long Rob said there were worse
folk than Tories and Chae said if there were they kept them¬
selves damn close hidden, if he’d his way he’d have all Tories
nailed up in barrels full of spikes and rolled down the side of the
Grampians; and Long Rob said there would be a gey boom in
the barrel trade then, the most of Kinraddie would be inside
the barrels; and Chae said Jnd a damned good riddance of rub¬
bish, too.
They were both heated up with the toddy then, and raising
their voices, but father just said, cool-like, that he was a
Liberal himself; and what did they think of this bye-election
coming off in the February? Chae said it would make no
difference who got in, one tink robber was bad as another,
Tory as Liberal; damn’t if he understood why Blawearie
should be taken in by those Liberals. Long Rob said Why
don’t you stand as the Socialist man yourself, Chae? and winked
at Chris, but Chae took it real serious and said maybe he’d
do that yet once Peesie’s Knapp was builded again. And
Long Rob said Why wait for that? You’re allowing your opinions
to eat their heads off in idleness, like a horse in a stall in winter.
Losh, man, but they’re queer beasts, horses. There’s my sholtie,
Kate But Chae said Och, away to hell with your horses,
Rob. Damn’t, if you want a canty kind of beast there’s nothing
like a camel, and maybe he’d have just begun to tell them about
the camel if he hadn’t fallen off his chair then, nearly into the
fire he went, and John Guthrie smiled at him over his beard,
as though he’d really rather cut his throat than smile. And
then Will and Long Rob helped Chae to his feet, Long Rob
gave a laugh and said it was time they went dandering back to
their beds, he’d see Chae far as the Netherhill. The storm
DRILLING
117
had cleared a bit by then, it was bright starlight Chris saw
looking after the figures of the two from her bedroom window—
not very steady, either of them, with shrouded Kinraddie
lying below and a smudge there, faint and dark, far down in the
night, that was the burned-out steading of Peesie’s Knapp.
And there the smudge glimmered through many a week,
they didn’t start on Peesie’s new steading till well in the Febru¬
ary. But faith! there was clatter enough of tongues round the
place right from the night of the fire onwards. All kinds of
folk came down and poked in the ash with their walking-
sticks, the police and the Cruelty came from Stonehaven; and
the factor came, he was seldom seen unless there was money
in question; and insurance creatures buzzed down from
Aberdeen like a swarm of fleas, their humming and hawing
and gabbling were the speak of all Kinraddie. Soon all kinds
of stories flew up and down the Howe, some said the fire had
been lighted by Chae himself, a Drumlithie billy riding by the
Knapp late that night of the fire had seen Chae with a box of
spunks in his hand, coming from the lighting of the straw sow,
sure; for soon as he saw the billy on the bicycle back Chae
had jumped to the lithe again. Others said the fire had been
set by the folk of Netherhill, their only chance of recovering
the silver they’d loaned to Chae. But that was just a plain lie,
like the others, Chris thought, Chae’d have never cried for his
burning sholtie like that if he’d meant it to burn for insurance.
But stories or no, they couldn’t shake Chae, he was paid his
claims up to the hilt, folk said he’d made two-three hundred
pounds on the business, he’d be less keen now for Equality.
But faith! if he’d won queer silver queerly, he’d lost feint the
queer notion in the winning of it. Just as the building of the
new bit Knapp began so did the bye-election, the old member
had died in London of drink, poor brute, folk said when they
cut his corpse open it fair gushed out with whisky. Ah well, he
n8 SUNSET SONG
was dead then, him and his whisky, and though he’d maybe
been a good enough childe to represent the shire, feint the thing
had the shire ever seen of him except at election times. Now
there came a young Tory gent in the field, called Rose he was,
an Englishman with a funny bit squeak of a voice, like a bairn
that s wet its breeks. But the Liberal was an oldish creature
from Glasgow, fell rich he was, folk said, with as many ships
to his name as others had fields. And real Radical he was,
with everybody’s money but his own, and he said he’d support
the Insurance and to Hell with the House of Lords, Fate for the
Scottish Thistle and not for the English Rose.
But the Tory said the House of Lords had aye been defenders
of the Common People, only he didn’t say aye, his English was
a real drawback; and it was at the meeting where he said that,
that Chae Strachan up and asked if it wasn’t true that his own
uncle was a lord? And the Lory said and Chae said that
maybe that lord would be glad to see him in Parliament but
there was a greater Lord who heard when the Tories took the
name of poor folk in vain. T. he God of old Scotland there
was, aye fighting on the side of the people since the days of
old John Knox, and He would yet bring to an end the day of
wealth and waster throughout the world, liberty and equality and
fraternity were coming though all the damned lordies in the
House of Lords should pawn their bit coronets and throw their
whores back in the streets and raise private armies to fight the
common folk with their savings.
But then the stewards made at Chae, he hadn’t near finished,
and an awful stamash broke out in the hall; for though most
of the folk had been laughing at Chae they weren’t to see him
mishandled by an English tink and the coarse fisher brutes he’d
hired from Gourdon; to keep folk from asking him questions.
So when the first steward laid hands on Chae, John Guthrie,
who was sitting near, cried Ay, man, who'll you be? And the
fisher swore You keep quiet as well, and father rose and took him
a belt in the face, and the fisher s nose bled like the Don in
spate, and somebody put out a leg and tripped him up and that
DRILLING 119
was the end of his stewarding. And when the other steward
made to come to his help Long Rob of the Mill said Away
home to your stinking fish! and took him by the lug and ran
him out of the hall and kicked him into the grass outside.
Then everybody was speaking at once, Mr. Gibbon was the
Tory lad’s chairman and he called out Can't you give us fair
play, Charles Strachan? But Chae’s blood was up, strong for
the Kirk though he was in a way he clean forgot who he
spoke to—Come outside a minute, my mannie, and I'll fair-play
you! The minister wasn’t such a fool as that, though, he said
that the meeting was closed, fair useless it was to go on; and
he said that Chae was a demagogue and Chae said that he was
a liar, folk cried out Wheest, wheest! at that and begun to go
home. The Tory childe got hantle few votes in the end,
Chae boasted it was his help put in the old Liberal stock: and
God knows if he thought that fine he was easily pleased, they
never saw the creature again in Kinraddie.
But that was the last time father struck a man, striking in
cold anger and cold blood as was the way of him. Folk said he
was an unchancy childe to set in a rage; but his next rage mis-
chieved himself, not others. For a while up into the New
Year, April and the turnip-time, things at Blawearie went
fair and smooth, Will saying no more than his say at plate
or park, never countering father, hardly he looked at him
even; and father maybe thought to rule the roost as he d done
before when Will was no more than a boy that cowered when
he heard that sharp voice raised, frightened and beaten and
lying through nights with his sore wealed body in the arms of
Chris. But Chris, knowing none of his plannings, guessed
right well something new it was kept Will quiet, so quiet day
on day, yet if you looked at him sudden you’d more likely than
not seeing him smiling to himself, lovely the face that he
smiled with, brown and clean, and his eyes were kind and
120 SUNSET SONG
clear and the hair grew down on his head in a bonny mop, Will
took after mother with that flame of rusty gold that was hers.
Ah well, he kept to his whistling and his secret smiling,
and every night after loosening and suppering was done, off
uown the road on his old bit bicycle he’d go, you’d hear through
the evening stillness nothing but the sound of the old machine
whirring down Blawearie road, and the weet-weet of the peewits
flying twilit over Kinraddie, wheeling and circling there in the
dark, daft creatures that made their nests in this rig and that
and would come back next day and find them robbed or smo¬
thered away. So for hundreds of years they’d done, the peewits,
said Long Rob of the Mill, and hadn’t learned the sense of the
thing even yet; and if you were to take that as a sample of the
Divine Intelligence that had allotted a fitting amount of brain
to each creature’s needs then all you could suppose was that the
Divine had more than a spite against the peesie.
Chris heard him say that one day she looked in at the Mill
to ask when a sack of bruised corn, left there by Will, would
be ready. But there on the bench outside the Mill, in the shade
from tne hot Spring weather, sat Rob and Chae and Mutch
of Bridge End, all guzzling beer from long bottles they were,
Rob more bent on bruising their arguments than on bruising
Blawearie’s corn. Peewits were flying round the Mill fell
thick, peewits and crows that nested in the pines above the Mill,
and the birds it was had begun the argument. Chris waited
for a while, pleased enough with the shade and rest, hearkening
to Long Rob make a fool of God. But Alec Mutch wagged his
meikle lugs, Mo, man, you're fair wrong there. And man, Roh,
you ll burn in hell for that, you know. Chae was half on his
side and half wasn’t, he said Damn the fears, that's nothing
but an old wife's gabble for fearing the bairns. But Something
there IS up there, Rob man, there's no denying that. If I thought
there wasn't I'd out and cut my throat this minute. Then the
three of them sighted Chris and Rob got up, the long, rangy
childe with the glinting eyes, and cried Is't about the bruised
corn, Chris? Tell Will I'll do it to-night.
DRILLING
121
But Will had unyoked and made off to Drumlithie, his
usual gait, when Chris got home, and father was up on the moor
with his gun, you heard the bang of the shots come now and then.
Chris had a great baking to do that night, both father and Will
would eat oat-cakes and scones for a wager, bought bread from
the vans soon scunnered them sore. Warm work it was when
you’d heaped a great fire and the girdle glowed below, you’d
nearly to strip in line weather if you weren’t to sweat yourself
sick. Chris got out of most things but a vest and a petticoat,
she was all alone and could do as she pleased, it was fine and
free and she baked with a will.
She was lifting the last cake, browned and good and twice
cross cut, when she knew that somebody watched her from the
door of the kitchen, and she looked, it was Ewan Tavendale,
him she hadn’t seen since the day of the thresh at Peesie’s
Knapp. He was standing against the jamb, long and dark
with his glowering eyes, but he reddened when she looked,
not half as much as she did herself, she could feel the red warm
blushing come through her skin from tip to toe; such a look he's
taking, she thought, it's a pity I'm wearing a thing and he can't
study the blush to its end.
But he just said Hello, is Will about? and Chris said No, in
Drumlithie I think, and they stood and glowered like a couple
of gowks, Chris saw his eyes queer and soft and shy, the neck
of his shirt had fallen apart, below it the skin was white as new
milk, frothed white it looked, and a drop of sweat stood there
where the brown of his tanning and the white of his real skin
met. And than Chris suddenly knew something and blushed
again, sharp and silly, she couldn’t stop, she’d minded the night
of the lire at Peesie’s Knapp and the man that had kissed her
on the homeward road, Ewan Tavendale it had been, no other,
shameless and coarse.
He was blushing himself again by then, they looked at each
other in a white, queer daze, Chris wondered in a kind of a
panic if he knew what she knew at last, half-praying she was he
wouldn’t speak of it when he began to move off from the door,
122
SUNSET SONG
still red, stepping softly, like father, like a limber, soft-stepping
cat. fNell, l was hoping I’d see him in case he should leave us
sudden-like.
She stared at him all awake, that kissing on the winter road
forgotten. Leave? IVho said Will was leaving? Oh,
1 heard he was trying for a job in Aberdeen, maybe it's a lie.
Tell him I called in about. Ta-ta.
She called Ta-ta, Ewan> after him as he crossed the close,
he half-turned round and smiled at her, quick and dark like
a cat again, Ta-ta, Chris. And she stood looking after him a
long while, not thinking, smiling, till the smell of a burn¬
ing cake roused her to run, just like the English creature
Alfred.
And next morning she said to Will after breakfast, casual¬
like, but her heart in her throat, Eivan Tavendale was down to
see you last night, he thought you'd be leaving Blawearie soon.
And Will took it cool and quiet, Did he? God, they'd haver
the breeks from a Highlandman's haunches, the gossipers of Kin-
raddie. Tavendale down to see me? More likely he was down
to take a bit keek at you, Chris lass. So look after yourself, for
he's Highland and coarse.
In July it came to the hay-time, and John Guthrie looked
at Will and said he was going to have down the hay with a
scythe this year, not spoil the bit stuff with a mower. Fair
plain to Chris he expected Will to fly in a rage at that and
say he wasn’t to chave and sweat in the forking of rig after
rig when a mower would clear Blawearie’s park in a day or
two at the most. But Will just said All right and went on
with his porridge, and went out to the field in the tail of father,
a fork on his shoulder and whistling happy as a lark, so that
father turned round and snapped Hold your damned wheeber,
you'll need your breath for the bout. Even at that Will laughed,
as a man at a girning bairn, right off they were worse friends
than even the year before. But all that time Will was making
his plans and on the morning of the August’s last Saturday,
Chris aye remembered that morning with its red sun and the
DRILLING
123
singing of the North Sea over the Howe, that morning he said
to father I’m off to Aberdeen to-day.
Father said never a word, he went on with his porridge and
finished it, he mightn’t have heard Will speak, he lighted his
pipe and stepped out of the house, fleet as ever he went, and
began coling the hayfield in front of the house; Will could
see him then and be shamed of himself and his idle jaunting.
But Will wasn’t ashamed, he looked after father with a sneer,
The old fool thinks he can frighten me stiff and said something
else Chris didn’t catch, syne looked at her suddenly, his eyes
bright and his lips moving, Chris—Lord, I wish you were coming
as well!
She stared at that amazed, pleased as well. What, up to
Aberdeen? I’d like it fine but I can’t. Hurry and dress, else
you’ll miss your train.
So he went and dressed, fell slow-like he seemed at the busi¬
ness, she thought, the morning and a jaunt in front of him.
She went to the foot of the stairs and cried up to ask if he were
having a sleep before he set out? And instead of answering her
back with a jest and a fleer he laughed a shaky laugh and called
out All right, he’d soon be down. And when he came she saw
him in his Sunday suit, with his new boots shining, he’d on a
new hat that suited him fine. Well, will I do? he asked and
Chris said You look fair brave, and he said Havers! and picked
up his waterproof, Well, ta-ta, Chris; and suddenly turned
round to her and she saw his face red and strange and he kissed
her, they hadn’t kissed since they were children lying in a bed
together on a frosty night. She wiped her mouth, feeling
shamed and pleased, and pushed him away, he tried to speak,
and couldn’t, and said Oh, to hell! and turned and ran out of
the door, she saw him go down the Blawearie road fast as he
could walk, looking up at the hills he was with the sun on
them and the slow fog rising off the Howe, jerking his head
this way and that, fast though he walked, but he didn’t once
look in father’s direction nor father at him. Syne she heard
him whistling bonny and clear, Up in the Morning it was,
124
SUNSET SONG
they’d used that for a signal in the days when they went the
school-road together, and down on the turnpike edge he looked
round and stood still, and waved his hand, he knew she was
watching. Then a queer kind of pain came into her throat,
her eyes smarted and she told herself she was daft, Will was only
off for the day, he’d be back at night.
But Will didn’t come back that night, he didn’t come back
the next day, he came back never again to John Guthrie’s
Kinraddie. For up in Aberdeen he was wed to his Mollie
Douglas, he’d altered his birth certificate for that; and the
earth might have opened and swallowed them up after that,
it seemed not a soul in Aberdeen had seen them go. So when
father went into Aberdeen on the track of the two there wasn’t
a trace to be found, he went to the police and raged at them,
but they only laughed—had he lain with the quean himself,
maybe, that so mad he was with this son of his?
So father came home, fair bursting with rage, but that didn’t
help. And ten days went by before they heard of the couple
again, it came in a letter Will sent to Chris at Blawearie; and
it told that through Mollie’s mother, old Mistress Douglas,
Will had got him a job in the Argentine, cattleman there on a
big Polled Angus ranch, and he and Mollie were sailing from
Southampton the day he wrote; and oh! he wished Chris
could have seen them married; and remember them kindly,
they would write again, and Mrs. Douglas at Drumlithie
would aye be a friend to her.
So that was Will’s going, it was fair the speak of the parish
a while, folk laughed at father behind his back and said maybe
that would bring down his pride a bit; and they asked Chae
Strachan, that well-travelled childe, where was this Argentine,
was it a fine place, would you say? And Chae said Och, fine,
he’d never been actually there, you might say, but a gey fine
place it was, no doubt, a lot of silver was there; and Damnt
DRILLING
125
man, young Guthrie's no fool to spread his hit wings, I was just
the same myself. But most said it was fair shameful of Will to
go off and leave his father like that, black burning shame he
might think of himself; it just showed you what the world was
coming to, you brought bairns into the world and reared them
up and expected some comfort from them in your old age and
what did you get? Nothing but a lot of damned impudence, it
was all this education and dirt. You might well depend on it,
that coarse young Guthrie brute would never thrive, there’d
be a j udgment on him, you’d see, him and his coarse tink quean.
Judgment or not on Will, it was hardly a week before his
own rage struck down John Guthrie. He’d been setting up
ricks in the cornyard when Chris heard a frightened squawk
break out from the hens. She thought maybe some strange
dog was among them and caught up a spurtle and ran out to
the close and there saw father lying still in his blood, black blood
it looked on his face where he’d fallen and mischieved himself
against a stone. She cried out to him in fright and then cooled
herself down, and ran for water from the spring and dipped her
hanky in it and bathed his face. He opened his eyes then,
dazed-like he seemed, and he said Jll right, Jean lass^ and tried
to rise, and couldn’t. And rage came on him again, he put
out his hand and gave Chris a push that near threw her down,
he tried and tried to rise up, it was sickening to see. He chaved
on the ground as though something tied him there, all one of his
sides and legs, and the blood veins stood out blue on his face;
and he cursed and said Get into the house, you white-face
bitch! he wouldn’t have her looking at him. So she watched
from behind the door, near sick she felt, it was as though a
great frog were squattering there in the stour, and the hens
gathered and squawked about him.
And at last he stood up and staggered to a stone, and Chris
didn’t look more, going on with her work as well as she could
with hands that quivered and quivered. But when he came in
for supper he looked much as ever, and grumbled at this and
that, and ate his egg as though it would do him ill, syne got his
126
SUNSET SONG
gun and went off to the hill as fleet as ever. He was long up
there, Chris went to the window and watched for him, seeing
the August late night close in, Cuddiestoun’s sheep were baaing
high up in the Cuddiestoun moor and a sprig of the honey¬
suckle that made the Blawearie hedges so bonny through the
summer tapped and touched against the window-pane, it was
like a slow hand tapping there; and the evening was quiet in the
blow of the night-wind, and no sign of father till Chris grew
alarmed and nearly went out to look for him. But then she
heard his step in the porch, in he came and put down his gun
and saw her stand there and cried out Damn't to hell, is that all
you've to do, stand about like a lady? So you could hardly believe
there was much wrong with him then, except ill-nature, he’d
plenty of that, you’d no foreseeing that next morning he’d try
to get out of bed and lie paralysed.
She wouldn’t in a hurry forget the sight of him then, nor
the run she had down Blawearie brae till the new Knapp came
in sight, brave with its biggings and house. But there at last
was Chae Strachan, he was busied letting a strainer into the
ground, smoking, the blue smoke of his pipe rose into the air,
blue, like a pencil-stroke, a cock was crowing across the Den-
burn and he didn’t hear her cry for a while. But then he did
and was quick enough, he ran up to meet her, What's wrong,
Chris lass? and she told him and he turned and ran down—
Go back to your father and I'll get to the doctor myself and send
the wife up to Blawearie.
And up she came, the fat, fusionless creature, all she could
do was to stand and gowk at father, Mighty me, Mr. Guthrie,
this is a sore, sore sight, whatever will you do now, eh? And
father mouthed and mowed at her from the bed as though the
first thing he’d be keen on doing was braining her, paralysis
or not he’d still plenty of rage. For when the doctor came up
at last from Bervie and bustled into the room, peering and
poking with the sharp, quick face of him, and his bald head
shining, and snapped in his curt-like way, What's this? what's
wrong with you now, Blawearie? father managed to speak out
DRILLING 127
then right enough—That's for you to find out, what the hell
do you think you're paid for?
So the doctor grinned behind his hand, One of you women
must help me strip him. And he looked from Kirsty to Chris
and said You, Chris lass, and that she did while Mrs. Strachan
went down to the kitchen to make him tea and trail around like
a clucking hen, God! what mightn’t be happening in Peesie’s
Knapp without her? Chris lost her temper at last, she lost it
seldom enough, this time it went with a bang—I don't know
either ivhat's happening in Peesie's Knapp but if you're in such
tune about it you'd better go home and find out. Mrs. Strachan
reddened up at that, bubbling like a hubbley-jock, that wasn’t
the way for a quean to speak to a woman that might well be
her mother, she might think shame to curse and swear with
her father lying at death’s door there. And Chris said she
hadn’t sworn, but she was over-weary to argue about it, and
knew right well that whatever she said now Mistress Strachan
would spread a fine story about her.
And sure as death so she did, it was soon all over the Howe
that that coarse quean at Blawearie had started to swear at
Mistress Strachan while her father was lying near dead in the
room above their heads. Only Chae himself didn’t believe it,
and when he came up to Blawearie next day he whispered to
Chris, Is't true you gave Kirsty a bit of a damning yesterday? and
when she said she hadn’t he said it was a pity, it was time that
somebody did.
So there father lay and had lain ever since, all those five
weeks he’d lain there half-paralysed, with a whistle beside his
bed when he wanted attention, and God! that was often
enough. Creeping to her bed half-dead at night Chris would
find herself thinking a thing that wouldn’t bear a rethinking
out here in the sun, with the hum of the heather-bees, heather-
smell in her face, Lord! could she only lie here a day how she’d
128
SUNSET SONG
sleep and sleep! Fold over her soul and her heart and put them
away with their hours of vexing and caring, the ploughing was
done, she was set to her drilling, and faith! it was weary work!
She started and sighed and took her hands down from her
face and listened again. Far down in Blawearie there rose the
blast of an angry-blown whistle.
Ill
SEED-TIME
SHE’D thought, running, stumbling up through the
moor, with that livid flush on her cheek, up through the
green of the April day with the bushes misted with cobwebs,
Vll never go back, I'll never go back, I'll drown myself in the
loch! Then she stopped, her heart it seemed near to bursting
and terribly below it moved something, heavy and slow it had
been when she ran out from Blawearie but now it seemed to
move and uncoil. Slow, dreadfully, it moved and changed, like
a snake she had once seen up on this hill, and the sweat broke
out on her forehead. Had anything happened with it? Oh
God, there couldn’t be anything! If only she hadn’t run so,
had kept herself quiet, not struck as she’d done, deaved and
angry and mad she had been!
Sobbing, she fell to a slow walk then, her hand at her side,
and through the gate into the moorland went with slow steps,
the livid flush burning still on her cheek, she felt it was branded
there. Tears had come in her eyes at last, but she wouldn’t
have them, shook them off, wouldn’t think; and a pheasant
flew up beneath her feet, whirroo! as she came to the mere of
the loch. She bent over there through the rushes, raising her
hands to her hair that had come all undone, and parted it from
her face and looked down at her face in the water. It rippled a
moment, it was brown with detritus, at first she could see
nothing of herself but a tremulous amorphousness in the shadow
of the rushes; and then the water cleared, she saw the flush
below her cheek-bone, her own face, strange to her this last
month and stranger now. Below in Kinraddie the carts were
rattling up every farm-road, driving out dung to the turnip¬
planting, somewhere there was a driller on the go, maybe it
was Upperhill’s, the clank was a deafening thing. Nine o’clock
in the morning and here up on the hill she was, she didn’t
know where to go or where to turn.
There were the Standing Stones, so seldom she’d seen them
129
1
130 SUNSET SONG
this last nine months. Cobwebbed and waiting they stood,
she went and leant her cheek against the meikle one, the mon¬
ster that stood and seemed to peer over the water and blue
distances that went up to the Grampians. She leant against it,
the bruised cheek she leaned and it was strange and comforting
—stranger still when you thought that this old stone circle,
more and more as the years went on at Kinraddie, was the only
place where ever she could come and stand back a little from
the clamour of the days. It seemed to her now that she’d
had feint the minute at all to stand and think since that last
September day she’d spent up here, caught and clamped
and turning she’d been in the wheel and grind of the days
since father died.
But at the time a thing fine and shining it had been, she
hadn’t cared if folk deemed her heartless and godless—fine she
thought it, a prayer prayed and answered, him dead at last
with his glooming and glaring, his whistlings and whisperings.
Chris, do this, and Chris, do that it went on from morn till night
till but hardly she could drag herself to the foot of the stairs
to heed him.
But a worse thing came as that slow September dragged to
its end, a thing she would never tell to a soul, festering away
in a closet of her mind the memory lay, it would die sometime,
everything died, love and hate; fainter and fainter it had grown
this year till but half she believed it a fancy, those evening
fancies when father lay with the red in his face and his eye on
her, whispering and whispering at her, the harvest in his blood,
whispering her to come to him, they’d done it in Old Testa¬
ment times, whispering You're my flesh and blood, l can do with
you what I will, come to me, Chris, do you hear?
And she would hear him and stare at him, whispering also,
1 won't, they never spoke but in whispers those evenings. And
then she’d slip down from his room, frightened and frightened,
SEED-TIME
131
quivering below-stairs while her fancies raced, starting at every
creak that went through the harvest stillness of Blawearie
house, seeing father somehow struggling from his bed, like a
great frog struggling, squattering across the floor, thump,
thump on the stairs, coming down on her while she slept, that
madness and tenderness there in his eyes.
She took to locking her door because of that wild fear. The
morning of the day she woke to find him dead she leaned out
from her bedroom window and heard Long Rob of the Mill,
far ayont the parks of Peesie’s Knapp, out even so early, hard at
work with his chaving and singing, singing Ladies of Spain
with a throat as young and clear as a boy’s. She had slept but
little that night, because of the fear upon her and the tiredness,
but that singing was sweet to hear, sweet and heart-breaking,
as though the world outside Blawearie were singing to her,
telling her this thing in the dark, still house could never go on,
no more than a chance and an accident it was in the wind-loved
world of men.
She got into her clothes then, clearer-headed, and slipped
down to the kitchen and put on the kettle and milked the kye
and then made breakfast. Below the windows the parks stood
cut and stocked and trim, Ellison and Chae and Long Rob
had done that, good neighbours John Guthrie had, had he
never aught else. There came no movement from father’s
room, he was sleeping long, and setting the tray with porridge
and milk she hoped he’d have nothing to say, just glower and
eat, she’d slip away then.
So she went up the stair and into his room without knocking,
he hated knocking and all such gentry-like notions, she put down
the tray and saw he was dead. For a moment she looked and
then turned to the curtains and drew them, and took the tray
in her hand again, no sense in leaving it there, and went down
and ate a good breakfast, slowly and enjoyingly she ate and felt
quiet and happy, even though she fell fast asleep in her chair
and awoke to find it gone nine. She lay and looked at her
outspread arms a while, dimpled and brown, soft-skinned with
SUNSET SONG
132
the play of muscles below them. Sleep? She could sleep as she
chose now, often and long.
Then she tidied the kitchen and found a spare sheet and
went out to the hedge above the road and spread the sheet
there, the sign she’d arranged with Chae should she need him.
In an hour or so, out in his parks he saw it and came hurrying
up to Blawearie, crying to her half-way up Chris, lass, what's
wrong? Then only she realised she hadn’t yet spoken that
day to a soul, wondered if her voice would shake and break, it
didn’t, was ringing and clear as a bell crying down to Chae,
My father s dead.
It was fair a speak in Kinraddie, her coolness, she knew
that well but she didn’t care, she was free at last. And when
Mistress Munro, her that came to wash down the corpse,
poked out her futret face and said, J body would hardly think to
look at you that your father was new dead, Chris looked at the
dark, coarse creature and saw her so clearly as she’d never
done before, she’d never had time to look at a soul through
her own eyes before, Chris-come-here and Chris-go-there.
Not a pringle of anger she felt, just smiled and said Wouldn't
you, now, Mistress Munro? and watched her at work and watched
her go, not caring a fig what she thought and did. Then she
roused herself for a while, free yet she could hardly be for a day
or so, and got ready the big room for Auntie Janet and her man to
sleep in, medals and all, when they came down to the funeral.
Down the next day they came, the two of them, Auntie as
cheery as ever, Uncle as fat, he’d another bit medal stuck on
his chain; and when they saw she wasn’t sniftering or weeping
they put off the long decent faces they’d set for her sight, and
told her the news, Dod and Alec did fine and had sent their
love. And Auntie said they must sell up the things at Blawearie
and Chris come and bide with them in the North, some brave
bit farmer would soon marry her there.
SEED-TIME
133
And Chris said neither yea nor nay, but smiled at them,
biding her time, waiting till she found if a will had been left
by father. Chae Strachan and old Sinclair of Netherhill saw
to the funeral, old Sinclair moving so slow up the road, you’d
half think he’d stop and take root, clean agony it was to watch
him, and his face so pitted and old, father had been young by
the like of him. And Mr. Gibbon came over to see her, he’d
been drinking a fell lot of late, folk said, maybe that accounted
for the fact that as he crossed the twilit brae he was singing out
loud to himself, Auntie heard the singing and ran up and out
and hid in the lithe of a stack to try and make out what he
sang. But he left off then and left her fair vexed, she said later
she could have sworn it was a song they sang in the bothies
about the bedding of a lad and a lass.
But Chris didn’t care, keeping that secret resolve she’d made
warm and clean and unsoiled in her heart, taking it out only
alone to look at it, that old-time dream of hers. She’d never
looked at herself so often or so long as now she did, the secret
shining deep in her eyes, she saw her face thinner and finer than
of yore, no yokel face it seemed. So she cared nothing for Mr.
Gibbon and his singing, the great curly brute and his breath that
smelt so bad, he went up with her to father’s room where
father lay in his coffin, in a fine white shirt and a tie, his beard
combed out and decent and jutting up, you’d say in a minute
he’d raise those dead eyelids and whisper at you. Down on his
knees the minister went, the great curly bull, and began to pray,
Chris hesitated a minute and looked at the floor, and then,
canny-like, when he wasn’t seeing her, dusted a patch and her¬
self knelt down. But she didn’t heed a word he was saying,
honeysuckle smell was drifting in on the air from the night,
up on the hills the dog of some ploughman out poaching was
barking and barking itself to a fair hysteria following the white
blink of some rabbit’s tail, in the closing dark she could see
across the brae’s shoulder the red light of Kinraddie House shine
like a quiet star. So the curly bull prayed and boomed beside
her, it was what he was paid for, she neither listened nor cared.
134 SUNSET SONG
And that brought the funeral, it was raining early in the
dawn when they woke, a fine drizzle that seeped and seeped
from the sky, so soft and fine you’d think it snow without
whiteness; there was no sun at all at first but it came up at last,
a red ball, and hung there so till ten o’clock brought up the first
of the funeral folk, and that was Chae, and his father-in-law,
syne Ellison and Maitland in a gig they loosed in the cornyard,
setting the sholtie to graze. And Ellison cried out, but low and
decent, 77/leave him here, me dear, sure he'll be all right, won't he?
and Chris smiled and said Fine, Mr. Ellison, and he goggled his
eyes, Irish as ever, you could never change Erbert Ellison,
not even for the worse, folk said. Next there came a whole
drove of folk, the factor, the minister, Cuddiestoun with his
ill-marled face like a potato-park dug in coarse weather, but
a fine white front, new-starched, to cover his working sark,
and cuffs that fair chafed his meikle red hands, right decent,
and he’d on fine yellow boots on his meikle feet. Rob of the
Mill and Alec Mutch came next, you could hear their tongues
fi om the foot of Blawearie brae, folk were affronted and went
out and cried Whcest-wheest! down to them, and Rob called
back lb hat is t? and faith! it would have been better if they’d
been left alone, what with the wheesting and whispering
that rose.
But they were real good, Rob bringing a bottle of whisky,
Glenlivet it was, and Alec a half-bottle, they whisked them
over to Uncle Tam when nobody looked; or anyway not a body
but looked the other way and spoke, canny-like, of the weather.
The kitchen was fair crowded, so was the room, like a threshing-
day, folk sat and each had a dram, Mr. Gibbon said Spirits?
Tes, thank you, l ll have a drop^ there’d have been barely enough
to go round but for Rob and Alec. I hen they heard another
gig come up the hill, it was Gordon’s from Upperhill, him and
his foreman. Uncle Tam winked at the whisky, You'll have
a dram, Upperhill, you and your man? but Mr. Gordon said,
sniffy-like, 7 hardly think it shozvs respect and Ewan's tee-tee
as well.
SEED-TIME
i35
Long Rob of the Mill sat next the door, he winked at Chris
and then at Ewan Tavendale, Ewan turned fair red and said
nothing. So he hadn’t a dram, he’d have liked one fine, Chris
guessed, and felt mean and pleased and shy, and then gave her¬
self a shake inside, what did it matter to her? T hen the minister
looked at his watch and the undertaker came in about, and then
last of all, they hadn’t expected the poor old stock, there was
Pooty on the doorstep, he’d on a clean collar and shirt and an
old hat, green but well-brushed; and when Uncle whispered if
he’d have a dram he said Och, ay, it's the custom, isn't it? and
had two.
The undertaker had gone up by then, Uncle with him,
folk followed them one by one and came down, syne Auntie
beckoned Chris to the neuk of the stair and said Would you like
to see him before he's screwed down?
Uncle Tam and Long Rob of the Mill were there and as
Chris went in Long Rob said Well, well, good-bye, Blawearie
man, and shook father’s hand, his eyes looked queer when he
turned away, he said He was a fine neighbour and went out and
closed the door. Chris stood and looked at her father, seeing
him so plain as never in life she’d seen him, he’d been over¬
restless for that and quick enough he’d have raged at you had
you glowered at his face like this. Still enough now, never-
moving there in the coffin, he seemed to have changed already
since he died, the face sunk in, it wasn’t John Guthrie and yet
it was. Uncle whispered behind her, him and the undertaker,
and then Auntie was beside her, They're to screw it down now,
kiss your father, Chris. But she shook her head, she couldn’t
do that, the room was still as they looked at her, for a moment
she felt almost sick again as in those evening hours when that
in the coffin had lain and whispered that she should lie with
it. Then she just said Good-bye, father, and turned from him
and went down to her own room and put on her coat and hat,
it wasn’t decent for a quean to go to a funeral, folk said, but
in Blawearie’s case there was no son or brother to see him into
the kirkyard.
136 SUNSET SONG
Chae and Long Rob and Ellison and Gordon carried the
coffin down to the stair-foot, and settled it on their shoulders
there, and went slow with it out through the front door then;
and the rain held off a little, wind blowing in their faces,
though, as they held down the hill. Behind walked the
Reverend Gibbon, bare-headed, all the folk were bare-headed
but Chris, Long Rob and Chae stepping easily and cannily,
Ellison as well, but Gordon quivering at his coffin corner, he’d
have done better with a dram to steady him up. But Chris
walked free and uncaring, soon as the burial was over she’d be
free as never in her life she’d been, she lifted her face to the
blow of the wet September wind and the world that was free
to her. T hen it was that she saw Ewan Tavendale walked
beside her, he glanced down just then and straight and fair up
into his eyes she looked, she nearly stumbled in the slow walk
because of that looking. They came to the turnpike then,
there Ewan took Gordon’s corner and Alec Mutch Ellison’s,
and these two fell back beside the minister, but Chae and
Long Rob shook their heads when others offered to change
with them, they’d manage fine.
The rain still held off, presently the wind soughing down
the Howe died away and a little peek of sun came through, not
down the Denburn it came but high up in the hill peaks, the
lost, coarse ground where never a soul lived or passed but some
shepherd or gillie, you could see them far off, lone and lonesome
there on a still, clear day. Maybe so the dead walked in a still
clear, deserted land, the coarse lands of death where only the
chance wanderer showed his face, Chris thought, and the
dead lapwings wheeled and cried against another sun. Then
she ceased from that, startled out a moment from the calm that
had come to her with her father’s dying—daft to dream these
things now when she planned so much. Step, step, steadily and
cannily went Long Rob and Chae, Chae getting bald and sandy
in the crown, but Rob still with the corn hair clustered thick
and the great moustaches swinging from his cheeks as they
turned up the road that led to the kirkyard.
SEED-TIME
137
Then the sun went again, it was eleven o’clock perhaps,
and Chris raised her eyes and saw through the trees the blinded
windows of the Mains, the curtains were all drawn, decent-
like, in respect for the funeral; and she felt a queer, sick thrill
just below her left breast, not ill or sick, but just like a starting
of the blood there, as though she’d leant on that place too long,
and it had grown numb. It was dark under the yews, they
dripped on the coffin and Long Rob, then there came a pattering
as they passed by slow beneath, and Chris saw the long, oval
leaves suddenly begin to quiver, it was as though a hand shook
them, and through the leaves was the sky, it had blackened
over and the rain was coming driving in a sheet down the brae
from the Grampian haughs. It came and whipped the wet
skirts about her legs, she saw Long Rob and Chae and Ewan
stagger and then stand leaning against the drift, and then go on,
not a soul put on his hat, there’d be bad colds by night and ill-
tunes over this funeral yet.
That wasn’t decent to think, but what did it matter to her?
She wished she were back in Blawearie, and hoped the minister
would not be over long-winded when he said his say. There
was the grave-digger, a man from the Mains, a big scrawny
childe who lived ill with his wife, folk said, he had his coat
collar up and came out below the eaves of the kirk and motioned
them along a path. And ben it they went, then Chris saw the
grave, red clay and bright it was, not as she’d expected his
grave somehow to be, they weren’t burying him in mother’s
grave. For that land was over-crowded, folk said that every
time the grave-digger stuck his bit spade in the ground some
bone or another from the dead of olden time would came
spattering out, fair scunnering you. But this was an old enough
bit as well, right opposite rose the stone with the cross-bones,
maybe all the dead bodies had long mouldered away into red
clay here, clay themselves, and folk were glad they left the earth
free for newcomers.
Uncle had come to her elbow then and he stood with her,
the others stood back, it was strange and silent but for the soft
SUNSET SONG
i38
patter of the rain on the yews and the Reverend Gibbon
shielding his Bible away from the wet drive of it, beginning
to read. And Chris listened, her head bent against the rain’s
whisper, to the words that promised Resurrection and Life
through Jesus Christ our Lord, who had died long syne in
Palestine and had risen on the third day and would take from
that thing that had been John Guthrie quick, and was now
John Guthrie dead, the quickness and give it habitation again.
And Chris thought of her dream looking up at the coarse lands
of the hills and thinking of the lands of death, was that where
Christ would meet with father? Unco and strange to think,
standing here in the rain and listening to that voice, that father
himself was there in that dark box heaped with the little flowers
that folk had sent, father whom they were to leave here happed
in red clay, alone in darkness and earth when the night came
down. Surely he’d be back waiting her up in Blawearie,
she’d hear his sharp, vexed voice and see him come fleetly out
of the house, that red beard of his cocked as ever at the world
he’d fought so dourly and well 
Somebody chaved at her hand then, it was the grave-digger,
he was gentle and strangely kind, and she looked down and
couldn’t see, for now she was crying, she hadn’t thought she
would ever cry for father, but she hadn’t known, she hadn’t
known this thing that was happening to him! She found her¬
self praying then, blind with tears in the rain, lowering the
cord with the hand of the grave-digger over hers, the coffin
dirling below the spears of the rain. Father^ father^ 1 didn't
know! Oh father^ 1 didn't KNOW! She hadn’t known,
she’d been dazed and daft with her planning, her days could
never be aught without father; and she minded then, wildly,
in a long, broken flash of remembrance, all the fine things of
him that the years had hidden from their sight, the fleetness of
him and his justice, and the fight unwearying he’d fought with
the land and its masters to have them all clad and fed and
respectable, he’d never rested working and chaving for them,
only God had beaten him in the end. And she minded the long
SEED-TIME
i39
roads he’d tramped to the kirk with her when she was young,
how he’d smiled at her and called her his lass in days before the
world’s fight and the fight of his own flesh grew over-bitter,
and poisoned his love to hate. Oh father^ I didn't know! she
prayed again, and then that was over, she was in the drive of
the rain, hard and tearless, the grave-digger was pointing to the
ground and she picked up a handful of soft, wet earth, and heard
the Reverend Gibbon’s voice drone out Dust to dust, ashes to
ashes, and leant over the grave and dropped the wet earth; and
then the grave-digger was throwing in the turf, the coffin rang
as though it were hollow, she stared at it till Uncle had her by
the elbow, speaking to her, and so was the Reverend Gibbon
but she couldn’t hear them at first; and folk were to say she must
have been real fond of her father after all, the best of a coarse
bit family in the end.
And then she was walking back through the kirkyard and
the folk at the gate were stopping to shake her hand, Long
Rob and Chae to say they’d aye help her, and Ellison, kind and
solemn and Irish, and old Sinclair dripping in the rain, he
should never have been out in a day like this. The last was
Ewan Tavendale, he said Ta-ta, Chris, his hand was wet
meeting hers as her own hand was, but he put up his left hand
as well as his right and held both of hers a minute; and he didn’t
look ashamed and shy any more, but as though he was so sorry
he’d help her in any way, not only the ways he could.
That was the last of them she saw and the end of father’s
funeral. Back in Blawearie Auntie Janet made her strip from
her clothes and get into bed, God he here, it's you that'll be next
in your grave! she cried. And Chris slept throughout the
remainder of that day, undreaming, she didn’t wake till late in
the night, Blawearie listening and hearkening about her.
And then she was afraid, awfully afraid, sitting up in bed and
hearkening to that Something that walked the house with sharp,
quick footsteps, running so fleetly up the stairs, impatient and
unresting, a shadow with footfalls that were shadows; and into
the night and far towards the dawn it roamed the house of
SUNSET SONG
140
Blawearie till the cocks were crowing and Uncle and Auntie
moving, and Chris didn’t feel afraid at all by then, only lay
and wept softly for the father she’d never helped and forgot to
love.
And the next forenoon the lawyer man came down from
Stonehaven, it was Peter Semple, folk called him Simple
Simon but swore that he was a swick. Father had trusted him,
though, and faith! you’d be fell straight in your gait ere John
Guthrie trusted you. Not that he’d listened to advice, father,
he’d directed a will be made and the things to be set in that will;
and when Mr. Semple had said he was being fell sore on some
of his family father had told him to mind his own business, and
that was a clerk’s. So Mr. Semple drew up the will, it had been
just after Will went off to the Argentine, and father had signed
it; and now the Blawearie folk sat down in the parlour, with
whisky and biscuits for Mr. Semple, to hear it read. It was
short and plain as you please, Chris watched the face of her
uncle as the lawyer read and saw it go white in the gills, he’d
expected something far different from that. And the will
told that John Guthrie left all his possessions, in silver and
belongings, to his daughter Christine, to be hers without let
or condition, Mr. Semple her guardian in such law matters
as needed one, but Chris to control the goods and gear as she
pleased. And folk were to say, soon as Kinraddie heard of the
will, and faith! they seemed to have heard it all before it was
well out of the envelope, that it was an unco will, old Guthrie
had been fair spiteful to his sons, maybe Will would dispute his
sister’s tocher.
The money was over three hundred pounds in the bank, it
was hard to believe that father could have saved all that. But
he had; and Chris sat and stared at the lawyer, hearing him
explain and explain this, that, and the next, in the way of
lawyers: they presume you’re a fool and double their fees.
SEED-TIME
141
Three hundred pounds! And now she could do as she’d planned,
she’d go up to the College again and pass her exams and go on to
Aberdeen and get her degrees, come out as a teacher and finish
with the filthy soss of a farm. She’d sell up the gear of Blawearie,
the lease was dead, it had died with father, oh! she was free and
free to do as she liked and dream as she liked at last!
And it was pity now that she’d all she wanted she felt no
longer that fine thrill that had been with her while she made
her secret plans. It was as though she’d lost it down in Kin-
raddie kirkyard; and she sat and stared so still and white at the
lawyer man that he closed up his case with a snap. So think it
well over, Christine, he said and she roused and said Oh, Ell do
that; and off he went, Uncle Tam drew a long, deep breath,
as though fair near choked he’d been Not a word of his two
poor, motherless boys!
It seemed he’d expected Alec and Dod would be left their
share, maybe that was why he’d been so eager to adopt them the
year before. But Auntie cried For shame, Tam, hoiv are they
motherless now that Eve got them? And you'll come up and live
with us when you've sold Blawearie's furnishings, Chris? And
her voice was kind but her eyes were keen, Chris looked at
her with her own eyes hard, Ay, maybe and got up and slipped
from the room, Ell go down and bring home the kye.
And out she went, though it wasn’t near kye-time yet,
and wandered away over the fields; it was a cold and louring
day, the sound of the sea came plain to her, as though heard in a
shell, Kinraddie wilted under the greyness. In the ley field old
Bob stood with his tail to the wind, his hair ruffled up by the
wind, his head bent away from the smore of it. He heard her
pass and gave a bit neigh, but he didn’t try to follow her, poor
brute, he’d soon be over old for work. The wet fields squelched
below her feet, oozing up their smell of red clay from under
the sodden grasses, and up in the hills she saw the trail of the
mist, great sailing shapes of it, going south on the wind into
Forfar, past Laurencekirk they would sail, down the wide
Howe with its sheltered glens and its late, drenched harvests,
SUNSET SONG
142
past Brechin smoking against its hill, with its ancient tower that
the Pictish folk had reared, out of the Mearns, sailing and passing,
sailing and passing, she minded Greek words of forgotten
lessons, Ilarra pet} Nothing endures. And then a queer
thought came to her there in the drooked fields, that nothing
endured at all, nothing but the land she passed across, tossed and
turned and perpetually changed below the hands of the crofter
folk since the oldest of them had set the Standing Stones by
the loch of Blawearie and climbed there on their holy days
and saw their terraced crops ride brave in the wind and sun.
Sea and sky and the folk who wrote and fought and were
learned, teaching and saying and praying, they lasted but as a
breath, a mist of fog in the hills, but the land was forever, it
moved and changed below you, but was forever, you were
close to it and it to you, not at a bleak remove it held you and
hurted you. And she had thought to leave it all!
She walked weeping then, stricken and frightened because
of that knowledge that had come on her, she could never leave
it, this life of toiling days and the needs of beasts and the smoke
of wood fires and the air that stung your throat so acrid, Autumn
and Spring, she was bound and held as though they had prisoned
her here. And her fine bit plannings!—they’d been just the
dreamings of a child over toys it lacked, toys that would never
content it when it heard the smore of a storm or the cry of sheep
on the moors or smelt the pringling smell of a new-ploughed
park under the drive of a coulter. She could no more teach a
school than fly, night and day she’d want to be back, for all the
fine clothes and gear she might get and hold, the books and the
light and learning.
The kye were in sight then, they stood in the lithe of the
freestone dyke that ebbed and flowed over the shoulder of the
long ley field, and they hugged to it close from the drive of the
wind, not heeding her as she came among them, the smell of
their bodies foul in her face—foul and known and enduring
as the land itself. Oh, she hated and loved in a breath! Even
her love might hardly endure, but beside it the hate was no more
SEED-TIME 143
than the whimpering and fear of a child that cowered from the
wind in the lithe of its mother’s skirts.
And again that night she hardly slept, thinking and thinking
till her head ached, the house quiet enough now without
fairlies treading the stairs, she felt cool and calm, if only she
could sleep. But by morning she knew she couldn’t go on with
Uncle and Auntie beside her, they smothered her over with
their years and their canny supposings. Quick after breakfast
she dressed and came down and Auntie cried out, real sharp¬
like, Mighty be here, Chris, where are you going? as though she
owned Blawearie stick and stone, hoof and hide. And Chris
looked at her coolly, Vm away to Stonehaven to see Mr. Semple,
can I bring you anything? Uncle Tam rose up from the table
then, goggling, with his medals clinking, Away to Stonehive?
What are you jaunting there for? Eli transact any business
you have. Their faces reddened up with rage, she saw plain as
daylight how near it lay, dependence on them, she felt herself
go white as she looked at them. 77/ transact my own business
fine, she said hardly, and called Ta-ta from the door and heard
no answer and held down the Blawearie road and ran over the
parks to the station, and caught the early scholars’ trains that
went in to Stonehaven Academy.
It was crowded fell close, there were three-four scholars
in the carriage she got in to, she didn’t know any, they were
learning French verbs. And she’d wanted to go back to things
as silly!
They were past Drumlithie and the Carmont then, you
could smell the woods of Dunnottar and look out at them from
the window, girdling Stonehaven down to its bay, shining
and white, the sun was out on the woods and the train like a
weasel slipped through the wet smell of them. And there
was Stonehaven itself, the home of the poverty toffs, folk said,
where you might live in sin as much as you pleased but were
144 SUNSET SONG
damned to hell if you hadn’t a white sark. She d heard Chae
Strachan say that, but it wasn’t all true, there were fell poor
folk in Stonehaven as well as the come-ups; and douce folk
that were neither poor nor proud and had never a say when
Stonehaven boomed of its braveness. And that it did fair often,
the Mearns’ capital, awful proud of its sarks but not of its
slums; and it thought itself real genteel, and a fine seafront it
had that the English came to in summer—daft, as usual, folk
said, hadn’t they a sea in England?
Because it was early in the day and the lawyer’s office still
shut Chris loitered on the road in the tail of the hasting scholars,
the little things they were, all legs and long boots, funny how
they tried to speak English one to the other, looking sideways
as they cried the words to see if folk thought them gentry.
Had Marget and she been daft as that?
But the sun was out now on the long Stonehaven streets and
Chris went past the Academy down to the market, still at that
hour with just a stray cat or so on the sniff around, genteel
and toff-like, Stonehaven cats. Down through a lane she caught
a glimmer of the North Sea then, or maybe it was the sunlight
against the sky, but the smell of the sea came up. And she
still had plenty of time. .
So she went down to the shore, the tide was out, thundering
among the rocks, not a soul on the beach but herself, gulls
flying and crying, the sun strong and warm. She sat on a seat
in the glow of it and shut her eyes and was happy. Below her
feet the ground drummed and trembled with reverberations
from that far-off siege of the rocks that the sea was making
out there by the point of the bay, it was strange to feel it and be
of it, maybe folk there were who felt for the sea as last night
she had felt in the rain-drenched fields of Kinraddie. But to her
it seemed restless, awaiting and abiding nowhither, not fine like
the glens that nestled and listened high up the coarse country,
or the parks sun-heavy with clover that waited your feet at
evening.
She fell asleep then, she slept there two hours in the sun and
SEED-TIME 145
woke feeling fresher than she’d done since father s funeral.
So hungry also she felt she couldn’t wait the ending of the
business she’d come on but went into a tea-house up in the
square, two women kept it, old bodies they were that moved
backward and forward the room, slow and rheumatic. One
looked like the cats she’d seen in the square that morning,
sleeked and stroked, the other was thin as a lathe, their tea¬
room looked scrubbed and clean and their tea had a taste to
match. They were sharp and stroked and genteel, Chris
thought for the first time then in her life how awful it would
be to grow old like them, old maids without men, without ever
having lain with a man, or had him kiss you and hold you,
and be with you, and have children of his, or the arm of a
man when you needed it, kind and steadfast and strong. If
she’d lived her plan to train as a teacher she’d have grown like
them.
She might grow so still! she thought, and daft-like suddenly
felt quite feared, she paid for her tea in a hurry and went out
to the square again, thinking of herself as an old maid, it
wouldn’t bear thinking about. So she hurried to the office
of Simple Simon and a little clerk asked her business, perky-like,
and she looked at him coolly and said her business was Mr.
Semple’s. And then she minded the old maids, was she herself
one by nature? And in a cold fear she smiled at the clerk,
desperately, with her lips and eyes, it was fine, the boy smiled also
and blushed and thawed, and said Sit down, this is fine and
comfortable; and pulled out a padded chair for her; and down
she sat, light-hearted again. Then the clerk came back and
led her through a passage to Semple’s room, he looked busy
enough, with a telephone beside him and heaps of papers,
and rows of little black boxes round the shelves. Then he rose
and shook hands, IVell, ivell, it’s Miss Guthrie come up; you’ve
been thinking of the will, no doubt?
She told him, Yes, just that; and she was going to live on
at Blawearie a while, not roup the gear out at once, could he
see to that with the factor?
146 SUNSET SONG
He stared at her with his mouth fallen open, But you can't
live there alone!
She told him she’d no such intention, couldn’t he get her
some woman come live with her, some old bit body who’d be
glad of a home?
He said Oh, God, there are plenty of them! and began to chew
at his mouser.
She told him it mightn’t be for more than a month or so,
till she’d made up her mind, just.
He said absent-like, fust? Hell, a woman's mind just!
and then pulled himself up right sudden as she looked at him
hardly and cool. Then he argued a bit, but Chris hardly
listened, father’s will had said she could do what she liked.
And presently, seeing she cared not a fig for him, Semple
gave in and said he’d settle up with the factor, and he knew an
old widow body, Melon, he’d send down to Blawearie the morn.
So Chris said Thank you, good-bye, and went out from the
office, cool as she’d come, the sun was a fell blaze then and the
streets chock-a-block with sheep, great droves of them, driven
in to the weekly mart. Collies were running hither and yon,
silent and cocked of ear, clean and quick as you’d wish, paying
heed to none but shepherd and sheep. Drovers and beasts,
they took a good look at Chris both, as she stood in her black
clothes watching them; and just as she wondered what she’d
do next, walk down to the sea and sit on a bench till it neared
to dinner-time in the hotels, or go up to the station and
take the i i.o, a gig going by slowed down of a sudden, a man
jumped down and cried back to the driver.
The man that had jumped was the foreman at Upperhill,
Ewan Tavendale, the driver old Gordon himself, he looked in
a rage about something. And he cried Mind the time then!.
and gave Chris a sore glower and drove spanking away.
And then Ewan had crossed the pavement and was standing
in front of her, he lifted his cap and said, shy-like, Hello!
Chris said Hello, and they looked at each other, he was blushing,
she minded the last time, she didn’t like him half as she’d done
SEED-TIME 147
at the funeral. He said Are you in for the day? and she mocked
him, not knowing why she did that, it wasn t decent and father
new’ dead, Och ay, just that. He blushed some more, she felt
cool and queerly giddy in a breath, looking at the fool of a lad,
folk were glowering at them both they were later to learn, not
Gordon only but Ellison: and back the two of them went to
Kinraddie and told every soul it was a sore shame there wasn t
somebody about to heed to the Guthrie girl from the hands
of that coarse tink brute, Ewan Tavendale.
But they hadn’t known that and mightn’t have cared,
suddenly Chris felt herself hungry again, happy as well, not
caring about Ewan himself but not wanting either he should
leave her and go on to the mart. She said Fm going up to the
Inn for dinner, and he looked at her, still shy, but with a kind
of smoulder in the shyness, his eyes like the smoulder of a burning
Maybe we can eat together? And she said, as he turned
by her side, Oh, maybe. But what will Mr. Gordon do? And
Ewan said he could dance a jig on the head of the mart with
sheer rage, for all he cared.
So in they went to old Mother White s, not that they saw
the old body herself; and there was a fine room to eat in, with
white cloths set, and a canary that sang above them, the windows
fast closed to the dust and dirt. And they’d broth, it was good,
and the oat-cakes better; and then boiled beef and potatoes and
turnip; and then rice pudding with prunes; and then some tea,
Ewan found his tongue as they drank the tea and said to-day
was his holiday, for he’d worked all the last Sunday on a job
libbing lambs. And Chris said, it was out of her mouth before
she thought, So you're in no hurry to be back? and Ewan leaned
across the table, the smoulder near kindled to a fire. Not unless
you should be? What train are you taking up to Kinraddie?
And then how it all came about, their planning to spend the
day together and their walk to Dunnottar, Chris never knew,
148 SUNSET SONG
maybe neither did Ewan. But half an hour later, Stonehaven
a blinding white glimmer behind, Dunnottar in front, they were
climbing down the path that lead to the island. The air was
blind with the splash of the incoming tide, above you the rock
rose sheer as the path wound downwards sheer; and high up,
crowning the rock were the ruins of the castle walls, splashed
with sunlight and the droppings of sea-birds. Gulls there were
everywhere, Chris was deafened in the clamour of the brutes,
but quiet enough in the castle it proved, not a soul seemed
visiting there but themselves.
They paid their shillings and the old man came with them
from room to room, a scunner to Ewan, Chris guessed, for his
eyes kept wandering, wearied, to her from this ruin and that.
In walls little slits rose up, through these it was that in olden
times the garrisons had shot their arrows at beseigers; and down
below, in the dungeons, were the mouldering clefts where a
prisoner’s hands were nailed while they put him to torment.
There the Covenanting folk had screamed and died while the
gentry dined and danced in their lithe, warm halls, Chris stared
at the places, sick and angry and sad for those folk she could
never help now, that hatred of rulers and gentry a flame in her
heart, John Guthrie’s hate. Her folk and his they had been,
those whose names stand graved in tragedy:
HERE : LYES : JOHN : STOT : IAMES : ATCHI
SON : IAMES : RUSSELL : & WILLIAM : BRO
UN : AND : ONE : WHOSE : NAME : WEE : HAVE
NOT : GOTTEN : AND : TWO : WOMEN : WHOSE
NAMES : ALSO : WEE : KNOW : NOT : AND • TWO
WHO: PERISHD.: COMEING: DOUNE: THE: ROCK
ONE : WHOSE : NAME : WAS : IAMES : WATSON
THE : OTHER: NOT : KNOWN : WHO : ALL • DIED
PRISONERS : IN : DUNNOTTAR : CASTLE
ANNO : 1685 : FOR : THEIR : ADHERENCE :
TO : THE : WORD : OF : GOD : AND : SCOTLANDS
COVENANTED : WORK : OF : REFORMA
TION; REV; II CH : I2 VERSE
SEED-TIME
149
But Ewan whispered, OA, let's get out of this, though it was
he himself that had planned they come to Dunnottar. So out
in the sun, at the shelving entrance, they stood awhile in the
cry of the gulls; and then Ewan said Come down to the sea: I
know a nook.
And they climbed down and then up again, along the cliff-
edge, it made you dizzy to look over and down at the incoming
wash of froth, and sometimes, far under their feet, there rose a
loud boom! like a gun going off. Ewan said that the rocks were
sometimes hollow and the water ran far below the fields, so that
ploughmen ploughed above the sea and in stormy weather
they’d sometimes see their furrows quiver from that storm that
raged under their feet. So they came to a crumbling path,
it seemed to fall sheer away, a seagull sailed up to meet them,
and Ewan with his feet already out of sight turned back and
asked, You'll not be dizzy? And Chris shook her head and fol¬
lowed him, it seemed to her between sea and sky, down and
down, and then Ewan was gripping her ankle, she swung
almost loose for a moment, looking down in his face, it was
white and strained, then her foot and hand caught again,
Ewan called that it wasn’t much further; and they got to the
bottom and sat and looked at each other on a ledge of sand.
The sun poured in there, the tide whispered and splashed
and threw out its hands at them on the sand, but it didn’t come
further up. And Chris saw that the place was closed in, you
couldn’t see a thing of the coast but the rocks overhanging,
and only a segment of the sea itself, a mile or so out a boat had
tacked, it flashed its wings like a wheeling gull; and Ewan was
sitting beside her, peeling an orange.
They ate it together and Chris took off her hat, she felt
hot and uncouth in her sad black clothes. And suddenly,
for no reason, she thought of a time, years before, when she’d
been trampling blankets for mother a fine summer day in
May, and had taken off her skirts and her mother had come out
and laughed at her, You'd make a fine lad! It was as though
she heard mother speak, she looked up and around, daftly,
ISO SUNSET SONG
dazed-like a moment, but there was not a soul near but Ewan
Tavendale lying on an elbow, looking at the sea, the sun in his
face, young and smooth with its smouldering eyes. And she
found she didn’t mislike him any longer, she felt queer and
strange to him, not feared, but as though he was to say something
in a moment that she knew she couldn’t answer. And then he
said it, blushing, but his smouldering eyes didn’t waver, Chris,
do you like me a bit?
Can t thole you at all, that's why we're out lazing in this
place together.
But a nervousness came on her, not that she feared him,
she d known all along she was safe with Ewan as Mollie with
Will in those long-gone days of the court at Drumlithie.
Only, it was as though her blood ran so clear and with such a
fine, sweet song in her veins she must hold her breath and
heark to it; and for the first time she knew the strange thing
her hand was, held there dripping sand, it seemed as though
all her body sat a little apart from herself, and she looked at
it, wondering. So it was that she knew she liked him, loved
him as they said in the soppy English books, you were shamed
and a fool to say that in Scotland. Ewan Tavendale—that it
should be him! And then she minded something, it didn’t
matter at all, but she wanted to know for all that. Ewan,
was it true that story they told about you and old Sarah Sinclair?
It was as though she had belted him in the face.. He went
white then, funnily white leaving brown the red tan in the
little creases of his face that the coarse field weather had made;
and he sat up, angrily, and glowered at her, the great black
cat, so sleeked and quick to anger. And the feeling she’d had
for him, that dizziness that made earth and sea and her heart
so light, quite went from her. She said Oh, I don't want to
know, and began to hum to herself; and then Ewan reached out
his hand and gripped her arm, it hurt, he said Damn well listen
now that you've asked me. And it was awful, awful and terrible,
she didn’t want to listen to him, covering her face with her
hands, he went on and on and then stopped at last—Now
SEED-TIME 151
you're frightened, frightened that a woman should feel like that,
maybe some day you'll feel it yourself.
She jumped to her feet then, angry as him, forgetting to feel
shamed. Maybe I will, but when I do I'll get a better man
than you to serve mel And before he could answer that she had
caught up her hat and was up the cliff path so quick she didn’t
know how she did it, her fingers and feet were nimble and sure,
she heard Ewan cry below her and paid no heed. He was
barely half-way up when she reached the top and looked
down, and then the rage quite went from her, she leaned over
the edge instead, holding down her hand, and he caught it and
smiled, and they stood and panted and smiled one at the other,
fools again as they’d been in the market-square of Stonehaven.
But suddenly Ewan whipped out his watch, God, it must be
getting fell late, and as he said it the sunshine went. Chris
raised her head and saw why, they’d been sitting down there in
the last of it, the gloaming was down on the countryside and
the noise of the gulls rising up through the mirk. Ewan caught
her hand and they ran by the cliff-edge of the gloaming-stilled
parks, there were great dappled kye that stopped their grazing
to look; and up in front, dark and uncanny, they saw Dun-
nottar rise on its rock. And then they reached the main road
and slowed down, but she still left her hand in Ewan’s.
And in Stonehaven they caught by the skin of the teeth the six
o’clock train, the mart was long over and folk gone home. In the
carriage were only themselves all the way to Kinraddie, Ewan sat
on the opposite seat, she liked him sit there, liked him not wanting
to hold her hand, she’d have hated him touch her now. And they
didn’t say a word till they neared Kinraddie, and then he said
Chrissie! Tired? and she said Losh, no, and my name's Chris, Ewan.
Then she saw him blush again in the flicker of the gaslight; and
a strange, sweet surge of pity came on her, she leant over and
patted his knee, he was only a boy in spite of his Sarah Sinclair.
SUNSET SONG
152
But she thought of Sarah all the same that night, lying
listening in bed to the coming of the rain again, a wet winter
it promised the Howe. So women were like that when they
didn’t have the men they wanted?—many of them maybe
like that, hiding it away even from themselves till a summer
of heat drove one here and there to such acts as affronted
Kinraddie. But she didn’t feel affronted, it was maybe because
she was over young, had read over many of the books, had been
the English Chris as well as this one that lay thinking of Ewanj
and the old ways of sinning and winning, having your own
pleasure and standing affronted at other folk having theirs,
seemed often daft to her. Sarah Sinclair might well have
obliged her and met with some other lad than Ewan that
August night; but then she wasn’t to know Chris Guthrie
would ever lie and think of him in her bed, hearing the batter
of the rain against her window and the swish of the great
Blawearie trees.
It was then, in a lull of the swishing, she heard the great
crack of thunder that opened the worst storm that had struck
the Howe in years. It was far up, she thought, and yet so close
Blawearie’s stones seemed falling about her ears, she half-
scrambled erect. Outside the night flashed, flashed and
flashed, she saw Kinraddie lighted up and fearful, then it was
dark again, but not quiet. In the sky outside a great beast
moved and purred and scrabbled, and then suddenly it opened its
mouth again and again there was the roar and the flash of its
claws, tearing at the earth, it seemed neither house nor hall
could escape. The rain had died away, it was listening—
quiet in the next lull, and then Chris heard her Auntie crying
to her jfre you all right, Chrissie? and cried back she was fine.
Funny Uncle Tam had cried never a word, maybe he was still
in the sulks, he’d plumped head-first in when he’d heard of the
old woman that Semple was sending to help keep house in
Blawearie. They were off to Auchterless the morn, and oh!
she’d be glad to see them go, she’d enough to do and to think
without fighting relations.
SEED-TIME
153
The thunder clamoured again, and then she suddenly sat
shivering, remembering something—Clyde and old Bob and
Bess, all three of them were out in the ley field there, they
weren’t taken in till late in the year. Round the ley field was
barbed wire, almost new, that father had put up in the Spring,
folk said it was awful for drawing the lightning, maybe it had
drawn it already.
She was out of bed in the next flash, it was a ground flash,
it hung and it seemed to wait, sizzling, outside the window as
she pulled on stockings and vest and knickers and ran to the door
and cried up Uncle Ta?n, Uncle Tam, we must take in the horses!
He didn’t hear, she waited, the house shook and dirled in another
great flash, then Auntie was crying something, Chris stood as
if she couldn’t believe her own ears. Uncle Tam was feared
at the lightning, he wouldn’t go out, she herself had best go
back to her bed and wait for the morning.
She didn’t wait to hear more than that, but ran to the kitchen
and groped about for the box of matches and lighted the little
lamp, it with the glass bowl, and then found the littlest lantern
and lighted that, though her fingers shook and she almost
dropped the funnel. Then she found old shoes and a raincoat,
it had been father’s and came near to her ankles, and she caught
up the lamp and opened the kitchen door and closed it quick
behind her just as the sky banged again and a flare of sheet
lightning came flowing down the hill-side, frothing like the
incoming tide at Dunnottar. It dried up, leaving her Winded,
her eyes ached and she almost dropped the lantern again.
In the byre the kye were lowing fit to raise the roof, even
the stirks were up and stamping about in their stalls.. But
they were safe enough unless the biggings were struck, it was
the horses she’d to think of.
Right athwart her vision the haystacks shone up like great
pointed pyramids a blinding moment, vanished, darkness com¬
plete and heavy flowed back on her again, the lantern-light seeking
to pierce it like the bore of a drill. Still the rain held off as she
stumbled and cried down the sodden fields. Then she saw that
i54 SUNSET SONG
the barbed wire was alive, the lightning ran and glowed along it,
a living thing, a tremulous, vibrant serpent that spat and glowed
and hid its head and quivered again to sight. If the horses
stood anywhere near to that they were finished, she cried to
them again and stopped and listened, it was deathly still in the
night between the bursts of the thunder, so still that she heard
the grass she had pressed underfoot crawl and quiver erect
again a step behind her. Then, as the thunder moved away—
it seemed to break and roar down the rightward hill, above the
Manse and Kinraddie Mains,—something tripped her, she
fell and the lantern-flame flared up and seemed almost to vanish;
but she righted it, almost sick though she was because of the
wet, warm thing that her body and face lay upon.
It was old Bob, he lay dead, his tongue hanging out, his legs
doubled under him queerly, poor brute, and she shook at his
halter a minute before she realised it was useless and there
were still Bess and Clyde to see to. And then she heard the
thunder and clop of their hooves coming across the grass to her,
they loomed suddenly into the light of the lamp, nearly running
her down, they stood beside her and whinnied, frightened
and quivering so that her hand on Bess’s neck dirled as on
the floor of a threshing-machine. Then the lightning smote
down again, quite near, though the thunder had seemed to move
off, it played a great zig-zag over the field where she stood
with the horses, and they pressed so near her she was almost
crushed between them; and the lantern was pressed from her
hand at last, it fell and went out with a crash and a crinkle of
breaking glass. She caught Bess’s bridle with one hand,
Clyde s with another, and the lightning went and they began
to move forward in the darkness, she thought she was in the
right direction but she couldn’t be sure. The next flash
showed a field she didn’t know, close at hand, with a high,
staked dyke, and then she knew she had gone utterly wrong, it
was the dyke on the turnpike.
The thunder growled satisfiedly and Clyde whinnied and
whinnied, she saw then the reason for that, right ahead was
SEED-TIME
155
the waving of a lantern, it must be Uncle come out to look for
her at last, she cried Vm here! and a voice cried Where? She
cried again and the lantern came in her direction, it was two
men climbing the dyke. The horses started and whinnied and
dragged her forward and then she found herself with Chae
Strachan and Ewan, they had seen to their own horses on
Upperhill and the Knapp, and had met and had minded hers
on Blawearie; and up they had come to look for them. In
the moment as they recognised one the other the lightning
flared, a last sizzling glow, and then the rain came again,
they heard it coming far up in the moors, it whistled and
moaned and then was a great driving swish. Chae thrust his
lantern upon Ewan, Damn't man, take that and the lass and run
for the house! Til see to the horse!
Ewan caught Chris under the arm, he swung the lantern in
his other hand, they ran for a gate that led to the turnpike,
the horses galloped behind them, Chae dragging at their halters
and cursing them; and the rain overtook them as they gained
the road, it was a battering wet hand that beat at them, Chris
was soaked to the skin in a moment.
But in another they’d gained the new biggings of Peesie’s
Knapp, there shone a light in the kitchen, Ewan opened the
door and pushed Chris in, Bide here and 77/ off and help Chae!
He disappeared into the blackness, the door closed behind him,
Chris went forward into the kitchen and the glow of the
fire. She felt daft and deaf in the sudden silence and out of
the rain, in the stillness of the new kitchen with its meikle
clock wagging against the wall, and its calendars and pictures
all spaced about, it looked calm and fine. Then she realised
how wetted she was and took off the raincoat, it rained a puddle
on the kitchen floor, she was dressed below only in knickers
and vest, she’d not remembered that!
There came a rattle and clatter outside in the close as the
men ran to the house, Chris slipped on the coat again and was
tugging at the buttons as the two came stamping in. Chae
cried, Damn't, Chris, get out of that coat, you must fair he
SUNSET SONG
156
soaked. Here, 77/ stir up the fire, the old wife's in hed, she'd
sleep through a hundred storms.
He bent over the fire then, poking it up, Chris found Ewan
beside her, his hair black with the rain, the great cat, to help
her off with her coat. She whispered, 7 can't, Ewan, I've nothing
on below! and he blushed as red as a girl himself, and dropped
his hands, and looked like a foolish boy so that she lost her own
shyness at once, and told the same thing to Chae when he
turned him round. He laughed at her with his twinkling
eyes, JVhat, nothing at all? Well, not very much, Chae. 
Then come ben and I'll get you a coat of the wife's, you can slip
into that.
The rain was pelting on the roof as she followed him through
to Mistress Strachan’s new parlour, it sounded loud enough
to wake the dead let alone her that had been Kirsty Sinclair.
Chae opened the wardrobe and brought out a fine coat, Mis¬
tress Strachan’s best for the Sunday, lined and fine and smelling
of moth-balls; and then a pair of her slippers. Get out of your
things, Chris lass, and bring them to dry. I'll have something
war?n for you and Ewan to drink.
Left alone with the candle she wished she’d asked for a towel;
Chae was kind but a man had no sense. But she managed
without, though stripping from vest and knickers and stockings
felt like parting wetly from her own skin, almost, so soaked
she had been. Then she put on the coat and slippers and
gathered up the wet under-things and went through with them
to the kitchen; and there was Chae one side of the fire with a
bottle of whisky at his elbow, making toddy, and Ewan at the
other, with his coat off, warming his hands and looking at the
door for her to come ben. They didn’t look at her over-close,
either of them, Chae pulled in one chair for her to sit on and
another for her things to dry on, and when she’d spread them
out he stopped in his toddy-making and said Damn't, Chris,
was that JLL you'd on? And she nodded and he said You'll
have your death of cold, sit closer.
And that was fine, sitting next to Ewan, close to the blaze of
SEED-TIME
'51
the meikle larch logs that Chae had put on, they were swack
with resin. Syne Chae had the toddy made and he handed a
glass to Ewan first, as was right with a man, and another to
Chris, with three spoonfuls of sugar in it, Mistress Strachan
might have had something to say about that if she’d seen such
wastry. But she was fast asleep up in Chae’s bed and knew
nothing of it all till the morning, she made up for it then, folk
said she accused both Chae and Ewan of cuddling and sossing
with the Guthrie quean all the hours of the night.
So that was the ongoing there was that night of lightning,
nor was it the only one in Kinraddie, for the lightning, and
maybe it was the big flash Chris had seen as she gained the brae
leading down to the horses, drove a great hole through the
Manse spare bedroom, and let in the rain and fair ruined the
place. Folk said that when the Reverend Gibbon heard the
bolt strike the house, he’d been awake and listening, he dived
like a rabbit below the blankets and cried Oh, Christ, keep it
away from me! Which wasn’t the kind of conduct you’d have
expected from a minister, but there was a fair flock of folk the
lightning scared that night in one place or another, Jock Gordon
at Upperhill ran to his mother’s bedroom and wept all over the
counterpane there like a bairn. And Alec Mutch of Bridge
End went out about midnight to look for his sheep, but he was
half-drunk when he went and got drunker every minute as he
chaved about, not seeing a thing. And at last he came to a big
stock out in the corn-parks and crawled into that, it was a stook
that stood near the turnpike, and feint the thing else was
seen of him till late the next morning when the postman was
going by and the sun was shining fine, and out Alec’s face
and meikle lugs were stuck from the stook and gave the
postman such a turn in the wame he was nearly sick on the
spot.
But of all that Chris knew nothing, she’d plenty to think
of with her own bit ploys. For after the rain cleared and her
under-things dried she went through to the parlour and got in
them again, and into the raincoat of father’s, and Chae lighted a
SUNSET SONG
158
lantern, fair yawning with sleep was Chae, and Ewan was to
guide home to Blawearie both Chris and the horses. So out
to the night again, the rain had cleared and freshened it, there
was a wind from off the sea blowing in the stars, and clouds
like the drifting of great women’s veils, fisher-wives’ veils,
across the sad faces of the coarse high hills. Then the horses
champed in the courtyard, Ewan had their halter-ropes in his
hand, Chris was beside him swinging the lantern, they cried
Ta-ta! to Chae and Chae nearly uncovered the back of his
gums, so sleepy he was, poor stock; and he started to cry some¬
thing to Chris about coming up the morn and seeing to old
Bob whom the lightning had killed, they’d be able to sell him
to the knacker in Brechin. But a yawn put an end to whatever
he’d to say, it hardly mattered, it was morn already, you could see
far down by Bervie a band of greyness stroke the horizon, as
though an idle finger stroked it there on a window-pane.
Tramp, tramp, with a nicker now and then and long snortings
through their nostrils, the horses, glad to be roaded up to
Blawearie, Ewan big by the side of Chris, she hadn’t realised
before how big he was. He said nothing at all, except shy-like,
once Are you warm enough? and she laughed and said Finey
she’d never again be shy with Ewan Tavendale. And it seemed
to her even then it would be long before she forgot this walk
through the night that was hardly night at all, an hour poised
on the edge of the morning, like a penny on its rim, the flutter
of the wind in their faces and the wet country sleeping about
them, it smelt like Spring, not a morning in fore-winter. Then
she was yawning, stopping from that, it was still a bit way to the
house, she wondered if Uncle or Auntie had known she went
out to the horses in the lightning. But she needn’t have
worried, not a thing they’d guessed and didn’t till the morning
came, Blawearie was black as the inside of a lum-hat when they
climbed to it, the kye quietened down, it hardly seemed home
at all she had come to, a strange place this, with Ewan beside her.
She opened the stable door for him, he led in the horses and
made a shake-down, and came out and closed and barred up
SEED-TIME
159
the door, she held him the lantern to see to that. And then he
turned round, they were standing there in the close, his arms
went round her, below her arms, and she said Oh, don't! and
turned away her face; and he did nothing and she turned up her
face to him again, peeping to see what he did.
Dark still it was but she saw his teeth, laughing at her,
and then she put down the lantern and somehow resistance
went from her, she hadn’t wanted to resist, he was holding her
close to him, kissing her, her cheeks and the tip of her nose
because he couldn’t see well in the darkness. And then he
waited a moment and his lips came to hers and they were trem¬
bling as her own were, she wanted to cry and she wanted to laugh
in a breath, and have him hold her forever, so, in the close,
and his trembling lips that came into hers, sweet and terrible
those lips in hers. There was a great power of honeysuckle
that year, the smell of it drenched all the close in wet, still
weather, it perfumed the night and that kiss, she wouldn’t ever
forget them both though she lived unkissed again till she died.
And then she knew they were near to other things, both of
them, Ewan’s breath was quicker than it should, he’d stopped
from kissing her that kiss in the lips, his lips were urgent on her
neck and breast; and she let him, she pulled aside the coat for
him, standing so still, it was warm and sweet, she was his, he
hers, for all things and everything, she never wanted better than
that.
And then, in that ultimate moment, close at hand Chris
heard the Blue Wyandotte, already so cocky that he was,
stir on his ree, he gave a bit squawk before he stirred and
peeked for the day he would crow so lustily. Somehow that
stirring brought Chris to her senses, she wasn’t afraid, only this
could wait for another night’s coming, it was sweet and she
wanted it to live and last, not snatch it and fumble it blindly
and stupidly. And she caught Ewan’s hand and kissed him,
he stopped with that kiss of hers on his cheek, his cheek with the
soft brown skin; and she whispered Wait, Ewan!
He let her go at once, shamed of himself, he had little need
160 SUNSET SONG
to be that, she saw him troubled and uncertain in the dim light
and put her arms about him and kissed him again and whispered
Come down and see me to-morrow evening, and he said Chris,
when'll you marry me? and she quivered strangely and sweetly
as he said that, his hands holding her again, but gently. And
then something happened, and the happening was a yawn, she
yawned as though her head would fall off, she couldn t stop
yawning; and a laugh came in the middle of it and that only
made it worse. And Ewan let go of her again, maybe he was
nearly in a rage at first, and then he yawned himself, they
stood like two daft geese, yawning, and then they were laughing
together, holding hands, not laughing too loud in case they’d
be heard. And five minutes after that Ewan was far on his way
to the steading of Upperhill and Chris lying in her bed, she’d
hardly touched it when she thought of Ewan, she wanted to
think of him long and long, only next minute she was fast
asleep.
It didn’t seem that minute had passed when she heard Uncle
Tam come chapping at her door, fair testy, Come away, come
away, now; there's a fire to light and your Auntie wants her tea.
She sat up in bed, still sleepy and dazed, All right. Uncle Tam,
and yawned and didn’t move for a minute, remembering the
things of the night and day she’d forgotten in sleep. And then
she threw off the blankets and got out from the bed, and stretched
till each muscle was taut and quivering, she felt light and free
and fine, not at all Chris Guthrie with the grave brown face
and heavy hair, light and free as a feather; and without a
stitch on she did a little dance at her window in the splash of
early sun that came there—what a speak for Kinraddie were she
seen! And she was singing to herself as she dressed and went
slipping downstairs, Uncle was kneeling at the kitchen fire,
like a cow with colic, and fair sour in the face. You're in fine
tune this morning, he glowered, and she said Ay, Uncle, I'm that,
SEED-TIME
161
give the sticks to me^ and had them out of his hand and the fire
snapping into them all in a minute.
Uncle went out to the close then, to look over the fields for
the horses, and came back at a run, his little quoit medals swing¬
ing and clashing from his meikle belly, Mighty, Chris, there's
no sign of a horse! She didn’t turn round, just said You could
hardly have looked in the stable, and heard him stop and breathe
a great breath, and then go out again. And not a word more he
said at the breakfast, he went up to their room to pack; but
Auntie asked how the horses came to be in and was told Chris
had done it herself, with Chae Strachan and Ewan to help.
She seemed fair shamed to hear that, Auntie Janet, but angry
as well, she whisked round the house like a wasp, Jh well, it's
plain you've no use for your relatives here, I only pray you don't
come to disaster. And Chris said That's awfully fine of you,
Juntie, and that made her madder than ever, but Chris didn’t
care, she didn’t care though all the world, all Kinraddie and the
Howe, went mad and choked itself with its bootlaces over the
things that had been between her and Ewan.
If it wasn’t in a rage it was fair in a stir of scandal by postman
time, Kinraddie. Not a thing but it knew of her day in Stone¬
haven with that coarse tink brute, Ewan Tavendale, they’d
been seen to go wandering out to Dunnottar together, they’d
hidden away down in a hole by the sea—what did they that
for if they’d nothing to hide? The postie told this to Auntie
while Chris meated the chickens, Auntie fair grew worked
up and forgot to rage, near crying she was as she told the story
to Chris. How funny were folk! Chris thought, standing and
fronting that trembling face. You knew them, saw through
them, tied them up in little packets stowed away in your mind,
labelled COARSE or TINKS or FINE; and they came
tumbling from the packets at the very first shake, mixed and
up-jumbled, she’d never known a soul bide neat and sure in his
packet yet. For here was Auntie near crying because she
thought her niece had been raped by Ewan Tavendale over¬
night, ashamed for her, sorry for her, fair set to carry her off
162 SUNSET SONG
to Aberdeen and cover her shame. But Chris said There's
nothing to cry about yet, Auntie Janet, Ewan and I haven't
lain together. We'll wait till we're married, and laughed at
her Auntie’s face, it was funny and pitiful both at once. And
Auntie said He's to marry you then? and Chris said she hoped
so, but you never knew, and Auntie fell in a fearsome stew
again, it wasn’t fair to torment her like that, but that was the
mood of Chris that morning.
Then Chae Strachan came up from the Knapp and looked
at old Bob lying dead in his park. He shook his head over him,
he doubted if the knacker would pay more than a pound—the
closest muckers in Scotland, knackers, and that was fair saying
a lot. Syne he promised to drive Auntie and her man to the
station, and went back to the Knapp for his gig and was up and
waiting before you could blink. And Chris helped her relatives
up in the gig, and sent them her love to her brothers, and off the
gig spanked, they looked over their shoulders and saw her stand
laughing, she didn’t care a button, coarse quean that she was.
And fair a relief was the riddance, the place to herself again;
and then as she watched the gig whip round the corner into the
turnpike it came on her that it wasn’t again, it was just the
first time! Blawearie was hers, there wasn’t a soul in the place
but herself, nobody had a right to come near it but if she
allowed. The honeysuckle was blinding sweet in the sun, wet
still, and she stood beside it and buried her face in it, laughed
into it, blushed in it, remembering herself of the night before.
And Ewan would be up to see her soon, to see her . . . and
she wouldn’t think of more! she had hundreds of things to do.
By noon she had dinner set for the old wife sent from Stone¬
haven. And then she heard Chae’s gig come driving up to
Blawearie and there was Chae and an old bit body, fair tottery
she seemed as she got from the gig, with a black mutch on and
a string bag gripped in her hand. But when she’d reached the
ground she was none so tottery, she said that the heights aye
feared her legs; and she looked Chris all over as though to make
sure of her, living or dead, and asked Where'll I put my box.
SEED-TIME
163
Mem? And Chris blushed for shame that any old soul should
Mem at her, Maybe Chae will carry it up for us? And Chae
said Ochyfine that, and hoisted the old tin thing on his shoulder,
and went swaggering into the house, and Mrs. Melon followed
after and Chris turned to Chae’s gig.
By the time Chae came down she had nearly unyoked it,
Chae cried DamrCt^ Chris, what's on? and she told him Dinner,
you're to stay for that. So he was fell pleased, though he hummed
and hawed a minute about rousting back to the Knapp. But
she smiled at him, that way she’d done to the boy in Semple’s
office, and Chae stared at her and wound up his waxed mouser
and twinkled his eyes and gave her shoulder a slap, Lord, Chris,
they'll right soon be after you, the lads, with your eyes like thatl
And he gave a bit sigh as though, other times, other ways,
he’d have headed the band himself.
So into the kitchen he came and sat himself down with old
Mistress Melon, and Chris dished up the rabbit stew and they
ate a great dinner, Mistress Melon was a funny old wife as soon
as she saw you put on no airs. She’d a great red face as though
she’d just unbended from a day’s hard baking, and pale blue
eyes like a summer sky, and faded hair that had once been brown,
and Chris soon saw she was maybe the biggest gossip that had
ever come into Kinraddie, and faith! that meant the challenging
of many a champion. But her stories of Stonehaven had a
lilt and a laugh, and the best was the one of the Provost that
had lost his stud in his tumbler when speaking to a teetotal
gathering. And Chae said that was a fine one, Damn't,
mistress, when 1 was in Africa . . . and he told them a story of a
man he knew, a black he’d been, real brave, and he found a
diamond, on his own ground too, but as soon as the British
heard of it they sent to arrest him for’t. And what had that
black childe done? Swallowed the damned thing and nothing
of him could the British make, and they couldn’t arrest him,
and the black got his diamond back in a day or so in the course
of nature, they were awful constipated folk, the blacks.
All the time he was telling the story Chae had been tearing
SUNSET SONG
164
into his rabbit and oat-cake; and soon’s he’d finished one plate
he took a look over the pot and cried God, that was right fine,
Chris quean. Is there more on the go? Chris liked that, it was
fine to have somebody that was hungry and liked his meat and
didn’t make out he was gentry or polite, there was less politeness
about Chae than about a potato fork. Mistress Melon was
eating right heartily too, and syne Chae told them another
story, about a lion that he and the black head childe had hunted,
they’d been awful chief together. . . . And Mistress Melon
asked What, you and the lion? and winked at Chris, but Chae
wasn’t a bit put out, he just said Damn't no, mistress, me and
the head man^ and went on with the story again, it was plain
Mistress Melon thought he was a bit of a liar till suddenly,
casual-like, Chae opened the front of his sark and finished up
And that was the bit momenta the damned beast left on me.
Syne they saw the marks on his chest, the marks of great
raking claws they were they had torn fair deep and sure, and
Chae’s dark body-hair didn’t grow in them. So Mistress
Melon was fair stammy-gastered at that; and said so to Chris
when Chae was gone.
Soon as that was Chris set to arranging with the Melon
wife how the two of them would partition the work, Mistress
Melon could do the cooking and cleaning, Chris preferred the
outside, she’d milk and see to the kine; and they’d get on
bravely, no doubt. Mistress Melon was a fell good worker in
spite of her awful tongue, she’d cleared up the dinner things
and washed them and put them away ere Chris was well out of
the house. Then down on her knees she went and was scrub¬
bing the kitchen floor, Chris was glad enough to see her at that,
she hated scrubbing herself. If only she’d been born a boy she’d
never had such hatings vexing her, she’d have ploughed up parks
and seen to their draining, lived and lived, gone up to the hills a
shepherd and never had to scunner herself with the making of
beds or the scouring of pots. But neither would she ever have
had Ewan hold her as last night he had.
And then she blushed and went on in silence with the
SEED-TIME 165
cleaning of the byre, thinking of his coming and what she would
say to him and the thing it was they’d arrange. Before she
knew it the new plan came shaping up bravely in her mind,
neat and trim and trig, and when she looked out and saw the
gloaming near and went over the close and down through the
parks for the kye, she had everything fixed, it didn’t matter a
fig what folk might say.
So when Ewan came in by at last she waited him ben in
the parlour, with a great fire kindled there and the two big
leather chairs drawn close. It was Mistress Melon that
brought him through, her meikle red face fair shaking with
ill-fashionce, agog to know what was toward. But Chris just
said Thank you, Mistress Melon^ and ticed Ewan over to his
chair, and took his cap from him and made him sit down and
fair closed the door in the old wife s face. It was bright and
warm in the room, she turned round and saw her lad sit so; and
then she raised her head and saw herself in the long, old mirror
of the parlour wall, and thought how she d changed, it crept on
you and you hardly noted, in ways you were still as young
as the quean with the plaits that had run by Marget to catch
the scholars’ train. But she saw herself then in her long green
skirt, long under the knee, and her hair wound in its great fair
plaits about her head, and her high cheek-bones that caught
the light and her mouth that was well enough, her figure was
better still; and she knew for one wild passing moment herself
both frightened and sorry she should be a woman, she’d never
dream things again, she’d live them, the days of dreaming were
by; and maybe they had been the best ; and there was Ewan
waiting her, the great quiet cat, reddening and turning his
head up with its smouldering eyes.
She went to him then and put her hand on his shoulder and
before she knew it they were close together and so stayed long
after they had finished with kissing, just quiet, in the firelight,
his arms about her, her head on his shoulder, watching the fire.
And when at last they began to speak she put her hands over
his lips, whispering to him to whisper in case Mistress Melon
SUNSET SONG
166
should be listening out by. Maybe she wasn’t but in the
shortest while they heard her go stamping about the kitchen,
singing a hymn fell loud, and that was a bit suspicious.
But they ceased from heeding her soon enough, they’d a
hundred things to plan and discuss, there in the fireglow, they
lit no lamp, Chris listened with her head down-bent as he told
her he couldn’t marry, he’d no more than a hundred pounds
saved up, they’d have to wait. And she told him she had three
hundred pounds, no credit to her, it was father’s saving, but if
she and Ewan married fair soon he could take over Blawearie’s
lease, they could stay where they were, and that would be fine^
no need for you any day then to go back through the parks to
Upperhill. He kissed her again at that, hurting her lips, but she
didn’t heed, it was fine to be hurt like that; but she wouldn’t
kiss back till he’d put him his Highland pride in his pouch and
muttered Jll right.
They’d planned to be married in December and as they’d
planned so the thing worked out without any hitch at all. In
November Ewan found and fee’d a substitute foreman for
Upperhill, a quiet-like childe James Leslie; and though old
Gordon was none so pleased he couldn’t well afford to fall out
with so near a neighbour as the new Blawearie. Chris went
into Stonehaven again with Ewan and saw the man Semple,
he was fair suspicious, at first, but she argued him soon from that,
and he got the lease changed to Ewan’s name, and well-feathered
his own nest in the changing, no doubt.
By then the news was no news, Kinraddie knew all, and
when they came from the station that night they met in with
Ellison down from the Mains, he’d been waiting them there
to go by and he wouldn’t have it but that they go up to the
house and drink their own healths in a dram. Mistress Ellison
was gentry and nice, more gentry than nice, poor thing, she
was still no more than a servant quean and fleered and arched
SEED-TIME
167
to make Chris and Ewan blush, she managed with Ewan. But
Chris kept cool as ice, and nearly as friendly, she didn’t see that
a joke was less dirty if a neighbour spoke it. She and Ewan
fair quarrelled over that when they left the Mains, it was their
first quarrel and she wouldn’t let him touch her, she said If you
like foul stories, I don't, and he said, prigging at her, Oh, don't
be a fool, Chris quean, and she said There's no need for you marry
a fool, then, and the Highland temper quite went with him then,
he flared up like a whin with a match at it, Don't be feared, I've
no such intention! and off he went, up over the hill through the
evening parks. Chris walked on prim and cold and quick, it
was near to sunset, she turned her head, she couldn’t but help
it, to see if he wasn’t looking back, he wasn’t; and that was too
much, she stopped and cried Ewan! and he wheeled like a shot
and came running to her, she was crying in earnest by then,
she cried up against his coat while he held her and panted and
swore at himself, Oh Chris, I didn't mean to hurt you! And
she sniffed You didn't, it was myself; and they made it all up again.
She walked home subdued-like that night, it wouldn’t be always
plain sailing, they’d awful tempers, both of them. Then she
saw the light of Blawearie shine steadfast across the parks and
her heart kindled to a queer, quiet warmth at that.
They’d arranged to be married on New Year’s Eve, most
folk would be free to come that day. For three evenings they
sat in Blawearie parlour and wrote their invitations to folk
they knew and some they didn’t, nearly every soul in Kinraddie
was asked, they couldn’t well miss out one of them. And to
Auntie and Uncle and Dod and Alec they wrote, and to Ewan’s
friend Mclvor, a Highlandman out of Ross. He hadn’t any
near relatives, Ewan, and faith! they were feint the loss.
Chris knew that some would be sore affronted she should
marry so close to her father’s death, and with all the stir they
intended, too. But Ewan said Damn it, you're only married
once as a general rule, and it wont hurt the old man in Kinraddie
kirkyard. So when Uncle wrote down from Auchterless that
he’d think black, burning shame to attend such a marriage,
SUNSET SONG
168
Ewan said he could blacken and burn till he was more like a
cinder heap than a man, for all they need care.
Chris was sorry they wouldn’t let her brothers come, but it
couldn’t be helped, she wasn’t to weep for that. So they
planned out a wedding they’d mind on when they grew old,
ordering food enough to feed the French, as the saying went,
Mistress Melon near burst her meikle face with amaze as the
packages came pouring in; and she spread the story of Chris’s
extravagance out through the Howe, she’d soon see the end of
old Guthrie’s silver. Folk shook their heads when they heard
of that, it was plain that the quean wouldn’t store the kiln long.
When Ewan went over to see to the banns the Reverend
Gibbon tried to read him a lecture about such a display so close
to John Guthrie’s death. But he gave it up quick enough when
Ewan began to spit like a cat and say the service he wanted
was a wedding, not a sermon. Syne it grew plain they couldn’t
meet so often, Ewan would have to bide at the Upperhill all the
day before the marriage. Chris kissed him good-bye that evening
and told him to look after himself, and herself looked after him,
troubled, knowing the kind of coarse things they might try him
with in the bothy. And try they did, but Ewan couped one
of them into the midden and threw young Gordon into the
horse-trough when that brute was trying the same on Ewan
himself; so they let him be, dour devils to handle, those High-
landmen.
And down in Blawearie next day, what with cooking and
chaving and tending to beasts, and wrestling with the worry
of the barn, it wasn’t half spruced for the dance, Chris might
well have gone off her head if Chae and Long Rob of the Mill
hadn’t come dandering up the road in the afternoon, shy-like,
bringing their presents. And Rob’s was fine, two great biscuit-
barrels in oak and silver; and Chae’s was from him and Kirsty,
sheets and pillows, kind of Mistress Strachan, that, when you
minded how the two of you’d fallen out over father ill. And
when they heard of the barn they cast off their coats, Leave it to
us, Chris lass, just telTs what you want; and they set to with
SEED-TIME
ladders and tow and fancy frills and worked till near it was dark,
redding up the place, it looked fine as a fairy-palace in a picture-
book when they finished. Chae said dnd who s your musician?
Chris nearly dropped through the floor with shock, she and
Ewan had fair forgot about music. But Chae said it didn t
matter, he’d bring his melodeon and Long Rob his fiddle;
and faith! if that didn’t content the folk they were looking
for a church parade of the Gordons, not a wedding.
Syne they bade good night to Chris, and they laughed at
her, kind-like, and said This time the morn you'll be a married
woman, Chris, not a quean. Sleep sound to-night! And she
laughed back and said Oh, fine that; but she blushed when
Long Rob began to glint his grey eyes at her, he’d have to think
of getting married himself, he said, fine it must be to sleep with
a slim bit the like of herself those coldrife winter nights. And
Chae said Away, Rob, feint the much sleep you'd give her!
And then they cried their good nights again and went off,
leaving Chris with such lonesome feeling as she’d seldom had,
all had been done that could be done, she wanted to sleep
but couldn’t sleep; and she wandered from room to room till
Mistress Melon was fair upset and cried For God's sake gang
to your bed, lass, I'll tend to the rest; if you don't lie doivn you'll
look more like a bull for the butcher's than a bride the mom.
And Chris laughed, she heard her laugh funny and faint-hke,
and said she supposed so, and went off to her room, but not to
bed. She sat by the window, it was a night that was rimed
with a frost of stars, rime in the sky and rime on the earth,
the Milky Way shone clear and hard and the black trees of
Blawearie waved their leafless boughs up against the window,
sparkling white with the hoar; and far across the countryside
for hours she watched the winking of the paraffin-lights in. the
farmhouses, till they sank and went out, and she was left in a
world that might well have been dead but that she lived.
Strange and eerie it was, sitting there, she couldn t move from
the frozen flow of thoughts that came to her then, daft things
she’d no need to think on her marriage eve . .. that this marriage
SUNSET SONG
170
of hers was nothing, that it would pass on and forward into
days that had long forgotten it, her life and Ewan’s, and they
pass also, and the face of the land change and change again in
the coming of the seasons and centuries till the last lights sank
away from it and the sea came flooding up the Howe, all her
love and tears for Ewan not even a ripple on that flood of
water far in the times to be. And then she found herself
cold as an icicle and got to her feet and at last began to get
from her clothes—strange to think that to-morrow and all
the to-morrows Ewan would share her room and her bed with
her.
She thought that cool and unwarmed, still in the grip of the
strange white dreaming that had been hers, looking down
at herself naked as though she looked at some other than
herself, a statue like that of the folk of olden time that they set
in the picture galleries. And she saw the light white on the
satin of her smooth skin then, and the long, smooth lines that
lay from waist to thigh, thigh to knee, and was glad her legs
were long from the knee to the ankle, that made legs seem
stumbling and stumpy, shortness there. And still impersonally
she bent to see if that dimple still hid there under her left
breast, it did, it was deep as ever. Then she straightened and
took down her hair and brushed it, standing so, silly to stand
without her night-gown, but that was the mood she was in,
somehow it seemed that never again would she be herself,
have this body that was hers and her own, those fine lines
that curved from thigh to knee hers, that dimple she’d loved
when a child—oh, years before!
And then a clock began to strike, it struck two, and suddenly
she was in a panic to be bedded and snug and herself again;
and was in between the sheets in an instant, cuddling herself
to some warmth and counting how many hours it would be
till morning. And oh! it was still so long!
SEED-TIME 171
It came in snow that morning; she looked out from her
window and saw it sheeting across the countryside, all silent;
but still the daft peewits wheeped and wheeled against the
hills, looking for the nests they’d lost in the harvest and couldn’t
forget. In the race and whip of the great broad flakes the
leafless trees stood shivering; but down below Mistress Melon
was already at work, Chris heard the clatter of the breakfast
things, it was time she herself was into her clothes, there were
hundreds of things to do.
Then she took out of the chest of drawers her under-things,
there was no need to wait to change them, and looked at them,
the silken vest, awful price it had been, and knickers and petti¬
coat, vest, knickers and petticoat all of a shade, blue, with
white ribbon; and they looked lovely and they smelt fine, she
buried her face in them, so lovely they were and the queer
feeling they brought her. And she changed her mind, she
couldn’t wear anything now she’d be wearing when she was
married, she put on her old things and her old skirt and went
down the stairs; and there was Mistress Melon smiling at her,
How do you feel on your marriage-morn, Chris?
And Chris said Fine, and Mistress Melon said that was a
good job, too, she’d known creatures of queans come down
fair hysterical, others that just shook with fright, still others
that spoke so undecent you knew fine a man’s bed was no
unco place for them. She hoped Chris would be awful happy,
no fear of that, and soon have a two-three bairns keep her out
of longer. And Chris said You never know^ and she ate her por¬
ridge and Mistress Melon hers, and they cleared the table and
scrubbed the kitchen and then Chris went out and tended the
beasts, the very horses seemed to guess there was an unco thing
on the go, Bess nozzled up against her shoulder; and there
in the barn when she peeked in it, right in the middle of the
floor were two great rats, sitting up on their tails, sniffing at
each other’s mouths, maybe kissing, and that was so funny,
she tried not to laugh, but gave a choked gurgle and flirt! the
rats were out of sight and into their holes.
SUNSET SONG
172
In the cornyard the hens came tearing about her, mad with
hunger, she gave them meat hot from the pot and then a
bushel of corn, they liked that line. But first the little bit
Wyandotte got up on the cartshaft and gave a great crow that
might have been heard in the Upperhill; and he cocked a bright
eye on her, first one eye and then the other, and Chris laughed
again.
She didn’t feel hurried after that, then the postman came,
fell dry, they gave him a dram and he licked his lips and said
Here’s to you, Chris! as blithe to drink to her health as to
blacken her character. He’d brought him two parcels, one was
a lovely bedspread from Mistress Gibbon of the Manse, nice
of the quiet-voiced English thing, and the other from the
Gordons of Upperhill, a canteen of cutlery, full enough of
knives and forks and things to keep you cleaning them a week
on end and not be finished, said Mistress Melon.
Then up the road came the wife of the grave-digger, Garth-
more, him that had buried father. Sore made as always she
was, poor thing, they’d asked her to come and lend them a hand
more out of pity then anything else; and when the three sat
down to dinner she said Eh, me! it’s fine to be young and be
married, and maybe he’ll treat you all right, but mine, my first
man, him that’s now dead, God! he was a fair bull of a man
and not only the first night, either. He was aye at it, near deaved
me to death he would if he hadn’t fallen over the edge of a quarry
on the road from the feeing-market some nine-ten years come
Martinmas. But Mistress Melon said, Havers, are you trying
to frighten the lass? She’ll be fine, her lad’s both blithe and
kind; and Chris loved her for that, she’d never seemed to see
and know Mistress Melon before, thinking her just a hard¬
working, hard-gossiping old body, now she saw the kindliness
of her shine out, her gossiping no more than the dreams she
aye dreamt and must tell to others. And then Mistress Melon
cried Away and get into your dress now, Chris, before the folk
come up.
It had left off snowing, Chris, dressing, saw from her window,
SEED-TIME
173
a sunless day; and a great patching of clouds was upon the sky,
the light below bright and sharp, flung by the snow itself; and
the smoke rose straight in the air. Far over the braes by
Upperhill where Ewan would be getting set in his clothes—
unless he’d done that long before in the morning—the sheep
were baaing in their winter buchts. Then Chris took off her
clothes, and stood white again, and put on the wedding things,
mother’d have like to see them, mother lying dead and forgotten
in Kinraddie kirkyard with the twins beside her. She found
herself weep then, slowly, hardly, lost and desolate a moment
without mother on her marriage-day. And than she shook
her head, Oh, don't be a fool, do you want to look a fright before
Ewan and the folk?
She peered at her face in the glass, then, fine! her eyes were
bright, the crying had helped them. Pretty in a way, not only
good-looking, she saw herself, dour cheek-bones softened for
the hour in their chilled bronze setting. And she combed out
her hair, it came far past her middle, thick and soft and sweet¬
smelling and rusty and tarnished gold. Then last was her dress,
blue also, but darker than her under-clothes because so short
was the time since father had died, she threaded the neck with a
narrow black ribbon but round her own neck put nothing, her
skin was the guerdon there.
So, ready, she turned herself round a minute, and held back
the skirt from her ankles and liked them, they were neat and
round, she had comely bones, her feet looked long and lithe
in the black silk stockings and shoes. She found herself a
hanky, last, and sprinkled some scent in that, only a little; and
hid it away in her breast and went down the stairs just as she
heard the first gig drive up.
That was the Strachans from Peesie’s Knapp, Mistress
Strachan fell long in the face at first. But Chae soon kindled
her up with a dram, he whispered to Chris that he’d look after
the drink; and Mistress Melon said it was aye best to have a
man body at that end of the stir. And before they could say
much more there came a fair stream of traffic up from the
SUNSET SONG
174
turnpike, all Kinraddie seemed on the move to Blawearie:
except the old folk from Netherhill, and they sent their kind
wishes and two clucking hens for Chris’s nests. The hens broke
the ice, you might say, for they got themselves loose from the
gig of the Netherhill folk and started a wild flutter and chirawk
everywhere, anywhere out of Blawearie. Long Rob of the
Mill was coming up the road at that minute, in his Sunday best,
and he met the first hen and heard the cry-out that followed
her, and he cried himself, Shoo, you bitch! The hen dodged
into the ditch, but Rob was after her, grabbing her, she squawked
fair piercing as he carried her up to the house, his fine Sunday
coat was lathered with snow; and he said that such-like work
would have been nothing to Chae, who had chased the bit
ostriches out in the Transvaal, but he’d had no training himself.
Syne he took up the dram that Chae had poured him and
cried Here's to the bonniest maid Kinraddie will mind for many a
year!
That was kind of him, Chris had been cool and quiet enough
until then, but she blushed at that, seeing Rob stand like a Viking
out of the picture-books with the iron-grey glint in his eyes.
Mistress Munro, though, was right sore jealous as usual,
she poked her nose in the air and said, and not over-low, The
great fool might wait for the tea before he starts his speechifying;
she was maybe mad that nobody had ever said she was bonny;
or if anybody ever had, he was an uncommon liar.
Then the Bridge End folk came up, then Ellison and his wife
and their daughter, and then the Gordons, and then the minister,
riding on his bicycle, it looked as though he’d had a fall or two
and he wasn’t in the best of temper, he wouldn’t have a dram,
No, thank you, Chae, he said, real stiff-like. And when Rob
gave him a sly bit look, You've been communing with Mother
Earth, I see, Mr. Gibbon^ he just turned his back and made
out he didn’t hear, and folk looked fair uncomfortable, all except
Long Rob himself and Chae, they winked one at the other and
then at Chris.
She thought the minister a fusionless fool, and went to the
SEED-TIME
175
door to see who else was coming; and there, would you believe
it, was poor old Pooty toiling up through the drifts with a great
parcel under his oxter, his old face was white with snow and
he shivered and boasted as he came in, peeking out below his
old, worn brows for Chris. Where's the hit lllllass? he cried,
and then saw her and put the parcel in her hands, and she
opened it then, as the custom was, and in it lay a fine pair of
shoes he had made for her, shoes of glistening leather with
gay green soles, and a pair of slippers, soft-lined with wool,
there wouldn’t be a grander pair in Kinraddie. And she said
Oh, thank you, and she knew that wasn’t enough, he stood
peering up at her like an old hen peers, she didn’t know why she
did it but she put her arms round him and kissed him, folk
laughed at that, all but the two of them, Pooty blinked and stut¬
tered till Long Rob reached out a hand and pulled him into a
chair and cried Wet your whistle with this, Pooty man, you've
hardly a minute ere the wedding begins.
And he was right, for up the road came walking the last
two, Ewan and his best man, the Highlander Mclvor, near six
feet six, red-headed, red-faced, a red Highlandman that bowed
so low to Chris that she felt a fool; and presented his present,
and it was a ram’s horn shod with silver, real bonny and unco,
like all Highland things. But Ewan took never a look at
Chris, they made out they didn’t see one the other, and Mistress
Melon whispered to her to go tidy her hair, and when she came
down again all the place was quiet, there was hardly a murmur.
She stopped at the foot of the stairs with the heart beating
so against her skin it was like to burst from her breast; and
there was Chae Strachan waiting her, he held out his arm and
patted her hand when she laid it on his arm, and he whispered
Ready then, Chris?
Then he opened the parlour door, the place was crowded,
there were all the folk sitting in chairs, solemn as a kirk
congregation, and over by the window stood the Reverend
Gibbon, very stern and more like a curly bull than ever; and in
front of him waited Ewan and his best man, Mclvor. Chris
i76 SUNSET SONG
had for bridesmaids the little Ellison girl and Maggie Jean
Gordon, they joined with her, she couldn’t see clear for a minute
then, or maybe too clear, she didn’t seem to be seeing with her
own eyes at all. And then Chae had loosed her hand from
his arm and she and Ewan stood side by side, he was wearing
a new suit, tweed it was, and smelt lovely, his dark face was
solemn and frightened and white, he stood close to her, she knew
him more frightened than she was herself. Something of her
own fear went from her then, she stood listening to the Reverend
Gibbon and the words he was reading, words that she’d never
heard before, this was the first marriage she’d ever been at.
And then she heard Chae whisper behind her and listened
more carefully still, and heard Ewan say I will., in a desperate
kind of a voice, and then said it herself, her voice was as happy
and clear as well you’d have wished, she smiled up at Ewan,
the white went from his face and the red came in spate. The
Red Highlander behind slipped something forward, she saw it
was the ring, and then Ewan fitted it over her finger, his fingers
were hot and unsteady, and Mr. Gibbon closed his eyes and
said, Let us pray.
And Chris held on to Ewan’s hand and bent her head and
listened to him, the minister; and he asked God to bless their
union, to give them courage and strength for the difficulties
that the years might bring to them, to make fruitful their
marriage and their love as pure and enduring in its fulfilment as
in its conception. They were lovely words, words like the
marching of a bronze-leafed beech on the lips of a summer
sky. So Chris thought, her head down-bent and her hand in
Ewan’s, then she lost the thread that the words were strung on,
because of that hand of Ewan’s that still held hers; and she
curved her little finger into his palm, it was hard and rough there
and she tickled the skin, secretly, and his hand quivered and she
took the littlest keek at his face. There was that smile of his,
flitting like a startled cat; and then his hand closed firm and
warm and sure on hers, and hers lay quiet in his, and the minister
had finished and was shaking their hands.
SEED-TIME
177
He hesitated a minute and then bent to kiss Chris; close to
hers she saw his face older far than when he came to Kinraddie,
there were pouches under his eyes, and a weary look in his eyes,
and his kiss she didn’t like. Ewan’s was a peck, but Chae’s
was fine, it was hearty and kind though he reeked of the awful
tobacco he smoked, and then Long Rob’s, it was clean and
sweet and dry, like a whiff from the Mill itself; and then it seemed
every soul in Kinraddie was kissing her, except only Tony, the
daftie, he’d been left at home. Everybody was speaking and
laughing and slapping Ewan on the back and coming to kiss
her, those that knew her well and some that didn’t. And last
it was Mistress Melon, her eyes were over bright but careful
still, she nearly smothered Chris and then whispered Up to
your room and tidy yourself, they've messed your hair.
She escaped them then, the folk trooped out to the kitchen
where the fire was roaring, Chae passed round the drams again,
there was port for the women if they wanted it and raspberry
drinks for the children. Soon’s the parlour was clear Mistress
Melon and Mistress Garthmore had the chairs whisked aside,
the tables put forward and the cloths spread; and there came a
loud tinkling as they spread the supper, barely past three though
it was. But Chris knew it fell likely that few had eaten much
at their dinners in Kinraddie that day, there wouldn’t have been
much sense with a marriage in prospect: and as soon as they’d
something solid in their bellies to foundation the drink, as a man
might say, the better it would be. In her room that wouldn’t
be her room for long Chris brushed her hair and settled her
dress and looked at her flushed, fair face, it was nearly the same,
hard to believe though you thought it. And then something
felt queer about her, the ring on her hand it was, she stood and
stared at the thing till a soft bit whispering drew her eyes to the
window, the snow had come on again, a scurry and a blinding
drive from down the hills; and below in the house they were
crying The bride, where is she?
So down she went, folk had trooped back in the parlour by
then and were sitting them round the tables, the minister at
M
i78 SUNSET SONG
the head of one, Long Rob at the head of another, in the
centre one the wedding cake stood tall on its stand with the
Highland dirk beside it that Ewan had gotten _ from Mclvor
to do the cutting. The wind had risen storming without as
Chris stood to cut, there in her blue frock with the long, loose
sleeves, there came a great whoom in the chimney and some
looked out at the window and said that the drifts would be a
fell feet deep by the morn. And then the cake was cut and Chris
sat down, Ewan beside her, and found she wasn’t hungry at
all, about the only soul in the place that wasn’t, everybody
else was taking a fair hearty meal.
The minister had thawed away by then, he was laughing
real friendly-like in his bull-like boom of a voice, telling of
other weddings he’d made in his time, they’d all been gey funny
and queer-like weddings, things that you laughed at, not fine
like this. And Chris listened and glowed with pride that
everything at hers was just and right; and then again as so often
that qualm of doubt came down on her, separating her away
from these kindly folk of the farms—kind, and aye ready to
believe the worst of others they heard, unbelieving that others
could think the same of themselves. So maybe the minister no
more than buttered her, she looked at him with the dark, cool
doubt in her face, next instant forgot him in a glow of
remembrance that blinded all else: she was married to
Ewan! ^
Beside her: He whispered Oh, eat something, Chris, you'll fair
go famished^ and she tried some ham and a bit of the dumpling,
sugared and fine, that Mistress Melon had made. And every¬
body praised it, as well they might, and cried for more helpings,
and more cups of tea, and there were scones and pancakes and
soda-cakes and cakes made with honey that everybody ate;
and little Wat Strachan stopped eating of a sudden and cried
Mother, Tm not right in the belly! everybody laughed at that
but Kirsty, she jumped to her feet and hurried him out, and
came back with him with his face real frightened. But faith!
it didn’t put a stop to the bairn, he started in again as hungry
SEED-TIME
179
as ever, and Chae cried out IVell, well, let him be, maybe it tasted
as fine coming up as it did going down!
Some laughed at that, others reddened up and looked real
affronted, Chris herself didn’t care. Cuddiestoun and his wife
sat opposite her, it was like watching a meikle collie and a
futret at meat, him gulping down everything that came his way
and a lot that didn’t, he would rax for that; and his ugly face,
poor stock, fair shone and glimmered with the exercise. But
Mistress Munro snapped down at her plate with sharp, quick
teeth, her head never still a minute, just like a futret with a dog
nearby. They were saying hardly anything, so busied they were,
but Ellison next to them had plenty to say, he’d taken a dram
over much already and was crying things across the table to
Chris, Mistress Tavendale he called her at every turn; and he
said that she and Mistress Ellison must get better acquaint.
Maybe he’d regret that the morn, if he minded his promise:
and that wasn’t likely. Next to him was Kirsty and the boys
and next to that the minister’s table with Alec Mutch and
his folk and young Gordon; a real minister’s man was Alec,
awful chief-like the two of them were, but Mistress Mutch
sat lazy as ever, now and then she cast a bit look at Chris out
of the lazy, gley eyes of her, maybe there was a funniness in the
look that hadn’t to do with the squint.
Up at Rob’s table an argument rose, Chris hoped that it
wasn’t religion, she saw Mr. Gordon’s wee face pecked up to
counter Rob. But Rob was just saying what a shame it was that
folk should be shamed nowadays to speak Scotch—or they called
it Scots if they did, the split-tongued sourocks! Every damned
little narrow-dowped rat that you met put on the English if
he thought he’d impress you—as though Scotch wasn’t good
enough now, it had words in it that the thin bit scraichs of the
English could never come at. And Rob said You can tell me,
man, what's the English for sotter, or greip, or smore, or pleiter,
gloaming or glunching or welTkenspeckled? And if you said gloaming
ivas sunset you'd fair be a liar; and you're hardly that, Mr. Gordon.
But Gordon was real decent and reasonable, You can't help
i8o SUNSET SONG
it, Rob. If folk are to get on in the ‘world nowadays, away from
the ploughshafts and out of the pleiter, they must use the English,
orra though it be. And Chae cried out that was right enough,
and God! who could you blame? And a fair bit breeze got up
about it all, every soul in the parlour seemed speaking at once;
and as aye when they spoke of the thing they agreed that the
land was a coarse, coarse life, you’d do better at almost anything
else, folks that could send their lads to learn a trade were right
wise, no doubt of that, there was nothing on the land but work,
work, work, and chave, chave, chave, from the blink of day
till the fall of night, no thanks from the soss and setter, and
hardly a living to be made.
Syne Cuddiestoun said that he’d heardof a childe up Laurence¬
kirk way, a banker’s son from the town he was, and he’d come
to do farming in a scientific way. So he’d said at first, had the
childe, but God! by now you could hardly get into the place
for the clutter of machines that lay in the yard; and he wouldn’t
store the kiln long. But Chae wouldn’t have that, he swore
Damn't, no, the machine's the best friend of man, or it would
be so in a socialist state. It's coming and the chaving'll end,
you'll see, the machine'll do all the dirty work. And Long Rob
called out that he’d like right well to see the damned machine
that would muck you a pigsty even though they all turned
socialist to-morrow. And they all took a bit laugh at that,
Chris and Ewan were fair forgotten for a while, they looked at
each other and smiled, Ewan reached down and squeezed her
hand and Chris wished every soul but themselves a hundred
miles from Blawearie.
But then Chae cried Fill up your glasses, folk, the best man has
a toast. And the red Highlander, Mclvor, got up to his feet
and bowed his red head to Chris, and began to speak; he spoke
fine, though funny with that Highland twist, he said he’d never
seen a sweeter quean than the bride or known a better friend than
the groom; and he wished them long and lovely days, a marriage
in the winter had the best of it. For was not the Spring to come
and the seed-time springing of their love, and the bonny days
SEED-TIME iBi
of the summer, flowering it, and autumn with the harvest of
their days? And when they passed to that other winter to¬
gether they would know that was not the end of it, it was but
a sleep that in another life would burgeon fresh from another
earth. He could never believe but that two so young and fair
as his friend and his friend’s wife, once made one flesh would
be one in the spirit as well; and have their days built of happiness
and their nights of the music of the stars. And he lifted his
glass and cried The bride! looking at Chris with his queer,
bright eyes, the daft Highland poet, they were all like that, the
red Highlanders. And everybody cried Good luck to her! and
they all drank up and Chris felt herself blush from head to foot
under all the blue things she wore.
And then Long Rob of the Mill was making a speech,
different from Mclvor’s as well it might be. He said he’d never
married himself because he’d over-much respect for those kittle
folk, women; but if he’d been ten years younger he was damned
if his respect would have kept him from having a try for Chris
Guthrie, and beating that Highland childe, Ewan, at his own
fell game. That was just Ewan’s luck, he thought, not his
judgment, and Chris was clean thrown away on her husband,
as she’d have been on any husband at all; but himself. Ah
well, no doubt she’d train him up well, and he advised Ewan
now, from the little that he knew of marriage, never to counter
his wife; not that he thought she wasn’t well able to look
after herself, but just that Ewan mightn’t find himself worsted
though he thought himself winner. Marriage, he took it,
was like yoking together two two-year-olds, they were kittle
and brisk on the first bit rig—unless they’d fallen out as soon as
they were yoked and near kicked themselves and their harness
to bits—but the second rig was the testing-time, it was then
you knew when one was pulling and one held back, the one that
had sheer sweirty—and that was a word for Mr. Gordon to
put into English—in its bones, and the one with a stout bit
heart and a good guts. Well, he wouldn’t say more about
horses, though faith! it was a fascinating topic, he’d just come
182
SUNSET SONG
back to marriage and say they all wished the best to Chris, so
sweet and trig, and to Ewan, the Highland cateran, and long
might they live and grow healthy, wealthy, and well content.
Then they all drank up again, and God knows who mightn’t
have made the next speech if Chae then hadn’t stood up and
cried The night's near on us. Who's game for a daylight dance
at Chris's wedding?
So out they all went to the kitchen, it was cold enough there
from the heat of the room, but nothing to the coldrife air of the
barn when the first of them had crossed the close and stood in
the door. But Mistress Melon had kindled a brazier with
coal, it crackled fine, well away from the straw, Rob tuned
up his fiddle, Chae squeaked on his melodeon, it began to feel
brisk and warm even while you stood and near shivered your sark
off. Chris was there with the men, of course, and the children
and Mistress Gordon and Mistress Mutch and Mistress
Strachan were there, Mistress Munro had stayed behind to
help clear the tables, she said, and some whispered it was more
than likely she’d clear most of the clearings down her own
throat, by God she couldn’t have eaten a mouthful since
Candlemas.
But then Chae cried Strip the Willow^ and they all lined
up, and the melodeon played bonnily in Chae’s hands, and Long
Rob’s fiddle-bow was darting and glimmering, and in two
minutes, in the whirl and go off Strip the Willow^ there wasn’t
a cold soul in Blawearie barn, or a cold sole either. Then here,
soon’s they’d finished, was Mistress Melon with a great jar
of hot toddy to drink, she set it on a bench between Chae and
Long Rob. And whoever wanted to drink had just to go
there, few were bashful in the going, too; and another dance
started, it was a schottische, and Chris found herself in the
arms of the minister, he could dance like a daft young lad.
And as he swung her round and around he opened his mouth
and cried Hooch! and so did the red Highlander, Mclvor,
Hooch! careering by with fat Kirsty Strachan, real scared-like
she looked, clipped round the waist.
SEED-TIME
183
Then Chae and Long Rob hardly gave them a breather,
they were at it dance on dance; and every time they stopped
for a panting second Chae would dip in the jar and give Rob a
wink and cry Here's to you, man! and Rob would dip, solemn-like
as well, and say Same to you! and off the fiddle and melodeon
would go again, faster than ever. Ewan danced the schottische
with prim Mistress Gordon, but for waltzing he found a quean
from the Mains, a red-faced, daft-like limmer, she screamed
with excitement and everybody laughed, Chris laughed as well.
Some were watching to see if she did, she knew, and she heard
a whisper she’d have all her work cut out looking after him,
coarse among the queans he was, Ewan Tavendale. But she
didn’t care, she knew it a lie, Ewan was hers and hers only;
but she wished he would dance with her for a change. And
here at the Petronella he was, he anyway hadn’t been drinking,
in the noise of the dance as they swayed up and down the barn
he whispered IVell, Chris? and she whispered back Fine, and
he said You're the bonniest thing ever seen in Kinraddie, Long
Rob was right. And she said she liked him to think so and he
pulled her back in the darkness away from the dancers, and kissed
her quickly and slowly, she didn’t hurry either, it was blithe
and glad to stand there kissing, each strained to hear when they’d
be discovered.
And then they were, Chae crying Where's the bride and the
groom? Damn'ty they're lost! and out they’d to come. Chae cried
was there anyone else could play the melodeon? and young Jock
Gordon cried back to him Ay, fine that, and came stitering
across the floor and sat himself down by the toddy-jar, and
played loud and clear and fine. Then Chae caught Chris, he
said to Ewan Away, you greedy brute, wait a ivhile till she's yours
forever and aye, and he danced right neatly, you didn’t expect it
from Chae, with his grey eyes laughing down at you. And
as he danced he said suddenly, grave-like, Never doubt your
Ewan, Chris, or never let him know that you do. That's the hell of
a married life. Praise him up and tell him he's fine, that there's
not a soul in the Howe can stand beside him, and he'll want
SUNSET SONG
184
to cuddle you till the day he dies; and he'll blush at the sight of
you fifty years on as much as he does the day. She said Til try,
and Thank you, Chae, and he said Och, it must be the whisky
speaking, and surrendered her up to Ellison, and took the
melodeon from Gordon again, but staggered and leant back
against the sack that hung as a draught-shield behind the
musician’s place. Down came the sack and there among the
hay was the minister and the maid from the Mains that had
scraiched so loud, she’d her arms round him and the big curly
bull was kissing the quean like a dog lapping up its porridge.
Chris’s heart near stopped, but Chae snatched up the sack,
hooked it back on its hook again, nobody saw the sight except
himself and Chris and maybe Long Rob. But you couldn’t be
sure about Rob, he looked as solemn as five owls all in one,
and was playing as though, said Chae, he was paid by piece¬
work and not by time.
Between eight and nine Mistress Melon came out to the
barn and cried them to supper, the storm had left off, all but a
flake that sailed down now and then like a sailing gull in the
beam from the barn door. On the ground the snow crinkled
under their feet, frost had set in, the folk stood and breathed
in the open air, and laughed, and cried one to the other, Man,
Vll have aching joints the morn! The women ran first to the
house, to tidy their hair, Ewan saw everybody in, except
Munro of the Cuddiestoun, he was nowhere to be seen.
And then Ewan heard a funny bit breathing as he passed
by the stable; and he stopped and opened the door and struck a
match, and there was Munro, all in his Sunday-best, lying in
the stall beside Clyde the horse, and his arms were round the
beast’s neck, and faith! the beast looked real disgusted. Ewan
shook him and cried Munro, you can't sleep here, but Munro
just blinked the eyes in his face, daft-like, and grumbled Why
not? Syne Alec Mutch turned back from the house to see
what all the stir was about, and both he and Ewan had another
go at the prostrate Munro, but damn the move would he make,
Alec cried To hell with him, leave him there with the mare,
SEED-TIME 185
she's maybe a damned sight kinder a bed-mate than ever was
that futret of a wife of his.
So they closed the door of the stable and went into their
supper, everybody ate near as well as at tea-time, fair starved they
were with the dancing and drink. Chris had thought she her¬
self was tired till she ate some supper, and then she felt fresh
as ever, and backed up Long Rob, who looked twice as sober
as any of the men and had drunk about twice as much as any
three of them, when he cried IVho’s for a dance again? Mistress
Melon had the toddy-jar filled fresh full and they carried that
out, everybody came to the barn this time except Mistress
Munro, No, no, Vll dear the table.
And young Elsie Ellison, wondering for why the creature
should stay behind, stayed herself and took a bit keek round
the corner of the door: and there was Mistress Munro, with a
paper bag in her hand, stuffing it with scones and biscuits and
cake, and twisting her head this side and that, like the head of a
futret. So Elsie, fair scared, ran off to the barn and caught
at her father’s tails and cried The Cuddiestoun wife's away home
with the pieces, and Ellison, he was whiskied up to high tune by
then, cried Let her run to hell and be damned to her.
Syne he started a tale about how once she’d insulted him,
the dirty Scotch bitch. But Long Rob and Chae were striking
up a dance again and Chris heard no more of the Ellison story,
dancing a waltz with young Jock Gordon, it was like flying,
Jock’s face was white with excitement. The fourth dance
Alec Mutch, the fool, began to stiter the floor, backwards and
forwards, he was a real nuisance till he passed Long Rob and then
Rob cried Hoots, Alec, man, you're feet are all wrong! and
thrust out a foot among Alec’s and couped him down and
Chae shoved him aside to the straw with a foot and a hand,
and played on with the other foot and hand, or maybe with a
foot and his teeth, a skilly man, Chae.
Mistress Mutch said nothing, just standing and laughing
and smoking at her cigarette. There were more men than
women in the barn, though, even when the men made do
186 SUNSET SONG
with a little quean, and soon Chris found herself dancing with
Mistress Mutch, the great, easy-going slummock, she spoke
slow and easy as though she’d just wakened up from her sleep.
Chris couldn’t tell what way she looked with that gleying eye,
but what she spoke was Take things easy in married life, Chris,
but not over-easy, that's been MT ruin. Though God knows it'll
make not a difference in a hundred years time and we're dead.
Don't let Ewan saddle you with a birn of bairns, Chris, it kills
you and eats your heart away, for bye the unease and the dirt of it.
Don't let him, Chris, they're all the same, men; and you won't
well steer clear of the first or second. But you belong to yourself,
mind that.
Chris went hot and cold and then wanted to ask something
of Mistress Mutch and looked at her and found she couldn’t,
she’d just have to find the thing out for herself. Long Rob
came down to dance with her next, he’d left the fiddle to old
Gordon, and he asked what that meikle slummock had been
saying to her? And Chris said Oh, just stite, and Rob said
Mind, don't let any of those damned women fear you, Chris;
it's been the curse of the human race, listening to advice. And
Chris said But I'm listening to yours, Rob, now, amn't 1? He
nodded to her, solemn, and said, Oh, you've your head screwed on
and you'll manage fine. But mind, if there's ever a thing you
want with a friend, not to speak it abroad all over Kinraddie,
I'll aye be there at the Mill to help you. Chris thought that a
daft-like speak for Rob, kind maybe he meant it, but she’d have
Ewan, who else could she want?
And then the fun slackened off, the barn was warm, folk
sat or lay on the benches or straw, Chris looked round and saw
nothing of the minister then, maybe he’d gone. She whispered
to Chae about that, but he said Damn the fears, he's out to be
sick, can't you hear him like a cat with a fish-bone in its throat?
And hear him they could, but Chris had been right after all,
he didn’t come back. Maybe he was shamed and maybe he
just lost his way, for next noon there were folk who swore they’d
seen the marks of great feet that walked round and round in a
SEED-TIME
i87
circle, circle after circle, all across the parks from Blawearie
to the Manse; and if these weren’t the minister’s feet they
must have been the devil’s, you could choose whichever you
liked.
No sooner was the dancing done than there were cries
Rob, what about a song now, man? And Rob said Och, ay, I'll
manage that fine, and he off with his coat and loosened his
collar and sang them Ladies of Spain; and then he turned round
to where Chris stood beside her Ewan and sang The Lass that
Made the Bed to Me:
Her hair was like the link o’ gowd,
Her teeth were like the ivorie,
Her cheeks like lilies dipt in wine,
The lass that made the bed to me.
Her bosom was the driven snaw,
Two drifted heaps sae fair to see,
Her limbs, the polished marble stane,
The lass that made the bed to me.
I kissed her owre and owre again,
And aye she wist na what to say,
I laid her between me and the wa\
The lassie thought na long till day.
Folk stared and nodded at Chris while Rob was singing,
and Ewan looked at first as though he’d like to brain him; and
then he blushed; but Chris just listened and didn’t care, she
thought the song fine and the lass lovely, she hoped she herself
would seem as lovely this night—or as much of it as their
dancing would leave. So she clapped Rob and syne it was
Ellison’s turn, he stood up with his meikle belly a-wag and
sang them a song they didn’t know:
Roses and lilies her cheeks disclose,
But her red lips are sweeter than those,
Kiss her, caress her,
With blisses her kisses,
Dissolve us in pleasure and soft repose.
188 SUNSET SONG
and then another, an English one and awful sad, about a young
childe called Villikins and a quean called Dinah, and it finished:
For a cup of cold pizen lay there on the ground
With a tooril-i-ooril-i-ooril-i-ay.
Chae cried that was hardly the kind of thing that they
wanted, woeful as that; and they’d better give Chris a rest
about her roses and lips and limbs, she had them all in safe¬
keeping and would know how to use them; and what about
a seasonable song? And he sang so that all joined in, seasonable
enough, for the snow had come on again in spite of the frost:
Up in the morning’s no for me,
Up in the morning early,
When a’ the hills are covered wi’ snaw
I’m sure it’s winter fairly!
Then Mistress Mutch sang, that was hardly expected,
and folk tittered a bit; but she had as good a voice^ as most and
better than some, she sang The Bonnie House o Airlie> and
then the Auld Robin Gray that aye brought Chris near to weep¬
ing, and did now, and not her alone, with Rob s fiddle whispering
it out, the sadness and the soreness of it, though it was long,
long syne:
When the sheep are in the fauld, and the kye are a’ at hame,
And a’ the weary world to its rest has gane,
The tears o’ my sorrow fa’ in shooers frae my e’e
And Auld Robin Gray he lies sound by me.
and all the tale of young Jamie who went to sea and was thought
to be drowned in an awful storm; and his lass married Auld
Robin Gray; and syne Jamie came back but couldn’t win his
lass away from the old man, though near heart-broken she was.
I gang like a ghaist, and I carena’ to spin,
I daurna’ think o’ Jamie, for that wad be a sin,
But I’ll try aye my best a guid wife to be,
For Auld Robin Gray he is kind to me.
SEED-TIME
189
Old Pooty was sleeping in a corner; he woke up then, fell
keen to recite his TIMROUS BEASTIE; but they pulled
him down and cried on the bride herself for a song. And all
she could think of was that south country woman crying in the
night by the side of her good man, the world asleep and grey
without; and she whispered the song to Rob and he tuned his
fiddle and she sang, facing them, young and earnest, and she
saw Ewan looking at her, solemn and proud, The Flowers of the
Forest:
I’ve heard them lilting at our ewe-milking,
Lasses a’ lilting before dawn o’ day;
But now they are moaning on ilka green loaning,
The Flooers o’ the Forest are a’ wede away.
Dool and wae for the order sent oor lads tae the Border !
The English for ance, by guile wan the day,
The Flooers o’ the Forest, that fought aye the foremost,
The pride o’ oor land lie cauld in the clay.
Chae jumped up when she finished, he said Damn’t, folk,
zve'll all have the whimsies if we listen to any more woesome
songs! Have none of you a cheerful one? And the folk in the
barn laughed at him and shook their heads, it came on Chris
how strange was the sadness of Scotland’s singing, made for the
sadness of the land and sky in dark autumn evenings, the
crying of men and women of the land who had seen their
lives and loves sink away in the years, things wept for beside
the sheep-buchts, remembered at night and in twilight. The
gladness and kindness had passed, lived and forgotten, it was
Scotland of the mist and rain and the crying sea that made the
songs—And Chae cried Let's have another dance, then, it's
nearly a quarter to twelve, we must all be off soon as midnight
chaps.
And they all minded what midnight would bring, and Chae
and Rob had the melodeon and fiddle in hand again, and struck
up an eightsome, and everybody grabbed him a partner, it
I90 SUNSET SONG
didn’t matter who was who, Mclvor had Chris and danced
with her as though he would like to squeeze her to death,
he danced light as thistle-down, the great red Highlander}
and no sooner was one dance finished than Rob and Chae
swept forward into another, they played like mad and the
lights whipped and jumped as the couples spun round and
round; and the music went out across the snowing night; and
then Chae pulled out his great silver watch, and laid it beside
him, playing on.
And suddenly it was the New Year, the dancing stopped and
folk all shook hands, coming to shake Chris’s and Ewan’s;
and Long Rob struck up the sugary surge of Juld Lang Syne
and they all joined hands and stood in a circle to sing it, and
Chris thought of Will far over the seas in Argentine, under the
hot night there. Then the singing finished, they all found
themselves tired, somebody began to take down the barn lights,
there was half an hour’s scramble of folk getting themselves
into coats and getting their shivering sholts from out the
empty stalls in the byre. Then Chris and Ewan were hand-
shook again, Chris’s arm began to ache, and then the last
woof-woof of wheels on snow thick-carpeted came up the
Blawearie road to them, it was fell uncanny that silence in the
place after all the noise and fun of the long, lit hours. ^ And
there was Mistress Melon in the kitchen-door, yawning fit
to swallow a horse, she whispered to Chris Vm taking your room
now, don't for get j and cried them Good night, and a sound sleep,
both! and was up the stairs and left them alone.
He hardly seemed tired even then, though, Ewan, prowling
locking the doors like a great quiet cat till Chris called to him
softly Oh, sit by me! So he came to the chair she sat in and picked
her out of it, so strong he was, and himself sat down, still holding
her. They watched the fire a long time and then Chris’s head
drooped down, she didn’t know she had been asleep till she
woke to find Ewan shaking her, Chris, Chris, you're fair done,
come on to bed. The fire was dying then and the paraffin had
run low in the lamp, the flame swithered and went out with
SEED-TIME
191
a plop! as Ewan blew on it; and then they were in the dark,
going up the stairs together, past the room that had been
Chris’s and where Mistress Melon slept for a night ere she
went back to Stonehaven.
And to Chris going up that stair holding the hand of her
man there came a memory of one with awful eyes and jutting
beard, lying in that room they came to, lying there and whis¬
pering and cursing her. But she put the memory away, it
had never happened, sad and daft to remember that, she was
tired. Then, with her hand on the door, Ewan kissed her there
in the dark, sweet and wild his kiss, she had not thought he
could kiss her like that, not as though he wanted her as a man
might do in that hour and place, but as though he minded the
song he had heard her sing. She put up her face to the kiss,
forgetting tiredness, suddenly she was wakeful as never she
had been, the sleep went out of her head and body and the
chill with it, Ewan’s hand came over hers and opened
the door.
A fire burned bright in the fireplace, they had thought the
place would be black and cold, but Mistress Melon had seen
to that. And there was the bridal bed, pulled out from the wall,
all in white it was, with sheet and blanket turned back, the
window curtains were drawn, and in the moment they stood
breathing from their climb of the stairs Chris heard the sound
of the snow that stroked the window, with quiet, soft fingers,
as though writing there.
Then she forgot it, standing by the fire getting out of her
blue things, one by one. She found it sweet to do that, so slowly,
and to have Ewan kiss her at last when there was no bar to his
kisses, lying with him then, with the light put out and the
radiance of the fire on the walls and ceiling. And she turned
towards him at last, whispering and tender for him, JVe’re
daft, we'll catch cold without anything on! and then she saw his
face beside her, solemn and strange, yet not strange at all.
And he put his left hand below her neck, and he took her close
to him, and they were one flesh, one and together; and far
192
SUNSET SONG
into the morning she woke, and was not cold at all, him holding
her so, and then she heard again the hand of winter write on
the window, and listened a moment, happy, happy, and te
fast asleep till morning brought Mistress Melon and two great
cups of tea to waken Ewan and herself.
So that was her marriage, not like wakening from a^dream
was marrying, but like going into one, rather, she wasn t sure,
not for days, what things they had dreamt and what actually
done—she and this farmer of Blaweane who would stir ot a
morning at the jangle of the clock and creep from bed, the
great cat, and be down the stairs to light the fire and put on
kettle She’d never be far behind him, though, she loved even
the bitterness of those frozen mornings, and a bitter winter
it was, every crack and joist of the old house played a spray ot
cold wind across the rooms. He’d be gone to the byre and
stable as she came down and sought out the porridge meal an
put it to boil, Blawearie’s own meal, fine rounded stuff that
Ewan so liked. She’d leave it to hotter there on the hre and
then bring the pails from the dairy and open the kitchen door
on the close and gasp in the bite of the wind, seeing a grey
world on the edge of morning, the bare stubble ot the ley
riding quick on the close, peering between the shapes of the
stacks, the lights of the lanterns shining in byre and stable
and barn as Ewan feeded and mucked and tended horses
and kye. . r u 1 «
And the byre would hang heavy with the breaths of the y 5
they’d have finished their turnips as she came in, and Ewan
would come swinging after her with a great armful of straw
to spread them in front, he’d tickle her neck as she sat to millc
and she’d cry Tou’re hand's freezing! and he’d say Away,
woman, you're still asleep. Up in the morning's the thing. ^
go whistling out to the stable, Clyde and Bess stamping t ere,
getting fell cornfilled and frolicsome, they more than wanted
SEED-TIME
193
exercise. She would carry the milk back herself most mornings,
and make the breakfast, but sometimes Ewan would come
with her, so young and daft they were, folk would have laughed
to see them at that, both making breakfast and sitting them
close to eat it. Then Ewan would light his pipe when he’d
done and sit and smoke while she finished more slowly; and
then he’d say that he’d meat the hens, and she’d tell him not
to haver, she’d do that herself, and he’d argue, maybe sulk, till
she kissed him back to his senses again. Then he’d laugh and
get up and get down John Guthrie’s gun, and be out and up
in the moors till eleven, sometimes he’d bring a great bag and
Chris would sell the spare rabbits to the grocer that came on
T uesdays.
There was little to be done, such weather on Blawearie.
Ewan tidied the barn they’d danced in, it seemed years ago
since that night, and got ready plough and sock and coulter
for the time when the weather would break. And then he found
the bruised corn running low in the great kist there, that was
his first out-going from the place since his marriage, Chris
watched him go, sitting in the front of the box-cart, Clyde in
the shafts, the cart loaded down with corn for the Mill, and
Ewan turning to wave to her from the foot of Blawearie brae.
And all that afternoon he was away she fretted from room to
room, oh! she was a fool, there was nothing could happen to
him! And when at last he came back she ran out to him, fair
scared he was at the way she looked, and thought her ill, and
when she cried she had missed him so he went white and then
blushed, just a boy still, and forgot to unyoke Clyde left in the
cold, he was kissing Chris instead. And faith! for the bairns
of farmers both they might well have had more sense.
But, and it crept into her mind that night and came often
in the morning and days that followed, somehow that going
of Ewan’s to the Mill had ended the foolishness that shut them
in fast from Kinraddie and all the world, they two alone, with
all the gladness that was theirs alone and her kisses the most
that Ewan’d ever seek and his kisses ending days and nights,
N
i94 SUNSET SONG
and almost life itself for her. Kinraddie came in again, some¬
thing of her own cool reliance came back, the winter wore
on to its close, and mid-February brought the sun, weather
that might well have come out of a May. Looking out from her
window as every morning still she did, Chris saw the steam
of the lands below the house, it was as though the earth had
swung round the fields of Kinraddie into the maw of the
sun, a great furnace, and left them there to dry. The hills
marched their great banners of steam into the face of each
sunrise and through the whisper and wakening and shrouding of
the morning came presently the moan of the foghorn at Todhead,
a dreadful bellow, like a sore-sick calf, it went on and on, long
after the mist had cleared, it rose and faded into the sun-dazzle
overhead as great clouds of gulls came wheeling in from the
sea. They knew what was toward on Kinraddie’s land,
Chris heard the call of them as she went about the day s work,
and looked out on the ley field then, there was Ewan with the
horses, ploughing his first rig, bent over the shafts, one foot
in the drill, one the rig side, the ploughshare, sharp and crude
and new, cleaving the red-black clay. The earth wound back
like a ribbon and curved and lay} and the cloud of gulls cawed
and screamed and pecked on the rig and followed at Ewan s
heels again.
All over Kinraddie there were horse-pairs out, though none
so early as Ewan’s, it seemed, folk had stayed undecided about
the weather, they’d other things to do, they’d say, than just
wait about to show off like that young Blawearie. But, when
the day rose and at nine Chris set her a jug of tea in a basket,
and set by it scones well buttered and jammed, and carried
out the basket to Ewan wisshing up the face of the rig, Chae
Strachan, far away and below, was a-bend above his plough-
shafts at the tail of his team, Upperhill had two pairs in the
great park that loitered up to the larch-wood, and there was
Cuddiestoun’s pair, you guessed it him and his horses, though
they never came full in sight, their heads and backs just skimmed
the verge of the wood and hill.
SEED-TIME
195
Spring had come and was singing and rilling all over the
fields, you listened and heard, it was like listening to the land
new wake, to the burst and flow of a dozen burns in this ditch
and that ; and when you turned out the cattle for their first
spring dander, in case they went off the legs, they near went off
the face of the earth instead, daft and delighted, they ran and
scampered and slid, Chris was feared that the kye would break
their legs. She tried driving them down to the old hayfield,
but the steers broke loose and held down the road, and Ewan
saw them and left his plough and chased them across the parks,
swearing blue murder at them as he ran; and faith! if it hadn’t
been for the postman meeting them and turning them at
the end of the road they might well have been running
still.
Chris had known then mazes of things to do in that bright
coming of the weather, the house was all wrong, it was foul
and feckless, Ewan unyoking at midday would come in and
make hardly his way through the kitchen, heaped high with the
gear of some room, Chris saw her long hands grow sore and red
with the scrubbing she did on the sour old walls. Ewan said
she was daft, the place was fine, what more did she want?
And she said Less dirt; and that maybe he liked dirt, she didn’t;
and he laughed IVell, maybe 1 do, 1 like you right well! and put
his arm round her shoulders and they stood and kissed in the
mid of the heaped and littered kitchen—awful to be like that,
said Chris, they could hardly be sane.
In March the weather broke, the rain came down in
plashing pelts, you could hardly see a hand’s-length in front
of your face if you ran through the close. Ewan sat in the barn,
winnowing corn or tying ropes, or just smoking and swearing
out at the rain. Chae Strachan came up for a talk on the
second day, all in oilskins he came; and he sat in the barn with
Ewan and said he’d seen it rain like this in Alaska, and the
i96 SUNSET SONG
mountains move when the snows were melting. And Ewan
said he didn’t care a damn though Alaska moved under the
sea the morn, when would it clear on Blawearie? Munro
came next, then Mutch of Bridge End, they’d nothing on their
hands but watch the rain and shake their heads and swear they
were all fair ruined.
But at last it went, the unending rain of a fortnight went,
and that morning they woke and found it fine, Ewan took him
a look at the land from the bedroom window and prompt
lay back in the bed again. Damn Blawearie and all that s on tt
let's have a holiday the day, Chris quean. She said / can t, I m
cleaning the garret^ and Ewan got angered, she d never seen him
angry like that before, Highland and foreign then, spitting
like a cat. Are you to spend all your days cleaning damned
rooms? You'll be old and wizened and a second Mistress
Munro before you're well twenty. Off on a holiday we're going
to-day.
And, secretly glad, she lay back, lying with her hands under
her head, lazy, and looking at him, thinking how different he was
from that lad she’d tramped to Dunnottar with, so close she knew
him now, the way he thought and the things he liked and his
kindness and slowness to take offence, and the bitter offence,
how it rankled in him, once it was there! Like and not like
what she’d thought and wanted in those days before they had
married. Spite of their closest moments together, Ewan could
still blush at a look or a touch of hers; she touched him then
to make sure, and he did! He said Hold off! you re a shameless
limmer, for sure, and not nineteen yet. Come on, let's get out
and get off.
So they raced through the morning’s work and by nine
were down at the Peesie’s Knapp, and borrowed Chae’s gig
and heard Chae promise to milk and take in Blawearie’s kye.
Then out they drove and swung left through Kinraddie, into
the Laurencekirk road, the sun shining and the peewits calling,
there were snipe in a loch they passed, the North Sea was gloom-
away by Bervie as the sholtie trotted south. You could see then
SEED-TIME irK
as the land rose higher the low parks that sloped to the woods
and steeple of Drumlithie, beyond that the hills of Barras, the
Reisk in its hollow among its larch-woods. West of that
rose Arbuthnott, a fair jumble of bent and brae, Fordoun
came marching up the horizon in front of them then, and they
were soon going through it. Ewan said if he bided in Fordoun
he’d lay his neck on the railway line and invite the Flying
Scotsman to run over it, so tired he’d be of biding in a place that
looked like a barn painted by a man with nothing but thumbs
and a squint in both eyes.
But Chris liked the little place, she’d never seen it before
md the farms that lay about it, big and rich, with fine black
loam for soil, different from the clay of bleak Blawearie.
Ewan said To hell with them and their fine land too, they're
not farmers, them, only lazy muckers that sit and make silver out
cf their cotters; and he said he’d rather bide in a town and wear
a damned apron than work in this countryside. And then they
were near Laurencekirk, the best of weather the day held stil,
Laurencekirk looked brave in the forenoon stir, with its cattle
mart and its printing office where they printed weekly the
Kincardineshire Observer^ folk called it The Squeaker for
short. It had aye had a hate for Stonehaven, Laurencekirk,
and some said that it should be the county capital, but others
said God help the capital that was entrusted to it; and would
speak a bit verse that Thomas the Rhymour had made, how
ere Rome  ,
became a great imperial city,
’Twas peopled first, as we are told,
By pirates, robbers, thieves, banditti :
Quoth Tammas: ‘ Then the day may come
When Laurencekirk shall equal Rome.’
And when Laurencekirk folk heard that they would laugh,
not nearly cry as they did in Drumlithie when you mocked at
their steeple, or smile sick and genteel as they did in Stone¬
haven when you spoke of the poverty toffs. Ewan said it was
198 SUNSET SONG
a fine town, he liked Laurencekirk, and they’d stop and have
dinner there.
So they did, it was fine to eat food that another had cooked.
Then they looked at the day and saw how it wore and planned
to drive over to Edzell Castle—There's nothing to see there
but a rickle of stones, said Ewan, but you'll like them fine, no
doubt.
So they did as they’d planned, the afternoon flew, it was
golden and green. Under Drumtochty Hill they passed,
Ewan told that in summer it came deeper with the purple
of heather than any other hill in Scotland; but it hung dark
and asleep like a great cloud scraping the earth as they trotted
past. There was never a soul at the castle but themselves,
they climbed and clambered about in the ruins, stone on stone
they were crumbling away, there were little dark chambers
in the angle walls that had sheltered the bowmen long syne.
Ewan said they must fair have been fusionless folk, the bowmen,
to live in places like that; and Chris laughed and looked at him,
queer and sorry, and glimpsed the remoteness that her books
had made.
She was glad to be out in the sun again, though, clouds were
racing it up from the North and Ewan said they’d not need to
loiter long. In the garden of the castle they wandered from wall
to wall, looking at the pictures crumbling there, balls and roses
and rings and callipers, and wild heraldic beasts without number,
Ewan said he was glad that they’d all been killed. But Chris
didn’t laugh at him, she knew right well that such beasts had
never been, but she felt fey that day, even out here she grew
chill where the long grasses stood in the sun, the dead garden
about them with its dead stone beasts of an ill-stomached
fancy. Folk rich and brave, and blithe and young as them¬
selves, had once walked and talked and taken their pleasure
here, and their play was done and they were gone, they had
no name or remembered place, even in the lands of death they
were maybe forgotten, for maybe the dead died once again, and
again went on. And, daft-like, she tried to tell Ewan that
SEED-TIME
199
whimsy, and he stared at her, pushing his cap from his brow,
and looked puzzled and said y/y, half-heartedly; he didn’t know
what she blithered about. She laughed then and turned away
from him, angry at herself and her daftness; but once she’d
thought there wouldn’t be a thing they wouldn’t understand
together. . . .
And the rain that had held away all the day came down
at last and caught them on their way back home, overtaking
them near to Laurencekirk, in a blinding surge that they
watched come hissing across the fields, the sholtie bent its
head to the storm and trotted on cannily, it grew dark all of a
moment and Ewan found there was never a lamp on Chae’s
bit gig. He swore at Chae and then drove in silence, and the
wind began to rise as they came on the long, bare road past
Fordoun, near lifting the sholt from its feet; and out in the
darkness they heard the foghorn moaning by Todhead light¬
house. They were a pair of drooked rats when they turned
the gig into the close at Peesie’s Knapp, and Chae cried to them
to come in and dry, but they wouldn’t, they ran all the way
to Blawearie and the wet trees were creaking in the wind as
they reached to their door.
Now that was the last wet day of the Spring and to Chris
the weeks began to slip by like posts you glimpse from the
fleeing window of a railway train in a day of summer—light
and shade and marled wood, light and shade and the whoom of
the train, life itself seemed to fly like that up through the Spring,
Ewan had the corn land all ploughed and sown himself almost
early as was the Mains; only in the yavil did Chris go out and
carry the corn for him.
And that she liked fine, not a chave and a weariness as it was
with father, Ewan brisk and cheerful with the smoulder gone
from his eyes, they had settled to a clear, slow shining, it seemed
to Chris, now he had his own home and wife. Then in the
200
SUNSET SONG
days of the harrowing Chris drove the harrows while he carted
manure to the turnip-land, she was glad that she hadn’t that
work, glad to tramp behind the horses instead, with kilted
skirts, a switch in her hand and the reins there and the horses
plod-plodding steadily, they knew her fine, and she spoiled
them with bits of loaf and jam so that Ewan, coming to drive
them himself, cried vexedly, Hold up your head from my pockets,
Clydel What the hell are you snijf-sniff-sniffing for?
Then he went down to Stonehaven and bought a new
sower and sowed the turnips; and the night he finished and
unloosed and came back to the biggings for his supper, he
couldn’t find Chris though he called and called. She heard
him calling and didn’t answer, herself lying out in the garden
under the beeches, brave and green and rustling their new
Spring leaves, whispering without cease over her head that was
buried in the grass while she lay and thought. A little insect
ran over her hand and she hated it, but it mightn’t disturb her
for this time at the least, nothing might do that, she lay so
certain and still because of this thing that had come to her.
She felt neither gladness nor pain, only dazed, as though run¬
ning in the fields with Ewan she had struck against a great
stone, body and legs and arms, and lay stunned and bruised,
the running and the fine crying in the sweet air still on about
her, Ewan running free and careless still, not knowing or
heeding the thing she had met. The days of love and holiday¬
ing and the foolishness of kisses—they might be for him yet
but never the same for her, dreams were fulfilled and their
days put by, the hills climbed still to sunset but her heart might
climb with them never again and long for to-morrow, the night
still her own. No night would she ever be her own again,
in her body the seed of that pleasure she had sown with Ewan
burgeoning and growing, dark, in the warmth below her heart.
And Chris Guthrie crept out from the place below the beech
trees where Chris Tavendale lay and went wandering off into
the waiting quiet of the afternoon, Chris Tavendale heard her
go, and she came back to Blawearie never again.
SEED-TIME 201
But she did not tell Ewan, not that night nor the week that
followed, nor the weeks after that, watching her own body
with a secret care and fluttering eyes for the marks and stigmata
of this thing that had come to her. And she saw her breast
nipples change and harden and grow soft again, the breasts
that Ewan had kissed and thought the wonder of God, a maid’s
breasts a maid’s no longer, changing in slow, rhythm of purpose
with the sway and measure of each note in the rhythm, her
belly rounding to plumpness below the navel, she looked in the
glass and saw also her eyes changed, deeper and most strange,
with red lights and veinings set in them. And in the silences
of the night, when the whit-owl had quieted out by the barn,
once something moved there under her heart, moved and
stirred drowsily, a sleeper from dreams; and she gasped and
cried and then lay still, not wakening Ewan, for this was her
rig and furrow, she had brought him the unsown field and
the tending and reaping was hers, even as with herself when
she lay in her own mother’s body. And she thought of that,
queer it seemed then how unclearly she had thought of that
aforetime, shamed, indecent and coarse for a quean to think
of such things—that her mother had once carried her as seed
and fruit and dark movingness of flesh hid away within her.
And she wakened more fully at that, lying thinking while
Ewan slept at her side, turned away from him, thinking of
mother, not as her mother at all, just as Jean Murdoch, another
woman who had faced this terror-daze in the night. They
went sleepless in the long, dark hours for the fruitage of love
that the sower slept all unaware, they were the plants that stood
dark and quiet in the night, unmoying, immobile, the bee
hummed home and away, drowsy with treasure, and another
to-morrow for the hunting his. So was the way of things,
there was the wall and the prison that you couldn’t break down,
there was nothing to be done—nothing, though your heart
stirred from its daze and suddenly the frozenness melted from
you and still you might not sleep . . . But now it was because
of that babble of words that went round and around in your
202 SUNSET SONG
mind, soundless and scared of your lips, a babble of hours in
the hills and loitering by lochs and the splendour of books
and sleeping secure—babble of a world that still marched and
cried beyond the prison walls, fair and unutterable its love¬
liness still outside the doors of Blawearie house, mocked by
its ghost, a crying in the night for things that were lost and
foregone and ended.
It quietened away then, morning came tapping at the window,
she turned and slept, sleeping exhausted, rising with white
face and slow steps so that she was long in the kitchen. And
Ewan came hasting in, hurried that morning, the first of the
turnips were pushing their thin, sweet blades of grass above the
drills, he wanted to be out to them. Damn't, Chris, ore you
still asleep? he cried, half-laughing, half-angry, and Chris
said nothing, going back to the dairy, Ewan stared and then
moved uneasily and followed her with hesitant feet, JVhat's
wrong? IVhafs up?
Turning to look at him, suddenly Chris knew that she
hated him, standing there with the health in his face, clear of
eyes—every day they grew clearer here in the parks he loved
and thought of noon, morning and night; that, and the tending
to beasts and the grooming of horses, herself to warm him at
night and set him his meat by day. IVhat are you glowering
for? he asked, and she spoke then at last, calmly and thinly,
For God s sake don’t deave me. Must you aye be an old wife and
come trailing after me wherever I go?
He flinched like a horse with the lash on its back, his eyes
kindled their smoky glow, but he swung round and away
from her. You re out of bed the wrong side this morning^ and
out he went. She was sorry then, wanted to cry to him, dropped
the pails to run after him, when he spoilt it all, crying from the
middle of the close: Nnd I’d like my breakfast before the night
comes down.
It was as though she were dry whin and his speech a fire set
to it, she ran out and overtook him there in the close, catching
his shoulder and whirling him round, so surprised he was that
SEED-TIME
203
he almost fell. Speak to me like that? she cried, Do you think Vm
your servant? You're mine, mind that, living off my meal and my
milk, you Highland pauper! . . . More than that she said, so
she knew, no memory of the words abided with her, it was a
blur of rage out of which she came with Ewan holding her
shoulders and shaking her: You damned bitch, you'd say that to
me? To me? ... he was glaring like a beast, then he seemed
to crumple, his hands fell from her. Och, you're ill, you should
be in your bed!
He left her in the close then, striding to the barn, she stood
like a fool with the tears of rage and remorse blinding her
eyes. And as she went back to the kitchen and came out with
the pails Ewan went striding away over the fields, his hoe on
his shoulder, it was barely yet light, he was going to the parks
without his breakfast. Milking the kye she hurried, her anger
dying away, hurrying to be finished and have the breakfast
ready, for he’d sure to be back again soon.
So she planned; but Ewan didn’t come back. The porridge
hottered to a thick, tough mess, beyond the raised blind the day
broke thick and evilly red, hot like a pouring of steam across
the hills; the tea grew cold. Herself half-desperate with hunger
she waited, couldn’t sit, wandering from fire to door and door
to table; and then she caught sight on the dresser of the whistle
that had lain by father while he lay in paralysis in bed, and
snatched it down, and all in a moment had run over the close
to the lithe of the corn ricks.
Shading her eyes she saw Ewan then, down in the turnip-
park, swinging steady and quick in lunge and recovery, Kin-
raddie’s best hoer. Then she whistled to him loud and clear
down through the morning, half Kinraddie must have heard the
blast, but he took no notice. Then she went desperate in a
way, she stopped from whistling and screamed to him, Ewan,
Ewan! and at her first scream he looked up and dropped his
hoe—he’d heard her whistling all right, the thrawn swine!
She screamed again, he was running by then over the parks to the
close; him not ten yards away she screamed a third time, hurting
SUNSET SONG
204
her throat, but she did it calmly, anger boiled in her, yet in a
way she was cool enough.
And Ewan cried God, Chris, have you gone clean daft?
IVhat are you screaming for, what do you want? He towered
up above her, angry, amazed, it was then that she knew for
sure, she gathered up all the force in her voice and body for the
reply that sprang to her lips and the thing that followed it.
That! she said, and struck him across the face with her arm’s
full force, her fingers cried agony and then went numb, on
Ewan’s face a great red mark sprang up, the clap of the blow went
echoing around the Blawearie biggings.
So she saw and heard, only a moment, next minute he was at
her himself like a cat, her head rang and dirled as he struck her
twice, she tried to keep her footing and failed and fell back,
against the rick-side, clutching at the thing, staring feared at
Ewan, the madness on his face, his fists coming again. Get
up, get up! he cried, Damn you, get up! and she knew he would
strike her again, and rising shielded her face with her arm,
trying to cram back the sobs in her throat, too late for that.
Dizzy, she saw him in front of her swaying and moving, she
couldn’t see him but she cried No, no! and turned then and ran
stumbling up through the close, up the hill to the moor. Twice
he called as she ran, the second time so that nearly she stopped,
Chris, Chris, come back! in a voice that was breaking as her
own had been. But she couldn’t stop running, a hare that the
snare had whipped, Never again, never again, the loch, the loch!
she sobbed as she ran and panted, the Standing Stones wheeling
up from the whins to peer with quiet faces then in her face.
A quarter of an hour, half an hour, how long had she lain
and dozed? Still morning in the air, she was soaked with dew.
She turned and half-rose, heard the whistling of the broom and
sank down again.
It was Ewan by the moor-gate, searching, he’d stopped to
SEED-TIME 205
stare at the loch, thinking the thing she had thought, not seeing
her yet. She sighed. She felt tired as though she had worked
a great day in the sweat of the land, but Ewan would see to her,
Ewan would take heed.
So she raised her voice and called to him and he came.
IV
HARVEST
IT seemed to her that but hardly could she have left the
place since that May-day more than six years ago when Ewan
had come seeking her through the red, evil weather. She
closed her eyes and put out a hand against the greatest of the
Standing Stones, the coarse texture of the stone leapt cold to her
hand, for a shivering wind blew down the hills. She started at
thought of another thing then, opening her eyes to look round;
but there he was, still and safe as he stood and looked
at her. She cried Stay by me, Ewan! and he came running to
her side; and she caught his hand and closed her eyes again,
praying in a wild compassion of pity for that Ewan whose hand
lay far from hers.
Six years: Spring rains and seeding, harvests and winters
and springs again since that day that Ewan had come seeking
her here with his white, chill face that kindled to warmth
and well-being when she called him at last. She’d cried in his
arms then, tired and tired, as he carried her down the hill; and
the rage was quite gone from him, he bore her into the house
and up to their bed, and patted her hand, and said Bide you
quiet! and went off down the hill at a run.
So she learned he had run, and to Peesie’s Knapp, but she
didn’t know then, she sank and sank away into sleep, and awak¬
ened long after with Ewan and still another man come in the
room, it was Meldrum from Bervie, the doctor. He peeled off
his gloves from his long white hands, and peered at her like a
hen with his gley, sharp eye. JVhafs this you've been doing,
Chris Guthrie?
He didn t wait a reply but caught up her hand and wrist
and listened, still like a hen, head on one side while Ewan
stared at him greyly. Then he said Well, well, that's fine, let's
see a bit more of you, young Mistress Tavendale,
206
HARVEST
207
While he listened with the funny things at his ears and the
end of it on her chest, she closed her eyes, ill no longer though
drowsy still, and peeked sideways at Ewan, smiling at him.
And then the doctor moved his stethoscope further down, it
tickled her bared skin there and she knew he knew, and he
straightened up And you tell me you didn't know what the thing
was, Chris Tavendale?
She said Oh, yes, and he said But not Ewan? and she shook
her head and they both laughed at Ewan standing there staring
from one to the other, black hair unbrushed, she had gone
near to killing him that morning. And then Dr. Meldrum shook
him by the arm, You're going to be a father, Blawearie man,
what think you of that? Away and make me a cup of tea while
Chris and I go into more intimate details—you needn't bide, she's
safe enough with an old man, bonny though she be.
All that he said as canny as ordering a jug of milk, Ewan
gasped, and made to speak, and couldn’t, but his face was blithe
as he turned and ran down the stairs. They heard him singing
below and old Meldrum cocked his head to the side and listened,
Damned easy for him to sing, eh, Chris? But you'll sing yourself
when this bairn of yours comes into the world. Let's see if every¬
thing's right.
It was. He put his hand on her shoulder when he finished
and gave her a shake. A body as fine and natural and comely as
a cow or a rose, Chris Guthrie. You'll have no trouble and you
needn't fret. But look after yourself, eat vegetables, and be still
as kind to Ewan as the wear of the months will let you be. Good
for him and good for you. She nodded to that, understanding,
and he gave her another shake and went down to Ewan, and
drank the tea that Ewan had made, if tea it was, which you
doubted later when you smelt the cups.
Ewan knowing, Meldrum knowing, it was as though a bank
had gone down behind which she had dreamt a torrent and a
storm would burst and blind and whelm her. But there was
nothing there but the corn growing and the peewits calling,
summer coming, marching up each morning with unbraided
2o8 SUNSET SONG
hair, the dew rising in whorling mists from the urgent corn
that carpeted Ewan’s trim fields. Nothing to fear and much
to do, most of all to tell Ewan not to fret, she wasn t a doll,
she’d be safe as a cow though she hoped to God she didn t
quite look like one. And Ewan said Tou look fine, bonnier than
ever, saying it solemnly, meaning it, and she was glad, peeking
at herself in the long mirror when she was alone, seeing gradu¬
ally that smooth rounding of belly and hips below her frock
lucky, she had never that ugliness that some poor folk have to
bear, awful for them. She took pleasure in being herself, in
being as before, not making a difference, cooking and baking
and running to the parks with the early morning piece for
Ewan, he’d cry Don't run! and she’d cry Don't blether! and
reach beside him, and sink down beside him midway the long
potato rows he was hoeing, growing low and broad and well-
branched, the shaws, it was set a fine year for potatoes. And
as he sat and ate she’d gather his coat below her head for a pillow,
and lean back with her arms outspread in the sun, and make of
that few minutes her resting-time, listening to Ewan on the
crops and the weather that was so good folk didn’t believe it
could last, there must soon be a break of the fine interplay of
the last two months.
That was late in June he said that, and all the dour Howe
watched the sky darkly, certain some trick was on up there.
For the rain that was needed came in the night, just enough,
not more, as though cannily sprinkled, and the day would be
fine with sun, you couldn’t want better; but it wasn’t in the
nature of things it would last. And Chris said, dreamily,
Maybe things are changing for the better all rounds and Ewan
said Damn the fears! his gaze far off and dark and intent, the
crops and the earth in his bones and blood, and she’d look in his
face and find content, not jealous or curious or caring though
she herself found in his eyes a place with the crops and land.
And she’d close her eyes in the sun-dazzle then, in the
smell, green, pungent, strong and fine, of the coming potato
shaws, and sometimes she’d doze and waken sun-weary,
HJRVEST
209
Ewan working a little bit off, not clattering his hoe lest she
wake.
She made up her mind she’d have the baby born in the room
that had once been her own. So she rubbed it and scrubbed
it till it shone again and brought out the bed mattress and hung
it to air, in the garden, between the beeches, all in leaf they
were, so thick. You could hardly see the sky looking up in that
malachite, whispering dome; and by as she looked came Long
Rob of the Mill to settle his bills with Ewan, he saw Chris
then and came to lean on the hedge, hatless, and long as ever,
with the great moustaches and the iron blue eyes.
And he picked a sprig of the honeysuckle and bit it between
his teeth. This'll he for the son, eh^ Chris? And when are you
having him born? She said Late September or early October, I
think, and Rob shook his head, it wasn’t the best time for bairns,
though feint the fear for hers. And he laughed as he leaned
there, minding something, and he told Chris of the thing, his
own mother it was, the wife of a crofter down in the Reisk.
She’d had her twelve children in sixteen years, nine of them
died, Rob was the oldest and only a lad and he’d seen the
youngest of his brothers born. Seen? I helped, think of that,
Chris quean! And think she did and she shivered, and Rob
said That was daft, the telling of that. But things are fair
right with you, then, Chris?
So maybe, going home, he told of Blawearie’s news; soon
Kinraddie knew more than did Chris herself. Folk began to
trail in about in the quiet of an evening, out of ill-fashionce,
and nothing much more, they’d gley sidewise at Chris as they’d
argue with Ewan, syne home they would go and tell it was
true, Ay, there'll soon be a family Blawearie way, Chris must
fair have taken at the first bit sett. But others knew better,
Mutch and Munro, and the speak went round that the taking
was well ere the marriage, Ewan had married the quean when
she threatened him with law. Kinraddie mouthed that over,
it was toothsome and tasty, and the speak came creeping up to
Blawearie, Chris never knew how she heard it. But she did,
2io SUNSET SONG
Ewan did, and he swore to go out and kick the backsides of
Mutch and Munro till they’d dream of sitting as a pleasure and
a passion. And off he’d have set in the rage of the moment
but Chris caught him and held him, that would only be daft,
folk would think it the truer, the scandal; and if it made them
the happier to think as they did, let them think!
And then it seemed to Chris that her world up Blawearie
brae began to draw in, in and about her and the life she carried,
that moved now often and often, turning slow under her heart
in the early days, but jerking with suddenness, a moment at a
stretch now, sometimes, so that she would sit and gasp with
closed eyes. In, nearer and nearer round herself and the house,
the days seemed to creep, Will in Argentine was somebody
she’d met in a dream of the night, Aberdeenshire far away,
nothing living or moving but shadows in sunlight or night out¬
side the circle of the hills and woods she saw from Blawearie’s
biggings. Then fancies came on her and passed, but were daft
and straining and strange while they lasted, she couldn’t break
herself of the things, they’d to wear and fade at their own bit
gait.
One night it was that she couldn’t touch kye, Ewan had
to do the milking himself, sore puzzled and handless he was
but she couldn’t help that, though next morning she laughed at
herself, what was there to fear in the milking of kye? Then
came the day when they drove Chae Strachan’s sheep to the
buchts and the libbing of the lambs went on till it nearly drove
her mad, the thin young baaing that rose an unending plaint,
the folk with their pipes and knives and the blood that ran in
the sunlight. All in a picture it rose to her on the sound of
that baaing, and she hid in the dairy at last, the only place that
shut out the sound.
But another fad, and the one that lasted the longest, was
fear that all sounds would go, fear of the night when it might be
HARVEST
21 I
so nearly still, Ewan sleeping with his head in his arm as he
sometimes did, soundless, till she’d think him dead and shake
him to a sleepy wakefulness; and he’d ask What's wrong?
Have I been stealing the blankets from you? and she’d say Yes,
ashamed to let him know of that fear of hers.
So she found the days blithe enough then, the scraich and
scratch of hens in the close, the sound of the mower that Ewan
drove up and down the rigs of the hay, the mooing of the calves
wild-plagued with flies, Clyde’s neighing to a passing stallion.
Only night was the time to be feared, if she woke and there was
that stillness; but even the quietest night if she listened hard
she’d hear the wisp-wisp of the beech leaves near to the window,
quietening her, comforting her, she never knew why, as
though the sap that swelled in branch and twig were one with
the blood that swelled the new life below her navel, that coming
day in the months to be a thing she’d share with that whisperer
out in the darkness.
And oh! but the time was long! She could almost have
wished that she and Ewan had bedded unblessed as Mutch
said they had, the baby would have been here by now and not
still to come, still waiting harvest and stooking and the gathering
of stooks. But it lay with her, warm and shielded, and saw with
her the growth and ripening of that autumn’s corn, yellow and
great, and the harvest moons that came so soon in that year,
red moons a-slant and a-tilt on the rim of the earth they saw
as they went to bed, you felt it another land and another world
that hung there in the quietness of the sky.
One night, the mid-days of August as they sat at meat,
the door burst open and in strode Chae Strachan, a paper in his
hand, and was fell excited, Chris listened and didn’t, a war was
on, Britain was to war with Germany. But Chris didn’t care
and Ewan didn’t either, he was thinking of his coles that the
weather might ruin; so Chae took himself off with his paper
again, and after that, though she minded it sometimes, Chris
paid no heed to the war, there were aye daft devils fighting about
something or other, as Ewan had said; and God! they could
2i2 SUNSET SONG
fight till they were black and blue for all that he cared if only
the ley field would come on a bit faster, it was near fit for cutting
but the straw so short it fair broke your heart. And out he’d
go in the evening light, down to the ley park and poke about
there, rig to rig, as though coaxing the straw to grow and grow
in the night for his delight in the morning. A bairn with a
toy, Chris thought, laughing as she watched him then; and
then came that movement in her body as she watched Ewan
still—a mother with his child he was, the corn his as this seed
of his hers, burgeoning and ripening, growing to harvest.
The corn was first. Up and down the rigs on his brave new
binder, Clyde and Bess each aside the pole, rode Ewan; and the
corn bent and was smitten on the flyboard, and gathered up on
the forking teeth and wound and bound and ejected. Up and
down went the whirling arms, and fine harvest weather came
then in Kinraddie, though it rained in Dee, folk said, and down
in Forfar the year was wet. Park by park Ewan rode it down,
Chris still could carry him a piece as he worked, but she walked
slow now, careful and slow, and he’d jump from the binder
and come running and meet her, and down he would sit her
in the lithe of a stock while he stood and ate, his gaze as ever
on the fields and sky, there was still the harvest to finish.
But finished it was, September’s end, and there came a blatter
of rain next day, Chris saw the coming of the rain and the bright
summer went as the stocks stood laden and tall in the fields.
And Chris found herself sick, a great pain came and gripped at
her breast, at her thighs, she cried Ewan! and nearly fell and he
ran to her. They stared in each other’s faces, hearing the rain,
and then again the pain drove through and through Chris like
a heated sword, and she set her teeth and shook Ewan free, she
knew the things she’d to do. It'll maybe be a long time yet, but
get Chae to drive for the doctor and nurse. He'll bring the nurse
back from Bervie, Chae.
Ewan stood and stared and his face was working, she smiled
at him then though the pain of the sword was as nothing now,
iron hooks were tearing in her body instead, rusty and dragging
HARVEST
and blunt. She held up her face to be kissed and kept her teeth
fast and said Hurry, though Vm fine! and syne watched him
run down the road to the Knapp. 1 hen, white, in a daze of
pain, she began to walk backwards and forwards on the kitchen
floor, as she knew she must do to bring on the birth quick,
everything else was ready and waiting in the room upstairs.
And after a while the pain waned and went, but she knew it
would soon be back. So she filled her a hot-water bottle and
almost ran up the stairs to put it in the bed, almost running lest
the pain come midway and catch her unaware. But it held off
still, she smoothed out the sheets, brought out the rubber one
she’d had bought, and tied that down, firm and strong, and set
the great basin on the rug by the window and wondered what
else there might be. Then she saw her face in the glass, it was
flushed and bright and her eyes all hot; and suddenly she thought
how strange it would be if she died, like the many women who
died in childbed, she felt well and strong, they had felt the same,
strange to think that her face might be dead and still in another
day, that face that she looked at now, it couldn t be hers, it
was still the face of a quean.
From the window she saw Ewan running back and as she
reached to the foot of the stairs to meet him the pain came on
her again, she had to sit down. But that was daft, it would
make it last longer, she struggled to her feet and walked in the
kitchen again, Ewan was in the doorway, a white blur of a
face and nothing else unless she looked at him hard and hard.
He kept saying Chris, go and he down! and she opened her mouth
and gasped and meant to tell him she was fine; and instead found
herself swearing and swearing, terrible words she hadn’t known
she knew, they were wrung from her lips as she went stumbling
to and fro, better than screaming, women screamed, but she
wouldn’t. , ,
And then came relief again, the kitchen straightened and
she sat down, Ewan emerged from his blur and made her tea.
Something kept worrying her—what was he to have for
his dinner? She couldn’t remember the thing she’d intended,
SUNSET SONG
214
and gave it up, her tormentors were near-by again. Boil
yourself on egg, Ewan! she gasped, and he didn’t understand,
he thought it something she wanted—Boil what? And at
that a frenzy of irritation came on her, Oh, boil your head if
you like! and she dragged herself to her feet, the clock on the
mantelshelf was expanding and contracting, its dial blurred
and brightened as she stood. And then she was sure, she cried
Ewan, help me up to the room^ for she knew that her time had
come.
What happened then she didn’t know, there came a clear
patch and she found herself nude, all but a stocking, it wouldn’t
come off, she sat on the bedside and tried, Ewan tried, it was so
funny she giggled in spite of the pain. And then she saw
Ewan’s face, it had grown to the face of an old man, now,
she must lie and get him out of the room. She cried Mind the
fire, Ewan, there's no wood there, run and hack some^ and when
he was out of the room she could heed to herself and her agony
at last; and she bit the sheets, she rolled herself tight in a ball,
the pain seemed to go for a moment, maybe she had smothered
the baby, she didn’t care, she couldn’t abide it, not through
hours and hours and days and days, for weeks it had gone on
now, she had seen the room darken and lighten and night come,
tormented by Ewan and father her body, and Will was dead,
they had tortured him first.
She cried Will! then and opened her eyes from an hour-long
sleep. In the room was the doctor and the nurse frofti Bervie,
he came over to her side, old Meldrum, Well, Chris lass, how do
you feel? Fine to send for us in such a stour, and here we coming
tearing up to find you sleeping like a lamb! This is Mrs. Ogilvie,
you've heard of her.
Chris tried to speak, and managed, her body was a furnace,
but she managed to speak, she didn’t get it clear and she tried
again. And Mrs. Ogilvie patted her and said Don't bother with
that. Do you feel you're getting on fine? Dr. Meldrum came
back then, Well, let's see; and Chris poised herself on the rim
of a glistening cup of pain while they looked at and felt at and
HARVEST 215
straightened something alien and white, it was her own body
she remembered. Meldrum said Fine, fine, it shouldn't be long,
Vll wait beloW) and went out and closed the door, he hated
confinements. Mrs. Ogilvie sat down and next minute jumped
to her feet again, Don't do that, Mrs. Tavendale, don't grip
yourself up! Slacken and its easy, wish it to come, there's a brave
Chris tried: it was torment: the beast moved a.way from
her breasts, scrabbled and tore and returned again, it wasn’t a
beast, red-hot pincers were riving her apart. Riven and^ riven
she bit at her lips, the blood on her tongue, she couldn’t bite
more, she heard herself scream then, twice. And then there
were feet on the stairs, the room rose and fell, hands on her
everywhere, holding her, tormenting her, she cried out again,
ringingly, deep, a cry that ebbed to a sigh, the cry and the sigh
with which young Ewan Tavendale came into the world in the
farm-house of Blawearie.
So quick as all that, she was lucky, folk said, bringing a birth
in a forenoon, just; it was twelve when Ewan was born.
Some folk, Mrs. Ogilvie told, had to thresh from dawn to dusk
and through another night to another day, and Chris lay and
nodded and said Yes, I know, and fell fast asleep, she didn t
dream at all. And, waking, she found herself washed and dried,
a new nightgown put on her and Mrs. Ogilvie knitting by the
side of the bed, nothing else, oh! she couldn’t have dreamt
and not known it. She whispered, scared, My baby? and
Mrs. Ogilvie whispered Beside you, don't crush hvn, and Chris
turned round her head and saw then beside her a face as small
as though carved from an apple, near, perfect and small, with a
fluff of black hair and a blue tinge on long eyelids, and a mouth
that was Ewan’s and a nose her own, and she nearly cried
out Oh, my baby! . , „ ,
So she lay and wondered, near cried again, and put out her
2l6
SUNSET SONG
hand, it felt strong and quick, only heavy, and her fingers passed
up and along, under its swathings, a body as small and warm as
a cat’s, with a heart that beat steady and assured. And the
baby opened his eyes and fluttered them at her and yawned
and she saw a tongue like a little red fish in the little red mouth;
and the blue-shaded eyelids went down again and young Ewan
Tavendale slept.
Sweet to lie beside him in the hours that went by, sleeping
herself now and then and wakening to watch him, not ugly
as she’d thought he’d be, lovely and perfect. And then he
moved and whimpered, unrestful, and was picked from the bed
in Mrs. Ogilvie’s hands, and fluttered his eyelids at her, Chris
saw, and opened his mouth and weeked like a kitten. And
Mrs. Ogilvie said He's hungry now^ Chris found him in her
arms at last, and hugged him, just once, and held him to her
breast. The blind little mouth came kissing and lapping, he
wailed his disappointment, his little hands clawing at her.
Then his lips found her nipple, it hurt and it didn’t, it was as
though he were draining the life from her body, there was
nothing better than to die that way, he was hers close and
closer than his father had been, closer than again could any
child be. And she wondered above him and kissed his black
hair, damp still from the travail of birth; and looked at the eyes
that stared so unwinkingly as the hungry lips clung to her
breast. So at last he was finished, then Ewan came up, he’d
come while she slept before and he bent and kissed her and she
cried Mind the baby! and he said By God, am I like to forget?
And he wiped his forehead, poor Ewan!
In a week Mrs. Ogilvie was gone and Chris felt so well
she was up and about, it was daft to lie wearied and feckless when
she felt so fine. So down to the kitchen and the shining of the
October sun she came, she and her baby, into the whisper and
murmur of that war that had so excited Chae Strachan,
HARVEST
217
For it was on, not a haver only, every soul that came up
to look at young Ewan began to speak of it sooner or later.
Chae came and looked at young Ewan and tickled his toes and
said Ay, man! And he told them they’d brought out a fine bit
bairn between them, every man might yet have to fight for bairn
and wife ere this war was over; and he said that the Germans
had broken loose, fair devils, and were raping women and
braining bairns all over Belgium, it was hell let loose. And
Ewan said IVho'll win, then? and Chae said if the Germans did
there’d be an end of both peace and progress forever, there
wouldn’t be safety in the world again till the Prussians—and
they were a kind of German, with meikle spiked helmets,
awful brutes, and the very worst—were beaten back to the hell
they came from. But Ewan just yawned and said Oh, to hell
with them and their hell both, Chae! Are you going to the mart
the morn?
For he didn’t care, Ewan; but the mart was as bad, nobody
spoke of anything but war, Munro of the Cuddiestoun was there,
and Mutch, they’d a fair drink in their bellies, both, and swore
they’d ’list the morn were they younger, by God. That was
just the drink speaking, no doubt, but the very next day the
Upperhill foreman, James Leslie he was that had taken
Ewan’s place, went into Aberdeen and joined in the Gordons,
he was the first man to go from Kinraddie and was killed fell
early. But folk thought him fair daft, showing off and looking
for a holiday, just, there was no use coming to such stir as that
when the war would so soon be over. For the papers all said
that it would, right fierce they were, Man, some of those editors
are right rough creatures, God pity the Germans if they'd their
hands on them! And folk shook their heads, and agreed that
the newspaper billies were ill to run counter.
But the Germans didn’t care—maybe they didn’t read the
papers, said Long Rob of the Mill; they just went on with their
raping of women and their gutting of bairns, till Chae Strachan
came up to Blawearie one night with a paper in his hand and a
blaze on his face, and he cried that he for one was off to enlist,
218 SUNSET SONG
old Sinclair could heed to the Knapp and to Kirsty. And
Ewan cried after him, You're havering, man, you don't mean it!
but Chae cried back Damn't ay, that I do! And sure as death
he did and went off, by Saturday a letter came to Peesie’s Knapp
that told he had joined the North Highlanders and been sent
to Perth.
So there was such speak and stir as Kinraddie hadn’t known for
long, sugar was awful up in price and Chris got as much as she
could from the grocer and stored it away in the barn. Then Ewan
heard funny things about the sermon that the Reverend Gibbon
had preached the Sunday before, and though he couldn’t bear with
a kirk he broke his habit and put on his best suit and went down to
the service next Sabbath. There was a fell crowd there, more
than Ewan had heard of the last week’s sermon, and the place
was all on edge to hear what the Reverend Gibbon would say.
He looked bigger and more like a bull than ever, Ewan thought,
as he mounted the pulpit, there was nothing unusual as he gave
out the hymn and the prayer. But then he took a text, Ewan
couldn’t mind which, about Babylon’s corruptions, they’d
been right coarse there. And he said that God was sending
the Germans for a curse and a plague on the world because of its
sins, it had grown wicked and lustful, God’s anger was loosed
as in the days of Attila. How long it would rage, to what
deeps of pain their punishments would go, only God and His
Anger might know. But from the chastisement by blood
and fire the nations might rise anew, Scotland not the least in
its ancient health and humility, to tread again the path to grace.
And just as he got there, up rose old Sinclair of the Netherhill,
all the kirk watched him, and he put on his hat and he turned
his back and went step-stepping slow down the aisle, he wouldn’t
listen to this brute defending the German tinks and some
friend that he called Attila. Hardly had he risen when Mutch
rose too, syne Cuddiestoun, and they too clapped on their hats;
and Ellison half made to rise but his wife pulled him down, he
looked daft as a half-throttled turkey then, Ella White wasn’t
to have hipi make himself a fool for any damned war they
HARVEST 219
waged. But the minister turned red and then white and he
stuttered when he saw folk leaving; and his sermon quietened
down, he finished off early and rattled off the blessing as though
it was a cursing. Outside in the kirkyard some young folk
gathered to clout him in the lug as he came from the kirk,
but the elders were there and they edged them away, and
Mr. Gibbon threaded the throngs like a futret with kittle,
and made for the Manse, and padlocked the gate.
But Ewan didn’t care one way or the other, as he told to
Chris. The minister might be right or be wrong with his
Babylons and whores and might slobber Attila every night of
the week, Blawearie had its crop all in and that was what
mattered. And Chris said Yes, what a blither about a war, isn't
it, Ewan? and tickled young Ewan as he lay on her lap. And
he laughed and kicked and his father sat down and looked at
him, solemn, and said it was fair wonderful, Did you see him look
up at me then, Chris quean?
So they were douce and safe and blithe in Blawearie though
Kinraddie was unco with Chae Strachan gone. Kirsty came
up on a visit and cried when she sat in the kitchen beside the crib,
Chris made her tea but she wouldn’t take comfort. She said
she knew well enough Chae’d never come back, he was in
such a rage with the Germans he’d just run forward in his bit
of the front and kill and kill till he’d fair lost himself. Chris
said And they're maybe not such bad folk as the papers make out,
and at that Kirsty Strachan jumped up So,you're another damned
pro-German as well, are you? There's over-many of your
kind in Kinraddie. Chris stared clean amazed, but out Kirsty
Strachan went running, still crying, and that was the last they
saw of her in many a week, maybe she was ashamed of her
outburst.
Whether or not she was, there could be never a doubt about
the Reverend Gibbon. For the next Sabbath day, when another
great crowd came down to the kirk to hear him preach, they got
all the patriotism they could wish, the minister said that the
Kaiser was the Antichrist, and that until this foul evil had been
220
SUNSET SONG
swept from the earth there could be neither peace nor progress
again. And he gave out a hymn then, Onward, Christian
Soldiers it was, and his own great bull’s voice led the singing, he
had fair become a patriot and it seemed likely he thought the
Germans real bad. But Long Rob of the Mill, when he heard
the story, said it was a sight more likely that he thought the
chance of losing his kirk and collections a damned sight worse
than any German that was ever yet decked.
For, and it grew a fair scandal all through the Howe, you
could hardly believe it, it was funny enough, Long Rob of the
Mill didn’t hold with the war. He said it was a lot of damned
nonsense, those that wanted to fight, the M.P.s and bankers
and editors and muckers, should all be locked up in a pleiter
of a park and made to gut each other with graips: there’d be
no great loss to the world and a fine bit sight it would make
for decent folk to look on at. But for folk with sense to take
part in the soss and yammer about King and country was just
plain hysteria; and as for Belgium invaded, it got what it needed,
what about the Congo and your Belgians there? Not that the
Germans weren’t as bad, they were all tarred with the same
black brush.
But, though folk weren’t patriots as daft as Chae Strachan,
that didn’t look when he was being laughed at, they knew right
well that Long Rob couldn’t lie like that, the long, rangy
childe, without being pro-German, as the papers called it.
For all the papers were full of pro-Germans then, British
folk that thought that the German rascals were right; and in
England folk went and smashed in their windows, such a rage
they were in with the pro-Germans for being so coarse. There
was little danger that they’d smash Rob’s windows, there were
few that cared to tackle the childe except Chae Strachan that
was training in Perth. So the whole stour might well have
blown over, Rob was a well-liked billy and you needn’t heed his
blithers, if the Reverend Gibbon hadn’t taken to the business
and preached a sermon about tinks and traitors, and a lot he
preached about a jade called Jael, fell unchancy she’d been,
HJRVEST
221
right holy, though, and she’d killed a childe Sisera that she
couldn’t thole, because he was coarse to the Jews. And the
Reverend Gibbon boomed out she was fine, a patriot and a light
unto Israel she’d been, and we in like manner must act the same,
right here in our midst were traitors that sided with the Anti¬
christ, shame on Kinraddie that it should be so!
Folk listened to the sermon and fair got excited, and after
dinner that Sabbath a horde of billies, some came from Kin¬
raddie though most did not, but Upperhill’s new foreman was
there, and an awful patriot childe just like Gordon himself,
they went down to the Mill, and there was Long Rob sitting
out by his door, smoking at his pipe and reading in a book,
coarse stite about God and God knows what. And the Upper-
hill foreman cried out Here's the Kaiser's crony, let's duck the
mucker! and the lot made a run at Rob and got him gripped in
their hands, Rob thought it some joke and he laughed at them,
setting by his bit book. But they soon let him know they
were serious enough, they were clean worked up about the
sermon and Long Rob the Antichrist’s friend, and they started
to haul Rob over to the mill-course then, where the water was
sparkling and raging from a good bit spate in the hills.
Syne at last Rob knew they meant what they said, folk told
that he gave a great cry that wasn’t a curse and wasn’t a shout,
it was both together; and as they dragged him he lifted his foot,
real coarse-like, and he kicked the foreman at the Upperhill
right in the private parts then, and the foreman at the Upperhill
he screamed like a fell stuck pig; and God! folk laughed right
well when they heard about that. Well, the next thing that
happened was that Rob got a hand free then, and he took a
childe near him, a meikle man from the Mains, a clout in the
ear that stretched him flat; and then Rob was free and he ran,
all the rest at his heels, for the house. But he could run right
well, could Rob, and fair outdistanced the pack, and he leapt
inside and he barred the door.
So they threw some stones and rammed at the door with
their shoulders, half-shamed by then at the stour they were
222
SUNSET SONG
raising, and maybe they knew they’d feel fools by Monday;
and they might have gone home in another bit minute if it
hadn’t been that the meikle Mains man, him that Rob had
couped on the ground with a clout in the ear, crawled up to his
feet and picked up a great stone; and crack! through the kitchen
window it went with a bang and a splinter inside!
Next minute the door flung open, they turned and looked and
there was Long Rob, a gun in his hand and his face fair grey
with rage. Some cried Take care, man, now, put down that
gun! but they edged away back for all that. And Rob cried
out Smash in my window you would, then, would you, you scum?
and he swung the gun at the nearest billy and let drive at him.
The pellets sang past the billy’s head and he’d had enough of
the war, he turned and ran like a rabbit; and the others scattered
and ran as well, and Long Rob ran after them, and his gun
went bang! again and again, you could hear it all over Kinraddie.
Folk ran to their doors, they thought the Germans had landed
and were looting the Mearns; Chris, who had run across the
Blawearie cornyard, shaded her eyes and looked over the
country and at last she saw them, the running figures, like
beetles in the distance, they fanned out and ran from the Mill
as focus. And behind ran another that stopped now and then,
and a puff of smoke went up at each stopping, and there came the
bang of the gun. Mist was coming down and it blinded the
battlefield, and through it the attacking army ran in an awful
rout, Chris saw them vanish into its coming and Long Rob,
still shooting, go scudding in chase.
So that was the result of the Reverend Gibbon’s sermon,
Kinraddie fair seethed with the news next day, all about the
attack on the Mill and how Rob had chased the childes that
came up against him, some could hardly sit down for a week
after that, so full were their backsides with pellets. And some
said that Long Rob was a coarse tink brute, if he was willing to
fight like that at the Mill it was him that should go out to
France and fight; but others, though they weren’t so many,
Chris and Ewan were among them, liked Long Rob and sided
HARVEST
223
with him, and said it was a damn poor show for Scotland if
her patriots aye ran as they had at the Mill. That had been the
Sunday, but on Wednesday was another happening, and God
knows what mightn’t have come of it but for the interfering of
the daftie Tony, him that bided at Cuddiestoun.
He’d been stitering along the Denburn road, had Tony,
when he rounded a bend and there, on the road outside the
Mill, was the Reverend Gibbon, his bicycle was lying in the
stour and Long Rob had him gripped by the collar, and if he
wasn’t in danger of a bash in the face appearances were sore
deceptive. For Long Rob had seen the minister come riding
in the distance and knew his black coat and stopped the Mill
and ran down to the road to ask what the hell the Reverend had
meant by saying he was friends with the Antichrist. And the
Reverend Gibbon turned red with rage and cried Stand out of
my way there, Rob, and Rob cried Stand still you first, my man,
for we've a bit bone to pick! and as the minister tried to ride him
down Rob caught the handles and twisted them sore, and off the
minister came, like a sack of corn, right flump in Rob’s hands.
And Rob gave him a bit shake and asked Who's pro-German?
and the minister swore himself blue and made at Rob, and Rob
shook him like a futret a rabbit, and syne stood back and looked
close at his face, and made up his mind that he’d smash in the
minister’s bit nose right then, he’d seen that kind of thing
done before and it fair sossed up a pretty man, you just struck
and struck till the bone gave way. So Rob was just starting
to mash up the minister childe when round the bend with a
funny bit screech came the daftie Tony, he scraiched like a
hen with a seed in its throat and ran and caught at Rob’s arm.
He's only a half-witted cleric, Rob, you'll dirty your hands on
him, he cried, and both Rob and minister, sore astounded,
stopped from their fighting and stared at the creature, the im¬
pudence of him with his wee red beard, and him only a daftie,
like. But he nodded to the minister Get while the going's good
and your hide's still intact^ he said: and if you’d believe it the
minister louped on his bicycle without a word, and off he rode;
224 SUNSET SONG
and Long Rob turned and asked the daftie where he’d hidden his
sense all the time they’d known him, but Tony stood still like
a stock of rags, a daft-like look on his face. And when Rob
spoke to him again he just smiled like a gowk, and went shuffling
away through the stour.
Some said that if all things were true that wouldn’t be a he,
but Rob swore to it, he wasn’t boasting what he’d done to the
minister, he said, he was just so astonished at Tony he’d to tell
them the story to make Tony’s part plain. Cuddiestoun
swore ’twas a lie from beginning to end, the thing you’d expect
from a damned pro-German, like; but he didn t say that to
Long Rob, he was over coarse in the feet, Munro, to run as
fleet as the other billies had when Rob got in action. But be
stopped his trade with Long Rob and he carted his corn for
crushing and bruising over to the mill at Mondynes, syne
Mutch of Bridge End did the same. Ah well, they might do
that if they liked, folk as a rule were hardly so daft as leave the
best miller for miles around just because of his saying that all the
Germans could hardly be tinks. Maybe, you know, there was
something in what the man said, coarse devils though most of
the Germans were.
But Chris didn’t care, sitting there at Blawearie with young
Ewan at her breast, her man beside her, Blawearie theirs and the
grain a fine price, forbye that the stirks sold well in the marts.
Maybe there was war and bloodshed and that was awful,
but far off also, you’d hear it like the North Sea cry in a morning,
a crying and a thunder that became unending as the weeks
went by, part of life’s plan, fringing the horizon of your days
with its pelt and uproar. So the new year came in and Chris
watched young Ewan change and grow there at her breast,
he was quick of temper like his father, good like his mother,
she told Ewan; and Ewan laughed God, maybe you're right!
You could hardly be wrong in a thing after bringing a bairn like
HARVEST
225
that in the world. And she laughed at him But you helped a
little! and he blushed as red as he always did, they seemed daft
as ever in their love as the days wore on. It was still as strange
and as kind to lie with him, live with him, watch the sweat
on his forehead when he came from tramping a day in the
parks at the heels of his horses; still miracle to hear beside her
his soundless breathing in the dark of the night when their
pleasure was past and he slept so soon. But she didn’t herself,
those nights as the Winter wore to March, into Spring: she’d
lie and listen to that hushed breathing of his one side of her,
the boy’s quicker breath in his cradle out by—content, content,
what more could she have or want than the two of them,
body and blood and breath? And morning would bring her out
of her bed to tend young Ewan and make the breakfast and clean
out the byre and the stable, singing; she worked never knowing
she tired and Long Rob of the Mill came on her one morning
as she cleaned the manure from the stable and he cried The
Spring of life, eh, Chris quean? Sing it and cherish it, 'twill
never come again!
Different from the old Rob he looked, she thought, but
thought that carelessly, hurried to be in to young Ewan. But
she stopped and watched him swing down the rigs to Ewan
by the side of his horses, Ewan with his horses halted on the
side of the brae and the breath of them rising up like a steam.
And she heard Ewan call Ay, man, Rob, and Rob call Ay,
man, Eivan^ and they called the truth, they seemed fine men
both against the horizon of Spring, their feet deep laired in the
wet clay ground, brown and great, with their feet on the earth
and the sky that waited behind. And Chris looked at them
over-long, they glimmered to her eyes as though they had
ceased to be there, mirages of men dreamt by a land grown
desolate against its changing sky. And the Chris that had
ruled those other two selves of herself, content, unquestioning
these many months now, shook her head and called herself daft.
That year’s harvest fell sharp away, but the price of corn
made up for it, other prices might rise but farming folk did well.
226 SUNSET SONG
So it went in the winter and into the next year too, Ewan took
in a drove of Irish steers to eat up the lush green grass of ninc-
teen-sixteen. They grew fat and round in the shortest while,
Chris proud to see them, so many beasts had Blawearie. You’d
hardly believe ’twas here father had chaved and fought for a
living the way he did; but that was before the War.
For it still went on, rumbling its rumours like the thunder
of summer beyond the hills. But nobody knew now when it
would finish, not even Chae Strachan come home, a soldier
all the way from the front, as they called it; in the orra-looking
khaki he came, with two stripes sewn on his arm, he said they
had made him a corporal. He came up to Blawearie the night
he got home and scraped his feet on the scraper outside and
came dandering into the kitchen as aye he had done, not knocking
but crying through the door Jy,folk, are you in?
So there was Chae, Chris gave a loud gasp to see him, Chae
himself, so altered you’d hardly believe it, Chae himself, thin,
his fine eyes queered and strained somehow. Even his laugh
seemed different, hearty as it was, and he cried God, Chris, Tm
not a ghost yet! and syne Chris and Ewan were shaking his
hands and sitting him down and pouring him a dram and
another after that. And young Ewan came running to see
and cried soldier! and Chae caught him and swung him up from
the floor and cried Chris's bairn—God, it can't be, I mind the
day he was born, just yesterday it was!
Young Ewan took little to strangers, most, not frightened
but keep-your-distance he was, but he made no try to keep
distant from Chae, he sat on his knee as Chris spread them
supper and Chae spoke up about things in the War, it wasn’t
so bad if it wasn’t the lice. He said they were awful, but Chris
needn’t be feared, he’d been made to stand out in the close by
Kirsty and strip off everything he had on, and fling the clothes
in a tub and syne get into another himself. So he was fell clean,
and God! he found it a change not trying to reach up his
shoulders to get at some devil fair sucking and sucking the life
from his skin.
HARVEST
227
And he gave a great laugh when he told them that, his
old laugh queerly crippled it was. And Ewan asked what he
thought of the Germans, were they truly coarse? And Chae
said he was damned if he knew, he’d hardly seen one alive,
though a body or so you saw now and then, gey green and
feuch! there's a supper on the table! Well, out there you hardly
did fighting at all, you just lay about in those damned bit
trenches and had a keek at the soil they were made of. And
man, it was funny land, clay and a kind of black marl, but the
French were no good as farmers at all, they just pleitered and
pottered in little bit parks that you’d hardly use as a hanky to
wipe your neb. Chae didn’t like the French at all, he said
they were damned poor folk you’d to fight for, them, meaner
than dirt and not half so sweet. And Ewan listened and said
So you don't think that I should join up, Chae? and Chris stared
at him, Chae stared at him, young Ewan stared, and they all
three stared till Chae snorted There are fools enough in the
fighting as it is. Chris felt something holding her throat, she’d
to cough and cough, trying to speak, and couldn’t, and Ewan
looked at her shamed-like and blushed and said Och, I was
asking, only.
Chae went round all Kinraddie on his leave that time and
found changes enough to open his eyes, maybe he was fell
wearied with the front, folk thought, there was nothing on
there but their pleitering and fighting. And the first change
he saw the first morning, did Chae, lying down in his bed
for the pleasure of it and Kirsty at the making of his breakfast.
And Chae sat up in his bed to reach for his pipe when he looked
from the window and he gave a great roar; and he louped from
his bed in his sark so that Kirsty came running and crying
IVhat is't? Is't a wound? But she found Chae standing by the
window then, cursing himself black in the face he was, and he
asked how long had this been going? So Mistress Strachan
looked out the way he looked and she saw it was only the long
bit wood that ran by the Peesie’s Knapp that vexed him, it was
nearly down the whole stretch of it, now. It made a gey
SUNSET SONG
228
difference to the look-out faith! but fine for Kinraddie the
woodmen had been, they’d lodged at the Knapp and paid high
for their board. But Chae cried out To hell with their board,
the bastards, they’re ruining my land, do you hear! And he
pulled on this trousers and boots and would fair have run
over the park and been at them; but Kirsty caught at his sark
and held him back and cried Have you fair gone mad with the
killing of Germans?
And he asked her hadn’t she got eyes in her head, the fool,
not telling him before that the wood was cut? It would lay
the whole Knapp open to the north-east now, and was fair
the end of a living here. And Mistress Strachan answered
up that she wasn’t a fool, and they’d be no worse than the other
folk, would they? all the woods in Kinraddie were due to come
down. Chae shouted What, others? and went out to look; and
when he came back he didn’t shout at all, he said he’d often
minded of them out there in Franee, the woods, so bonny they
were, and thick and brave, fine shelter and lithe for the cattle.
Nor more than that would he say, it seemed then to Kirsty
that he quietened down, and was quiet and queer all his leave,
it was daft to let a bit wood go vex him like that.
But the last night of his leave he climbed to Blawearie
and he said there was nothing but the woods and their fate
that could draw his eyes. For over by the Mains he’d come on
the woodmen, teams and teams of them hard at work on the long
bit forest that ran up the high brae, sparing nothing they were
but the yews of the Manse. And up above Upperhill they had
cut down the larch, and the wood was down that lay back of
old Booty’s. Folk had told him the trustees had sold it well,
they got awful high prices, the trustees did, it was wanted for
aeroplanes and such-like things. And over at the office he had
found the factor and the creature had peeked at Chae through his
horn-rimmed glasses and said that the Government would
replant all the trees when the War was won. And Chae had
said that would console him a bloody lot, sure, if he’d the chance
of living two hundred years and seeing the woods grow up
HJRFEST
229
as some shelter for beast and man: but he doubted he’d not last
so long. Then the factor said thay must all do their bit at a
sacrifice, and Chae asked dnd what sacrifices have you made,
tell me, you scrawny wee mucker?
That wasn’t fair to the factor, maybe, who was a decent
childe and not fit to fight, but Chae was so mad he hardly
knew what he said, and didn’t much care. So when he fell
in with old Ellison things were no better. For Ellison’d grown
fair big in the mind and the pouch, folk said he was making
silver like a dung-heap sourocks; and he’d bought him a car
and another piano; and he said Ow, it's you, Charles lad! Are you
home for long? and he said And 1 11 bet you want back to the front
line, eh? And Chae said that he’d be wrong in the betting,
faith ay! Did you ever hear tell of a body of a woman that
wanted a new bairn put back in her womb? And Ellison gowked
and said No. And Chae said And neither have I, you gowk-
eyed gomeril, and left him at that; and it was hardly a kindly
remark, you would say.
But it seemed the same wherever he went in Kinraddie,
except at the Mill and his father-in-law’s: every soul made
money and didn’t care a damn though the War outlasted their
lives; they didn’t care though the land was shaved of its timber
till the whole bit place would soon be a waste with the wind
a-blow over heath and heather where once the corn came green.
At Cuddiestoun he came on the Munro pair, they were rearing
up hundreds of chickens that year and they sold them at
great bit prices to the Aberdeen hospitals. So busy they were
with their incubators they’d but hardly time to take notice of
him, Mistress Munro snapped and tweeted at him, still like a
futret, and the creature wrinkled its long thin neb: Ah well,
we'll have to get on with our work. Fine being you and a soldier,
Chae, with your holidays and all. But poor folk aye have to
work. Munro himself looked shamed at that and coloured
all over his ugly face, poor stock, but he’d hardly time to give
Chae a dram, so anxious he was with a new brood of hens.
So Chae left him fell quick, the place got on his stomach,
SUNSET SONG
230
and syne as he held through the parks he came bang on
Tony, standing right mid-way the turnip-field. And his eyes
were fixed on the ground and God! he might well have
stood there for days by the look of him. Chae cried out to him
Ay, then, Tony man, not expecting any reply, but Tony looked
up and aside Ay, Chae, so the mills of God still grind?
And Chae went on, and he thought of that, a real daft-like
speak he thought it at first, but further up the brae as he held
by Upprums, he scratched his head, was the thing so daft?
He stopped and looked back, and there, far below, was the
Tony childe standing, glued to the ground. And Chae
shivered in a way, and went on.
So Chae wandered his round of Kinraddie, a strange place
and desolate with its crash of trees and its missing faces. And
not that alone, for the folk seemed different, into their bones
the War had eaten, they were money-mad or mad with grief
for somebody killed or somebody wounded—like Mistress
Gordon of the Upperhill, all her pride gone now because of the
Jock she had loved and aye called John. But it was Jock she
called him when Chae sat with her in the parlour then, and she
told him the news of her blinded son in the hospital in England.
He wouldn’t ever see again, it wasn’t just a nervous trouble or
anything like that, he’d drawn back the bandages when she
went to see him and shown her the great red holes in his head;
and syne he’d laughed at her, demented like, and cried: What
think you of your son now, old wife?—the son you wanted to make
a name for you with his bravery in Kinraddie? Be proud, be
proud, Til be home right soon to crawl round the parks and Til
show these holes to every bitch in the Adearns that’s looking for a
hero. He’d fair screamed the words at his mother and a nurse
had come running and soothed him down, she said he didn’t
know what he said, but Mistress Gordon had never a doubt
about that. And she told Chae about it and wept uncovered,
her braveness and her Englishness all fair gone; and when
Gordon came into the room he looked different too, shrivelled
up he was, he’d taken to drink, folk said.
HARVEST
231
So Chae went out across the parks to the Bridge End then
and half-wished that he’d missed the Upperhill. But across the
nethermost park below the larch wood he ran into young
Maggie Jean, her that Andy the daftie had near mischieved,
grown a gey lass, and he hardly knew her. But she knew him
fine and smiled at him, blithe and open. It's Chae Strachan!
You look fine as a soldier, Chae! And please can I have a button?
So he cut off a button from his tunic for her and they smiled
at each other, and he went out across the fields with a lighter
heart then, she was sweet as a sprig of Blawearie ’suckle.
Bridge End he found with Alec away, he’d gone selling sheep
in Stonehaven. But Mistress Mutch was there and she sat
and smoked at a cigarette and told him that Alec was still a
fell patriot, he’d enrolled in the volunteers of Glenbervie and
every other night went down to Drumlithie for drill, a sight
for sore eyes, the gowks, prancing about like dogs with diarrhoea,
that’s what they minded her of. And she asked Chae when the
War was to end, and Chae said God only knows and she asked
And you still believe in Him? And Chae was real shocked, a
man might have doubts and his disbelief, you expected a woman
to be different, they needed more support in the world. But
now that he thought of God for himself he just couldn’t say,
there was more of his Enemy over in France, that minded him
now he must give the Reverend Gibbon a look up at the
Manse. But Mistress Mutch said Haven't you heard, then?
Mr. Gibbon's gone, he's a colonel-chaplain in Edinburgh now, or
something like that; and he wears a right brave uniform with a
black hanky across the neck of it. His father's come down to take
his place, an old bit stock that drinks German blood by the gill
with his porridge, by the way he preaches.
At Booty’s Chae knocked and knocked and got feint the
answer. And folk were to tell him that wasn’t surprising,
old Booty had taken to locking himself in nowadays, he got
queerer and queerer, he said every night he heard men tramping
the roads in the dark, chill hours, and they crept off the roads
and slithered and slipped by the hedges and fields, and he knew
SUNSET SONG
232
who they were, they were Germans, the German dead from
out of the earth that had come to work ill on Scotland. And
even in the daytime if you but looked quick, right sharp and
sudden between the bending of a bough or the bar of a gate,
you’d see a white German face, distorted still in the last red
pain, haunting the Scottish fields. And that was queer fancying
well you might say.
But Chae knew nothing of the business, he near knocked
in the door of the little house ere he gave it up and went ben
the road to Long Rob’s. And Rob saw him coming and turned
off the Mill and ran to meet him; and they sat and argued the
rest of the day, Rob brought out his bottle and they had a bit
dram; and then Rob made them their supper and they’d another
long dram, and they argued far to the wee, small hours. And
Chae swore that he still believed the War would bring a good
thing to the world, it would end the armies and fighting fore-
ever, the day of socialism at last would dawn, the common
folk had seen what their guns could do and right soon they’d
use them when once they came back.
And Rob said Havers, havers. The common folk when they
aren’t sheep are swine, Chae man; you're an exception, being a
goat.
Well, it was fine enough that long arguing with Rob, but
out in the dark by the side of Chae as they walked along the
road together Rob cried Oh man, Fd go back with you the morn
if only—and the words fair seemed to stick in his throat. And
Chae asked If only what, man? and Rob said If only I wanted to
be easy—easy and a liar. But Fve never gone that gait yet and
Fm damned if Fll begin for any bit war I
And what he meant by that Chae didn’t know, he left him
then and held over the moor land towards the Knapp under
the rising moon. And it was there that a strange thing happened
to him, maybe he’d drunk over much of Long Rob’s whisky,
though his head was steady enough as a rule for thrice the amount
he’d drunk. Ah well, the thing was this, that as he went
overman open space of the vanished Standing Stones he saw
HARVEST
233
right in front of him a halted cart; and a man had got out of
the cart and knelt by the axle and looked at it. And Chae
thought it some carter billy from the Netherhill taking the
near cut through the moor, and steered out to go by and cried
Good night, then! But there wasn’t an answer, so he looked
again, and no cart was there, the shingly stones shone white
and deserted under the light of the moon, the peewits were
crying away in the distance. And Chae’s hackles fair stood up
on end, for it came on him that it was no cart of the country¬
side he had seen, it was a thing of light wood or basket-work,
battered and bent, low behind, with a pole and two ponies
yoked to it; and the childe that knelt by the axle had been in
strange gear, hardly clad at all, and something had flashed on
his head, like a helmet maybe. And Chae stood and swore,
his blood running cold, and near jumping from his skin when a
pheasant started under his feet with a screech and a whirr and
shot away into the dimness. And maybe it was one of the men
of old time that he saw there, a Calgacus’ man from the Graupius
battle when they fought the Romans up from the south; or
maybe it had only been the power of Long Rob’s Glenlivet.
So that was Chae’s round of the countryside, in a blink his
leave was gone and Chae had gone with it, folk said he was
still the same old Chae, he blithered still about Rich and Poor,
you’d have thought the Army would have taught him better.
But Chris stuck up for him, Chae was fine, not that she herself
cared for the Rich and Poor, she was neither one nor the other
herself. That year the crops came so thick Ewan said they
must hire some help, and that they did, an oldish stock from
Bervie he was, gey handless at first, John Brigson his name.
But he soon got into the set of Blawearie, sleeping in the room
that had once been Chris’s, and making rare friends with
young Ewan, it was lucky they had him. And the harvest
came fine and Chris thought it near time that another baby
234 SUNSET SONG
should come to Blawearie. They’d been careful as blithe in
the thing so far, but now it was different, Ewan’d love to
have another.
And one night went on and then another and she whispered
to herself In the Spring Til tell him; and the New Year went
by; and then news came up to Blawearie in a wave of gossip
from all over the Howe. For the Parliament had passed the
Conscription Act, that meant you’d to go out and fight what¬
ever you said, they’d shoot you down if you didn’t. And sure
as death Ewan soon had his papers sent to him, he’d to go up to
Aberdeen and be there examined, he’d been excused before
as a farmer childe. Long Rob got his papers on the very same
day and he laughed and said Fine, 1TI like a bit jaunt.
And into Aberdeen they all went, a fair crowd of them
then, all in one carriage; and the ploughmen all swore that
they didn’t care a button were they taken or not; and Ewan
knew right well that they wouldn’t take him, they didn’t take
folk that farmed their own land; and Long Rob said nothing,
just sat and smoked. So they came to Aberdeen and went
to the place and sat in a long, bare room. And a soldier stood
near the door of the room and cried out their names one after
the other; and Long Rob sat still and smoked his pipe. So
they finished at last with the ploughmen childes, the whole
jing-bang were passed as soldiers. And they called Long Rob,
but he just sat still and smoked his pipe, he wouldn’t stir out
of his jacket, even. So there was a great bit stir at that, they
danced around him and swore at him, but he blew his smoke
up in their faces, calm, like a man unvexed by midges met on a
summer day.
They gave up the try, they did nothing to him then, he
came back to the Howe and sat down at the Mill. But next
he was called to appear at Stonehaven, the Exemption Board
sat there for the cases; and Rob rode down on his bicycle,
smoking his pipe. So they called out his name and in he went
and the chairman, a wee grocer man that worked night and
day to send other folk out to fight the Germans, he asked
HJRFEST
235
Long Rob how he liked the idea that folk called him a
coward? And Long Rob said Fine, man, fine. Vd rather any day
he a coward than a corpse. And they told him he couldn’t have
exemption and Long Rob lit up his pipe and said that was sad.
Home to the Mill he came again, and that night folk saw
him on the round of his parks, standing and smoking and
looking at his land and sky, the long rangy childe. Ewan went
by fell late that evening and saw him and cried Ay, Rob! but the
miller said never a word, Ewan went home to Blawearie
vexed about that. But Chris said it was just that Long Rob
was thinking of the morn, he’d been ordered to report to the
Aberdeen barracks.
And the next day passed and all Kinraddie watched from
its steadings the ingoings and outgoings of Rob at the Mill;
and damn the move all the day long did he make to set out as
they’d ordered him. The next day came, the policeman came
with it, he rode up to the Mill on his bicycle and bided at the
Mill a good two hours and syne rode out again. And folk
told later that he’d spent all that time arguing and prigging at
Rob to set out. But Rob said If you want me, carry me! and
faith! the policeman couldn’t very well do that, angered though
he was, it would look fair daft wheeling Rob along the roads
on his bicycle tail. So the policeman went off to Stonehaven
and out from it late in the evening there drove a gig, the police¬
man again, and two home-time soldiers, it needed all three to
take Rob of the Mill away to the War. He wouldn’t move
even then, though he made no struggle, he just sat still and
smoked at his pipe, and they’d to carry him out and put him in
the gig. And off they drove, that was how Long Rob went
off to the War, and what happened to him next there rose this
rumour and that, some said he was in jail, some said he’d given
in, some said he’d escaped and was hiding in the hills; but
nobody knew for sure.
236 SUNSET SONG
And to Chris it seemed then, Chae gone, Rob gone, that
their best friends were out of Kinraddie now, friends dose and
fine, but they had themselves, Ewan and her and young Ewan.
And she held dose to them both, working for them, tending
them, seeing young Ewan grow straight and strong, with that
slim white body of his, like his father’s, just; and it made a
strange, sweet dizziness go singing in her heart as she bathed
him, he stood so strong and white, she would mind that agony
that had been hers at the birth of this body, it had been worth
it and more. And now she wanted another bairn, Spring was
coming, fast and fast, the land smelt of it, the caller sea winds
came fresh with the tang that only in Spring they brought, it was
nineteen-seventeen. And Chris said in her heart that in April
their baby would be conceived.
So she planned and went singing those days about the kitchen
of Blawearie toun, busy with this plot, she planned fresh linen
and fresh clothes for herself, she grew young and wayward as
before she married, and she looked at Ewan with secret eyes.
And old John Brigson would cry Faith, mistress, you're light
of he art l
But Ewan said nothing, strange enough that. She knew
then that something troubled him, maybe he was ill and would
say nothing about it, sitting so silent at meat and after, it grew
worse as the days went on. And when he looked at her no
longer was the old look there, but a blank, dark one, and he’d
turn his face from her slowly. She was vexed and then
frightened and out in the close one morning, over the stillness
of the hens’ chirawk, she heard his voice raised in cursing at
Brigson, it was shameful for him to do that and not like Ewan
at all to do it. Then he came back from the steading with
quick stepping feet, as he passed through the kitchen Chris
cried What's wrong? He muttered back Nothing, and went
up the stairs, and he took no notice of young Ewan that ran
after him, bairn-like, to show him some picture in a book he
had.
Chris heard him rummage in their room, and then he came
HJRFEST
237
down, he was fully dressed, his dark face heavy and stranger
than ever, Chris stared at him IVhere are you going? and he
snapped To Aberdeen, if you d like to know^ and off he went.
He had never spoken to her like that—he was EWAN, hers!
... She stood at the window, dazed, looking after him, so strange
she must then have looked that little Ewan ran to her, Mother,
mother! and she picked him up and soothed him and the two of
them stood and watched Ewan Tavendale out of sight on the
bright Spring road.
It seemed to Chris he had hated her that minute when he
looked at her in the kitchen, she went through the day with a
twist of sickness about her heart. To old Brigson, shamed
for her man, she said that Ewan had been worried with this
business and that, he’d been out of his temper that morning
and had gone to Aberdeen for the day. And John Brigson
said cheerily Never heed, mistress. He ll be right as rain when
he's back the night, and he helped her wash up the supper things,
and they had a fine long talk. Syne off he went to tend to the
beasts, and Chris grew anxious, looking at the clock, till she
minded that there was a later train still, the ten o’clock train.
So she bedded young Ewan and milked the kye, and came back
to the kitchen, and waited. John Brigson had gone to his
bed Blawearie was quiet, she went out and walked down to the
road to meet Ewan in the fresh-fallen dew of the night—so
young the year and so sweet, she’d make it this night, the
night with Ewan that she’d planned!
By Peesie’s Knapp a snipe was sounding, she stood and
listened to the bird, and saw in the starlight the skeleton timbers
of the great wood that once fronted the north wind there.
A hare scuttled over the road, the ditches were running and
trilling, hidden, filled with the waters of Spring, she smelt the
turned grass of the ploughlands and shivered in the blow of the
wind, Ewan was long on the road. At the turnpike bend she
stopped and listened for the sound of his feet, and minded a
thing out of childhood then, if you put your ear to the ground
you’d hear far off steps long ere you’d hear them when standing
238 SUNSET SONG
and upright. And she laughed to herself, remembering that,
and knelt on the ground, agile and fleet, as the Guthries were,
and put close her ear to the road, it was cold and crumbly with
little stones. She heard a flock of little sounds going home to
their buchts, far and near, each sound went home, but never
the sound of a footstep.
And then, Stonehaven way, a great car came flashing down
through the night, its headlights leaping from brae to brae,
Chris stood back and aside and she saw it go by, there were
soldiers in it, one bent on the wheel, she saw the floating ends
of his Glengarry bonnet, the car whirled past and was gone in
the night. She stared after it, dazed and dreaming, and shivered
again. Ewan must have held over the hills and was already
at Blawearie, it was daft to be here, he’d be anxious about her
and go out seeking her!
So she ran back to Blawearie and she got there panting.
But her heart was light, she’d play a trick on Ewan, creep in
on him quiet as quiet, come up behind him sudden in the kitchen
and make him jump. And she padded softly across the close
to the kitchen door and looked in, and the lamp stood lit on the
table, and the place was quiet in its glow. She went up the
stairs to their room, there was no sign of Ewan, young Ewan
lay sleeping with his face in the pillow, she righted him away
from that and went down to the kitchen again. She sat in a
chair there, waiting, and her heart froze and froze with the
fears that came up in it, she saw Ewan run over by a car in the
streets, and why hadn’t they sent her a telegram? But maybe
she was wrong, maybe he’d missed the last train and taken one
out to Stonehaven instead and was tramping from there in the
darkness now. She piled new logs on the fire and sat and
waited, and the night went on, she fell fast asleep and waking
found the lamp gone out, in the sky between bar and blind was
a sharp, dead whiteness like the hand of a corpse. And as she
stretched herself, chilled and queer, up in John Brigson’s room
the alarum clock went. It was half-past five, the night had
gone, and still Ewan had not come back.
HJRVEST
239
Nor came he back that day, nor many a day beyond that.
For the postman at noon brought Chris a letter, it was from
Ewan and she sat in the kitchen and read it, and didn’t under¬
stand, and her lip hurt, and she put up the back of her hand to
wipe it and looked at the hand and saw blood on it. Young
Ewan came playing about her, he took the letter out of her hand
and ran off with it, screaming with laughter in his young,
shrill voice, she sat and did not look after him and he came back
and laughed in her face, surprised that she did not play. And
she took him in her arms and asked for the letter again, and
again she tried to read it. And what Ewan wrote was he’d
grown sick of it all, folk laughing and sneering at him for a
coward, Mutch and Munro aye girding at him. He was off
to the War, he had joined the North Highlanders that day,
he would let her know where they sent him, she wasn’t to
worry; and / am yours truly Ewan.
When John Brigson came in at dinner-time he found Chris
looking white as a ghost, but she wasn’t dazed any longer, it
just couldn’t be helped, Ewan was gone but maybe the War
would be over before he had finished with his training. And
John Brigson said Of course it will, I see the Germans are
retreating on all the fronts, they're fair scared white, they say,
when our men take to the bayonet. Little Ewan wanted to know
what a bayonet was and why the Germans were scared at them,
and John Brigson told him and Chris was sick, she’d to run
out to be sick, for if you’ve ever gutted a rabbit or a hen you can
guess what is inside a man, and she’d seen a bayonet going into
Ewan there. And John Brigson was awful sorry, he said he
hadn’t thought, and she wasn’t to worry, Ewan would be fine.
Oh, but that Spring was long! Out in the parks in the day¬
time she’d go to help John Brigson and ease her weariness,
she took little Ewan with her then and a plaid to wrap him in
for sleep, under the lithe of a hedge or a whin, when he grew
SUNSET SONG
240
over-tired. And the fields were a comfort, the crumble of the
fine earth under your feet, swinging a graip as you walked,
breaking dung, the larks above, the horses plodding by with
snorting breath, old Brigson a-bend above the shafts. He
made fair poor drills, they were better than none, and he aye
was pleasant and canty, a fine old stock, he did lots of the things
that Ewan had done and asked no more pay for the doing of
them. That was as well, he wouldn’t have got it, the weather
was bitter, corn spoiled in the planting.
Early in the year, about May that was, the rain came down
and it seemed it never would end, there was nothing to be done
out of doors, the rain came down from the north-east across
Kinraddie and Chris wasn’t the only one that noted its difference
from other years. In Peesie’s Knapp there was Mistress
Strachan vexing herself in trying to make out the change; and
then she minded what Chae had said would happen when
the woods came down; once the place had been sheltered and
lithe, it poised now up on the brae in whatever storm might
come. The woodmen had all finished by then, they’d left a
country that looked as though it had been shelled by a German
army. Looking out on those storms that May Chris could hardly
believe that this was the place she and Will had watched from the
window that first morning they came to Blawearie.
And then the very next day as she made the butter, young
Ewan was up the stairs with his blocks and books, John Brigson
had gone to Mondynes with a load of corn, Chris heard a step
in the close, somebody running in a hurry from the rain.
T hen the door burst open and a soldier came in, panting, in the
queerest uniform, a hat with gold lacing and red breeches and
leggings, Chris stared at the hat and then at the face. And the
soldier cried Oh, Chris, I believe you don't know me! and she
cried then Will! and her arms went round him, they cuddled
one the other like children, Chris crying, Will near to crying
himself, patting her shoulder and saying Oh, Chris!
Then she pushed him away and looked at him and they
cuddled each other again and Will danced her all round
HARVEST 241
the kitchen, and little Ewan up the stairs heard the stir and came
tearing down and when he saw a strange man holding his mother
in his arms he made at Will and whacked his legs and ciicd,
Away, man! Will cried God Almighty, what s this you ve got)
Chris? and swung Ewan high and stared in his face and shook his
head Toure a fine lad, ay, but you've over much of your father
in you ever to be as bonny as your mother!
That wasn’t true but fine to hear, Chris could hardly get
any work done or a meal made ready, so many the things they’d
to take through hand, Will sat and smoked and every now and
then they’d look one at the other and Will would give a great
laugh Oh Chris, mind this . . . mind that. . ./ And his laughter
had tears in it, they were daft, the pair of them. And when
old John Brigson came home, they heard the noise of the wheels
in the close and Will went out to lend him a hand, the old stock
jumped off the cart and made for a fork that was lying to hand,
he thought Will a German in that strange bit uniform. But
he laughed right heartily when Will said who he was, and
the two of them came in for dinner and Will sat at the table s
head, in Ewan’s place. And as he ate he told them how he
came in the uniform, and all the chances and wanderings that
were his and Molly’s when they went from Scotland.
And faith! he’d had more than enough of both, for in
Argentine, as he’d told Chris already by letter, he d left his
first work after a while, he and Molly had both learned up the
Spanish, and he took a job with a Frenchman then, an awful
fine stock. He liked Will well and Will liked him, and he gave
Will half of his house to bide in, it was a great ranch out in
the parks of that mcikle country. So there they had lived and
were happy and blithe till the Frenchman had to go to the War.
Will had thought of going himself more than once but the
Frenchman had told him he’d be a fair fool, he might well
be glad there wasn’t British conscription; besides, some body
or other had to look to the ranch. But in less than two years the
Frenchman came back, sore wounded he’d been, and soon as he
came Will told him it was his turn now, he’d see some of this
Q
242 SUNSET SONG
War for himself. And the Frenchman told him he was fair a
fool, but he’d get him a job with the French. So he did, after
cables and cables to Paris, and Will said good-bye to Molly
and the Frenchman and the Frenchman’s wife, and sailed
from Buenos Ayres to Cherbourg; and in Paris they knew all
about him, he found himself listed as a sergeant-major in the
French Foreign Legion, an interpreter he was, for he knew
three languages fine. Then they’d given him a fortnight’s
leave and here he was.
And when he was alone with Chris that evening and she
told him about Ewan down training in Lanark, he said Ewan
was either soft or daft or both. fUhy did you marry the dour
devil, Chris? Did he make you or were you going to have a
hairn? And Chris didn’t feel affronted, it was Will that
asked, he’d treat her just the same if she owned up to a father¬
less bairn once a year, or twice, if it came to that. So she
shook her head, It was just because he was to me as Molly to
you, and Will nodded to that, Ah well, we can't help when it gets
that way. Mind when you wanted to know . . .? And they
stood and laughed in the evening, remembering that, and they
walked arm in arm up and down the road and Chris forgot
her Ewan, forgot young Ewan, forgot all her worries remem¬
bering the days when she and Will were bairns together, and
the dourness and the loveliness then, and Will asked Do you
mind when we slept together—that last time we did it when the
old man had near killed me up in the barn? And his face grew
dark, he still couldn’t forgive, he said that folk who ill-treated
their children deserved to be shot, father had tormented and
spoiled him out of sheer cruelty when he was young. But
Chris said nothing to that, remembering the day of father’s
funeral and how she had wept by his grave in Kinraddie
kirkyard.
But she knew she could never tell Will of that, he’d never
understand, and they spoke of other things, Will of the Argen¬
tine and the life out there, and the smell of the sun and the
warm weather and the fruit and flowers and flame of life
HARVEST
243
below the Southern Cross. Chris said But you'll come back,
you and Mollie, to bide in Scotland again? and Will laughed, he
seemed still a mere lad in spite of his foreign French uniform,
Havers, who'd want to come back to this country? It's dead or
it's dying—and a damned good job!
And, daftly, Chris felt a sudden thrust of anger through her
heart at that; and then she looked round Kinraddie in the
evening light, seeing it so quiet and secure and still, thinking
of the seeds that pushed up their shoots from a thousand earthy
mouths. Daft of Will to say that: Scotland lived, she could never
die, the land would outlast them all, their wars and their
Argentines, and the winds come sailing over the Grampians
still with their storms and rain and the dew that ripened the
cropS—long and long after all their little vexings in the evening
light were dead and done. And her thoughts went back to the
kirkyard, she asked Will would he like to come to the kirk
next day, she hadn’t been there herself for a year.
He looked surprised and then laughed You're not getting
religious, are you? as though she had taken to drink. And
Chris said Nfl, and then thought about that, time to think for
once in the pother of the days with Blawearie so quiet above
them, young Ewan and old Brigson asleep. And she said
l don't believe they were ever religious, the Scots folk, Will—
not really religious like Irish or French or all the rest in the history
books. They've never BE LI EYED. It's just been a place to
collect and argue, the kirk, and criticise God. And Will yawned,
he said maybe, he didn’t care one way or the other himself,
Mollie in the Argentine had taken up with the Catholics, and
faith! she was welcome if she got any fun.
So next day they set out for the kirk, the weather had cleared,
blowing wet and sunny in a blink, there were teeth of rainbows
out over Kinraddie, Chris said it was Will’s uniform that
messed up the sky. But she was proud of him for all that,
how folk stared as the two of them went down the aisle! Chris
was in her blue, with her new short skirt and long boots, and
Will in his blue and red trousers and leggings, and his jacket
SUNSET SONG
244
with the gold lace on it and the high collar and the soft fine hat
with the shiny peak. Old Gibbon, him that preached for his son,
near fell down the stairs of the pulpit at sight of Will. But he
recovered fell soon and preached them one of the sermons that
had made such stir throughout the Howe a year or so back,
he told how the German beasts now boiled the corpses of their
own dead men and fed the leavings to pigs. And he ground
his teeth at the Germans, they were so coarse; and he said that
GUD would assuredly smite them.
But folk had grown sick of him and his ragings, there was
only a small attendance to hear him and when they came out
in the end Will said It's good to be out of that creature's stink!
Syne Ellison recognised Will and came swaggering over,
redder than ever and fatter than ever, and he cried If it ain't
Will Guthrie! How are you? and Will said Fine. Most of the
folk seemed pleased to see him, even Mutch and Munro,
excepting the Munro wife herself, she snapped, Jnd what
would you be, then, Will? They've a man at the picture palace
in Stonehaven that wears breeks just like that. And Will said
Faith, Mistress Munro, you're an authority on breeks. I hear you
still wear them at the Cuddiestoun. Folk standing around
gave a snicker at that, real fine for the futret, she’d met her
match.
And Will’s leave went by like a shot, he was all over the
Howe in the first few days, up in Fordoun and down in Drum-
lithie, and everywhere folk made much of him. But after that
he bided nearly all the time by Chris, he helped her or Brigson in
old clothes of Ewan’s she’d raked out for him. He went shooting
with father’s gun fell often, up in the moor it was blithe to hear
him and his singing, young Ewan would go wandering up to meet
him. And when it came to the end and the last day, young
Ewan in bed and they sat by the fire and the June night came
softly down without, Chris didn’t fear at all for Will, he was
clean and happy and quick, things went well with him. And
next morning only young Ewan cried at the parting, and off he
went, it seemed then at Blawearie.fhat more than Will had gone
HARVEST 245
out of their lives, it was a happy voice that had sung for itself a
chamber in their hearts those weeks he had been with them.
But the hills flowed up and down, day after day, in their
dark and sunshine, and even those weeks were covered and laid
past, and Chris saw the harvest near, so near, a good harvest
again in spite of the weather; and still the War went on. Some¬
times she’d a note or postcard from Ewan in Lanark, some¬
times she wouldn’t hear for week on week till she grew fair
alarmed. But he just said it was that he never could write,
he didn’t know how, they were awfully busy and she wasn’t
to worry. . .
And then through Kinraddie a motor came driving one
day, it turned at the cross-roads and drove down by the Denburn.
It stopped at the Mill and folk ran to their doors and wondered
who it could be, the place was locked up and deserted-like.
And when the motor stopped a man got out, and another
came after, slow, and he took the arm of the first one, and they
went step-stepping at snail’s pace up to the Mill-house and folk
could see no more. But soon the story of it was known all over
the place, it was Long Rob himself come back, he had never
given in, they had put him in prison and ill-used him awful;
but he wouldn’t give in whatever they did, he laughed in their
faces, Fine, man, fine. Last he went on the hunger-strike,
that was when you just starved to death to spite them, and
grew weaker and weaker. So they took him from prison to a
doctor childe and the doctor said it was useless to keep him,
he’d never be of use to his King and country.
So home at last he had come, folk told he was fairly a wreck,
he could hardly stand up and walk or make his own meat,
God knows how he ever got into his clothes. And Mutch
and Munro wouldn’t go near him, neither would Gordon,
they said that it served him right, the coarse pro-German.
And when Chris heard that there came a stinging pain in her
SUNSET SONG
246
eyes, and she called old John Brigson to yoke a cart and put
corn in it, as though taking it to Rob for bruising; and Chris
got into the cart as well and took young Ewan on her knee,
and off they set from Blawearie. Outside the Mill-house
Chris cried on Brigson to stop, and found the basket she’d
laid on the bottom of the cart and ran through the close to the
kitchen door. It stood half-open, the place was dark with
hardly a glimmer from the fire. But she saw someone sitting,
she stopped and stared, an old man it seemed with a white,
drawn face, his hands fumbling at the lighting of a pipe.
She called Rob! and he looked up and she saw his eyes,
they were filled with awful things, he cried Chris! God, is't
Chris Guthrie? She was shaking his hand and his shoulder then,
minding things about him, not looking at him, minding the
fine neighbour he’d been to her and Ewan in the days they
married. And she asked What are you sitting here for? You
should be in your bed> and Rob said Fm damned if I should, Vve
had over much of bed. I was waiting about for the grocer childe,
but he didn't stop, though he knows Fm home. I suppose he's
still an ill-will at pro-Germans, like.
Chris told him never to mind the grocer, and she spoke to
him roughly, in case she should weep at the sight of him;
and she told him to go out and see John Brigson. Then, soon
as he’d hirpled out with his stick she looked round the place
and started to clean it, and made a fine fire and a meal with
fresh eggs and butter, and oat-cakes and scones and jam, she’d
brought the lot from Blawearie. So when Rob came in from
his speak with Brigson, there it was waiting him on the table,
he blinked and sat down and said in a whisper, You shouldn't
have done this, Chris quean. But Chris said nothing, just
sat him down at the table and sat there herself and saw that he
ate; and when young Ewan came in with old Brigson she fed
them as well; and syne Brigson set off for the farm at Auchenblae
where Rob’s horse and sholtie were housed.
When he’d gone Chris set to work on the place and opened the
windows to the air and cleaned out the rooms and dragged off
HARVEST
247
the dirty linen from the bed and made it up in a bundle to take
back with her. Syne she baked oat-cakes for Rob and told him
that each day he’d get him a pail of milk from the Netherhill,
till time came when he’d kye of his own again, she d arranged
for that. And when John Brigson came back in the evening
with horse and sholtie Long Rob was fast asleep in his chair,
they didn’t rouse him but spread him his supper, and set him
his breakfast as well, and left a lamp low-burning and clear
beside him, and a hot-water bottle in his bed. Syne they left
him and rode them back to Blawearie, all three were tired,
young Ewan asleep in the arms of Chris, dear to hold him so
with his dark head sleeping against her breast and old Brigson’s
shoulder seen as a dark quiet bulking against the night.
Next morning they looked out from Blawearie and saw
Rob’s horse and sholtie at graze in a park of the Mill, and
Long Rob himself, a dot in the sunlight, making slow way to
the moor land he’d wrought at so long. And as they looked
they heard, thin and remote, the sound of a song Kinraddie
had missed for many a day. It was Ladies of Spain.
Soon maybe the War would end, Chris had dreamt as she
listened to that singing, and they all be back in Kinraddie
as once they had been, Chae and Long Rob and her dark lad,
Ewan himself. So she’d dreamt that morning, she’d never
grow out from long dreamings in autumn dawns like those.
And fruition of dream came soon enough, it was a telegram
boy that came riding his bicycle up to Blawearie. Chris read
the telegram, it was Ewan that had sent it, Home on leave to¬
night before going to France. She stared at it and the lad that
had brought it, and he asked Any reply? and she said Any what?
and he asked her again, and she said No, and ran into the kitchen
and stared at the writing in the telegram. He was going to
Y rance.
It lingered at the back of her mind, dark, like a black cat
SUNSET SONG
248
creeping at the back of a hedge, she saw the fluff of its fur or
the peek of its eyes, a wild and sinister thing in the sunlight;
but you would not look often or see those eyes, how they
glared at you. He was going out there, where the sky was a
troubled nightmare and the earth shook night and day, into the
lands of the coarse French folk, her Ewan, her lad with his
dark, dear face and that quick, blithe blush. And suddenly
she was filled with a weeping pity in her heart for him, a pity
that brought no tears to her eyes, he must never see her shed
tears all the time he was with her, he’d go out to the dark, far
land with memories of her and Blawearie that were shining
and brave and kind.
So all that forenoon she fled and bustled from room to room,
brightening the place, she brought out fresh sheets and pillows
for the bed she had found so lonely, she sent out young Ewan
to gather roses and honeysuckle to set in a jar on the ledge
above the bed. And she hung new curtains there and brought
out Ewan’s clothes and brushed them, he’d want to get out of
his uniform, they were sick of the khaki the men that came
back. Then she made a great baking against his coming, so
much that she’d hardly time to make dinner for young Ewan
and Brigson, but they didn’t care, they were both excited as
herself. She knew the train he would come by, the half-past
five, and she swept and dusted the kitchen and set his tea, and
punched a great cushion ready for his chair, and dressed herself
in the blue he liked and young Ewan in his brave brown cords.
John Brigson cried This is hardly the place for me with your
man come home. Til away to Bervie then for the night.
Off he set, Chris waved to the old, kind childe as he bicycled
down Blawearie brae. And then she ran back, ben to the
parlour to look at herself in the mirror again, in the long glass
her figure seemed blithe and slim even still, she’d be fine to
sleep with yet, she supposed—oh, Ewan! Pier face hadn’t
changed, it was flushed and fair, the eyes maybe older, but shining
and bright. And she finished with that looking and went over
the close to stand by the side of young Ewan, looking down the
HARVEST 249
hill for his father coming up. The sun flung the long shadows
of Elawcarie and the beeches far in the east, and across the Den,
high in the fields of Upperhill, a lost sheep baaed in the whins.
She had hardly been able to believe it him, lying awake
after he slept, he slept with a snoring breath and fuddled mum¬
blings, bulging out against her so that she had but little of the
bed and less of the blankets. She closed her eyes and pressed
her knuckles against her teeth that the pain might waken her,
that she might know Ewan hadn’t come home, was still the
same Ewan she’d dreamt of in the silence of the night and her
own lonely bed. But he moved, flinging out an arm that
struck her across the face, she lay still below it, then it wabbled
away. She took her knuckles from her mouth and lay quiet
then, no need for her to hurt heiself now.
Drunk he had come from the station and more than two
hours late. Standing at last in the kitchen m hiskdts he d
looked round and sneered Hell, Chris, what a bloody ™
she ran to him. And he’d flung his pack one way and his hat
the other and kissed her as though she were a tink, his hands
on her as quickly as that, hot and questing and wise as his hands
had never been. She saw the hot smoulder fire in his eyes then,
but no blush on his face, it was red with other things. But
she smothered her horror and laughed,, and kissed him and
struggled from him, and cried Ewan, who's this?
Young Ewan held back, shy-like, staring, and just said
It's father. At that the strange, swaying figure in the tartan
kilts laughed, coarse-like, JVell, we'll hope so, eh Chris? Any
supper left—unless you're too bloody stand-offish even to have that*
She couldn’t believe her own ears. Stand-offish. Uh,
Ewan! and ran to him again, but he shook her away, Och,
all right, I'm wearied. For Christ's sake let a man sit down.
He staggered to the chair she’d made ready for him, a picture-
book of young Ewan’s lay there, he picked the thing up and
250 SUNSET SONG
flung it to the other side of the room, and slumped down into
the chair. Hell, what a blasted climb to a blasted place. Here,
give us some tea.
She sat beside him to serve him, she knew her face had gone
white. But she poured the tea and spread the fine supper she’d
been proud to make, it might hardly have been there for the
notice he paid it, drinking cup after cup of the tea like a beast
at a trough. She saw him clearer then, the coarse hair that
sprang like short bristles all over his head, the neck with its
red and angry circle about the collar of the khaki jacket, a great
half-healed scar across the back of his hand glinted putrescent
blue. Suddenly his eyes came on her, IVell, damn't, is that all
you've to say to me now Eve come home? Fd have done better to
spend the night with a tart in the town.
She didn’t say anything, she couldn’t, the tears were choking
in her throat and smarting and biting at her eyelids, pressing
to come, the tears that she’d sworn she’d never shed all the time
he was home on leave. And she didn’t dare look at him lest he
should see, but he saw and pushed back his chair and got up in
a rage, God Almighty, what are you snivelling about now? You
always were snivelling, I mind. And out he went, young Ewan
ran to her side and flung his arms round her, Mother, don't cry,
I don't like him, he's a tink, that soldier! She’d pressed back the
tears then, IVhist, Ewan, never say that again; and got up and
cleared off the supper things and went out to the close and
cried gently Ewan!
He cried back All right, all right! still angrily; and at that
some anger kindled within herself, she didn’t wait for him to
come back but turned and took young Ewan in her arms and
climbed the stairs and put him to bed, he was vexed and troubled
about her, kissing her as he lay there. Sleep with me to-night,
mother. She laughed at him, she was sleeping with his father
to-night, he must be good and sleep himself, quick and quick,
there’d be such fun with father the morn. He said Fll try,
and closed his eyes and she went down the stairs, it was dark
there, getting on for eight. She thought Ewan was still outside
HARVEST 251
but as she made for the lamp something stirred in the chair, she
thought it a cat, it was Ewan. He caught her and pulled her
on to his knees and said Be stand-offish now if you can, what the
devil do you think Eve come home for?
It had been like struggling with someone deep in a night¬
mare, when the blankets are over your head and you can barely
breathe, awful she should come to think that of Ewan. But it
wasn’t Ewan, her Ewan, someone coarse and strange and
strong had come back in his body to torment her. He laughed
as he fought her there in the chair and held her tight and
began to tell stories—oh, he was drunk and didn’t know what
he said, terrible and sickening things, he’d had women when he
pleased in Lanark, he said. And he whispered of them to her,
his breath was hot on her face, she saw the gleam of his teeth,
he told her how he’d lain with them and the things he’d done.
Sickened and shamed she had felt and then worse than that,
stopping from struggling, a shameful, searing desire come on
her. And he knew, he knew at once, he said IVell, now that
you know you can get!
She had picked herself up from the floor and in a dream
went out to milk the kye, leaving him there. When she came
back he had gone from the kitchen, she was slow to finish
sieving and skimming the milk and go up to the room she d
made ready that morning, singing she had made it ready.
And up there he waited her, lying in the bed, he’d carried up a
lamp from the kitchen, they who’d always gone to bed in the
darkness and thought it fine to lie in each other s arms in
the night-glimmer from the window. But now he grumbled
For God's sake hurry up! and when she made to put out the
light Vll do that, come on! And she lay beside him and he
took her. , ...
She remembered that now, lying in the darkness the wnue
he slept, why he had left the lamp alight; and at memory of
that foulness something cold and vile turned and turned like a
wheeling mirror inside her brain. For it had been other things
than his beast-like mauling that had made her whisper in
252
SUNSET SONG
agony, Oh Ewan, put out the light! The horror of his eyes
upon her she would never forget, they burned and danced on
that mirror that wheeled and wheeled in her brain.
So that was Ewan’s homecoming on leave and the days that
went by were the same as that first night foreshadowed. He
had gone away Ewan Tavendale, he came back a man so coarse
and cruel that in place of love hate came singing in the heart of
Chris—hate that never found speech, that but slowly found
lodgement secure and unshaken. For often it seemed to her that
a tortured, tormented thing looked out from Ewan’s eyes while
he told them his foulest tale, ill-used old Brigson and jeered at
him, came drunken back to Blawearie night after night—that
tortured thing that was the lost lad she had married. But the
fancy wilted and vanished as the days went by. He stayed five
days, had his breakfast in bed, and never got up till dinner¬
time; he never looked at the parks or stock or took notice of
young Ewan; he dressed in his khaki and kilts alone, and
to Chris’s suggestion that he wear a suit—What, me dress up
like bloody cotichy? Ell leave that to your friend, Rob Dwican.
Every day he went swaggering down the road and was off
to Drumlithie or Stonehaven or Fordoun, drinking there.
Before he went he’d ask for money, Chris gave him all that he
asked, not saying a word, but he’d fancy a reluctance and
sneer at her. Wasn’t he entitled to what was his own? Did
she think him still the young fool he had been, content to slave
and slave at Blawearie—without as much as a dram to savour
the soss, or a quean or so at night to waken your blood—7iothing
but a wife you hardly dared touch in case you put her in the family
way, eh Chris?
He would say this at dinner-time, sneering and boasting,
old Brigson would colour and look down at his plate and young
Ewan stare and stare at his father till Ewan would say God,
what a damned glower! Eyes like your mother and a nature
HARVEST 253
the same; and he’d swear at the bairn, it was shameful to hear
that. He’d made friends with Mutch, him that once he could
hardly abide, and with him he went driving each night on their
drunken sprees. As he went to bed John Brigson would look
at Chris with trouble in his kind old eyes, but she didn t dare
say a thing to him, he’d go stamping slow up above her head the
while she sat down to await Ewan’s return and have the hirpling
note of the clock stamp each second in her heart, hating him
home, wanting him home.
For after that first night he had ceased to touch her, she would
lie beside him, quivering and waiting. And he’d lie quiet,
she knew him awake and knew that he knew what she waited;
and it was as though he were a cat that played with a mouse, he
would laugh out after a while and then go to sleep, she herself
to lie tortured in the hours thereafter. The last night she
refused the torment, she got up near three o’clock and kindled
a fire and made herself tea and watched the morning come down
the hill passes—a fine summer morning, yellow and grey and
lovely with its chirping of birds in the beeches. And suddenly
then, as always these changes took her, she was calm and secure,
putting Ewan from her heart, locking it up that he never could
vex her again, she was finished with him, either loving or
hating. And at that release she rose and went slow about her
work, a great load had gone from her then, John Brigson coming
down in the morning heard her sing and was cheery himself,
cheery with relief, but she sang her release.
At nine o’clock Ewan cried down from his room When
the hell are you bringing some breakfast? She took no notice
of that, but she sent young Ewan out to play and then went on
with her work. And at last she heard a clatter on the stairs,
and there he stood at the kitchen entrance, glaring at her
Have you gone clean deaf? She answered him then, raising
her head and looking at him, If you re in need of a breakfast—
get it.
He said You bitch! and he made to strike her. But she caught
up a knife from the table, she had it waiting there nearby, he
254
SUNSET SONG
swore and drew back. She nodded and smiled at that, calm,
and put the knife down and went on with her work.
So he made his own tea, grumbling and swearing, a fine
send-off this for a man that was going to France to do his bit.
And Chris listened to the catch-phrase, contempt in her heart,
she looked at him with a curling lip, and he saw her look and
swore at her, but was frightened for all that, always now she
knew she had known him the frightened one. And a queer,
cold curiosity came on her then that so she should have slaved
to tend him and love him and give him the best, body and mind
and soul she had given, for a gift to the body of a drunken lout
from the plough-stilts.
And now that body she saw with a cold repulsion him wash
and shave and dress, she could hardly bear to look at him and
went out and worked in the close, cleaning pots there in the
shining weather, young Ewan played douce and content with
his toys, it was hay-time all down the Howe and the hens came
pecking around her. She heard Ewan stamp about in the kitchen,
he wanted that she should look, go running and fetch him his
things. And she smiled again, cold and secure and serene,
and heard him come out and bang the door; and without raising
her head she saw him then. He was all in his gear, the Glen¬
garry on his head, his pack on his shoulder, his kilts a-swing,
and he went past her jauntily, but she knew he expected her
to stop him, to run after him and throw her arms about him:
she saw in his eyes as he went by the fear that she’d pay no heed.
And none she paid, she did not speak, she did not unbend,
young Ewan stopped from his playing and looked after his
father incuriously, as at a strange alien that went from the place.
At the gate of the close, as he banged it behind him, Ewan
stooped to sort up his garters, red in the face, not looking at her
still. And she paid him no heed.
He swung the pack on his shoulders then and went slow
down the road to the turnpike bend, she saw that from the
kitchen window, knew he believed she would cry to him at
the last. And she smiled, cold and sure, that she knew him so,
HJRVEST
255
every action and thought, and why he stood there at last, not
trying to look back. He fumbled for matches and lighted his
pipe as she watched; and a cloud came over the sun and went on
with Ewan, the two of them went down the turnpike then
together, out of her sight in the shadow and flame of the bright
sun weather, it was strange and impossibly strange. She stood
long staring down at that point where he’d vanished, sharp
under her breast, tearing her body, her heart was breaking,
and she did not care! She was outside and away from its
travail and agony, he had done all to her that he ever could now,
he who had tramped down the road in that shadow that fled
from the sun.
And then it was she found no salvation at all may endure
forever, or beyond the pitch that the heart may bear it, she was
weeping and weeping, her arms flung over the kitchen table,
weeping for that Ewan who had never come back, for the
shamed, tormented boy with the swagger airs she had let go
from Blawearie without a kiss or a parting word. Ewan,
Ewan! her heart cried then, breaking and breaking, Oh Ewan,
l didn't mean it! Ewan—he was hers, hers still in spite of all
he had done and said, he had lived more close in her body than
the heart that broke now, young Ewan was his, Oh God, she
had never let him go like that! And in her desolation of weeping
she began to pray, she had known it useless, but she prayed and
prayed for him to come back, to kiss her and hold her in kindness
just once before he went down that road. She ran wild-eyed and
weeping to the close and there was John Brigson, he stared dumb¬
founded as she cried Oh, don't let him go, run after him, John!
And syne he said he didn’t understand, if she meant her man,
it was more than an hour since Ewan had gone down the road,
he’d heard long syne the whistle of his train out across the hills.
It was a month before she heard from him, and then only a
scrape and a score on a thing they called a field postcard, written
256 SUNSET SONG
somewhere in France; and it said no more than that he was
well. No more than a whisper out of the dark cave of days
into which he had gone, it yet salved her mind from the sealing
agony that tormented the early weeks. They would never be
the same again, but some day he would come back to her,
their madness forgotten, back to her and young Ewan and
Blawearie when the War was done, they d forget and forget,
busy themselves in new hours and seasons, there would never
be fire and gladness between them again but still undying the
labour of the fields in which she now buried her days.
For she sank herself in that, the way to forget, she was hardly
indoors from dawn to dusk in all the range of the harvest weather,
running down the bouts behind the binder that john Bngson
drove, little Ewan running and laughing beside her. He
thought it a fun and a play she made, stocking and stocking
so quickly then, her hands became as machines, tireless and
quick and ceaseless through the long hours, she stocked so
quickly that with an extra hour each evening, old Brigson
helping her, she was close to the uncut rigs again. Corn and the
shining hollow stalks of the straw, they wove a pattern about
her life, her nights and days, she would creep to bed and dream
of the endless rigs and her hands in the night would waken
her, all pins and needles they would be. Once she went ben to
the parlour to look in the glass and saw then why pity came
often in old Brigson’s eyes, she was thinner than ever she d
been, her face was thin, it seemed to her some gloss had gone
from her hair, her eyes grown dull and patient and pupil-less;
like the eyes of a cow.
So, hurt and dazed, she turned to the land, close to it and the
smell of it, kind and kind it was, it didn’t rise up and torment
your heart, you could keep at peace with the land if you gave
it your heart and hands, tended it and slaved for it, it was wild
and a tyrant, but it was not cruel. And often, in the
stocking with old John Brigson near, a ghost of gladness would
come to her then, working under the coming of the moon
before the evening dew came pringling over Kinraddie, night-
HJRFEST
257
birds whistling over the fields, so quiet, so quiet, stilling away
the pain in her body, the pain in her heart that this reaping
and harvesting had brought.
And then Long Rob of the Mill came up to Blawearie. He
came one morning as they started the yavil, he came through
the close and into the kitchen, long and as rangy as ever he was,
his face filled out and his eyes the same, and he cried How's
Chris? Bonny as ever! And he caught young Ewan up on his
shoulder and Ewan looked down at him, dark and grave, and
smiled, and thought him fine.
Rob had come over to help, he’d no cutting to do; and when
Chris said nay, he mustn’t leave the Mill, he twinkled his eyes
and shook his head. And Chris knew he’d have little loss, folk
changed and were changing again, not a soul had driven his
corn cart to the Mill since Long Rob came back. He’d had
nothing to do but pleiter about from park to park and look out
on the road for the custom that never came; and if any came
now it could damn well wait, he’d come up to stook Blawearie.
So the two went down to the park, young Ewan went with
them, and they stocked it together, the best of the crop, Rob
cheery as ever it seemed to Chris. But sometimes his eyes
would wander up to the hills, like a man seeking a thing he had
never desired, and into the iron-blue eyes a shadow like a dark,
quiet question would creep. Maybe he minded the jail and its
torments then, he spoke never of that, and never a word of the
War, nor Chris, all the stocking of the yavil park. Strange
she had hardly known him before, Long Rob of the Mill,
unco and atheist; he’d been only the miller with the twinkling
eyes, his singings by morn and his whistlings by night, his
stories of horses till your head fair reeled. Now it seemed she
had known him always, closely and queerly, she felt queer, as
though shy, when she sat by his side at the supper table and he
spoke to old Brigson that night. The pallor of the jail came out
in the lamp-light, under the brown that the sun had brought,
and she saw his hand by the side of her hand, thin and strong,
the miller’s horse-taming hand.
258 SUNSET SONG
He bedded young Ewan that night, for a play, and sung him
to sleep, Chris and old Brigson heard the singing as they sat
in the kitchen below, Ladies of Spain and There was a Young
Farmer and A' the Blue Bonnets are Over the Border. Hardly
anybody left in Kinraddie sang these songs, it was full of other
tunes from the bothy windows now, Tipperary and squawling
English things, like the squeak of a rat that is bedded in syrup,
the Long, Long Trail and the like. It was queer and eerie,
listening to Rob, like listening to an echo from far in the years
at the mouth of a long lost glen.
And she never knew when and how in the days that followed,
it came on her silently, secretly, out of the earth itself, maybe,
the knowledge she was Rob’s to do with as he willed, she
willed. She wanted more than the clap of his hand on her
shoulder as they finished the bout at evening and up through the
shadows took their slow way, by parkside and dyke, to the
close that hung drenched with honeysuckle smell. She wanted
more than his iron-blue eye turned on her, warm and clean
and kind though she felt her skin colour below that gaze, she
wanted those things that now all her life she came to know she
had never known—a man to love her, not such a^boy as the
Ewan that had been or the poor demented beast he’d become.
And if old John Brigson guessed of those things that whis¬
pered so shamelessly there in her heart he gave never a sign,
wise and canny and kind. And no sign that he knew did Ro
give either, swinging by her side in the harvest that drew to its
end. And in Chris as she bent and straightened and stocked the
last day was a prayer to the earth and fields, a praying that this
harvest might never end, that she and Long Rob would tramp
it forever. But the binder flashed its blades at the head of the
last, long bout, and Long Rob had his hand on her shoulder,
He's finished, Chris quean, and it's clyak!
That evening she went out with him to the gate of the close,
and he swung his coat on his shoulder, IVell, well, Chris lass.
Eve liked this fine. And then, not looking at her, he added
Tm away to Aberdeen to enlist the morn.
HARVEST
259
For a moment she was stupefied and stared at him silently,
but she had no place in his thoughts, he was staring across
Kinraddie’s stocked fields. And then he began to tell her,
he’d resolved on this days before, he couldn’t stay out of it
longer, all the world had gone daft and well he might go with
the rest, there was neither trade nor trust for him here, or rest
ever again till this War was over, if it ever ended at all. So I’m
giving in at last, I suppose they’ll say. And this is ta-ta, Chris;
mind on me kindly some times.
She held to his hand in the gloaming light and so he looked
down at last, she was biting her lips to keep down the tears,
but he saw them shine brimming then in her eyes. And his
own changed, changed and were kind and then something else,
he cried IVhy, lass! and his hand on her shoulder drew her close,
she was close and against him, held tight so that she felt the slow
beat of his heart, she wanted to rest there, safe and safe in these
corded arms. And then she minded that to-morrow he’d be
gone, it cried through the evening in every cry of the lapwings,
So near, so near! So this also ended as everything else, every
thing she had ever loved and desired went out to the madness
beyond the hills on that ill road that flung its evil white ribbon
down the dusk. And it was her arms then that went round his
neck, drawing down his head and kissing him, queer and awful
to kiss a man so, kissing him till she heard his breath come quick,
and he gripped her, pleading with her, IVe’re daft, Chris quean,
we mustn’t! But she knew then she had won, she wound her
arms about him, she whispered The haystacks! and he carried her
there, the smell of the clover rose crushed and pungent and
sweet from under her head; and lying so in the dark, held to
him, kissing him, she sought with lips and limbs and blood to
die with him then.
But that dark, hot cloud went by, she found herself still
lying there, Rob was there, and she drew his head to her breast,
lying so with him, seeing out below the rounded breasts of the
haystacks the dusky red of the harvest night, this harvest
gathered to herself at last, reaped and garnered and hers in her
26o SUNSET SONG
heart and body. So they were for hours, John Brigson never
called out to them; and then she stood beside Rob at the head of
the road again, drowsy and quiet and content. They made no
promises, kissing for last, she knew already he was growing
remote from her, his eyes already remote to that madness that
beckoned beyond the hills. So it was that he went from her
next, she heard him go step-stepping slow with that swinging
stride of his down through the darkness, and she never saw him
again, was never to see him again.
It had burned up as a fire in a whin-bush, that thing in her
life, and it burned out again and was finished. She went
about the Blawearie biggings next day singing under breath
to herself, quiet and unvexed, tending to hens and kye, seeing
to young Ewan’s sleep in the day and the setting of old Brigson’s
supper ere he came at night. She felt shamed not at all, all the
vexing fears had gone from her, she made no try to turn from
the eyes in the glass that looked out at her, wakened and living
again. She was glad she’d gone out with Long Rob, glad and
content, they were one and the same now, Ewan and her.
So the telegram boy that came riding to Blawearie found her
singing there in the close, mending young Ewan’s clothes.
She heard the click of the gate and he took the telegram out
of his wallet and gave it to her and she stared at him and then at
her hands. They were quivering like the leaves of the beech
in the forecoming of rain, they quivered in a little mist below
her eyes. Then she opened the envelope and read the words
and she said there was no reply, the boy swung on his bicycle
again and rode out, riding and leaning he clicked the gate behind
him; and laughed back at her for the cleverness of that.
She stood up then, she put down her work on the hackstock
and read again in the telegram, and began to speak to herself
till that frightened her and she stopped. But she forgot to be
frightened, in a minute she was speaking again, the chirawking
HARVEST
261
hens in the close stopped and came near and turned up bright
eyes to her loud and toneless whispering, What do I do—oh,
what do I do?
She was vexed and startled by that—what was it she did?
Did she go out to Franee and up to the front line, maybe, into a
room where they’d show her Ewan lying dead, quiet and dead,
white and bloodless, sweat on his hair, killed in action? She
went out to the front door and waved to the harvesters, Brigson,
young Ewan, and a link they’d hired, they saw her and stared
till she waved again and then John Brigson abandoned the
half-loaded cart and came waddling up the park, so slow he
was, Did you cry me, Chris?
Sweat on his hair as sweat on Ewan’s. She stared at that and
held out the telegram, he wiped slow hands and took it and read
it, while she clung to the door-post and whispered and whispered
What is it 1 do now, John? Have l to go out to France? And
at last he looked up, his face was grizzled and hot and old, he
wiped the sweat from it, slow. God, mistress, this is sore news,
but he's died like a man out there, your Eivan's died fine.
But she wouldn’t listen to that, wanting to know the thing
she must do; and not till he told her that she did nothing, they
could never take all the widows to France and Ewan must
already be buried, did she stop from that twisting of her hands
and ceaseless whisper. Then anger came, Why didn't you tell
me before? Oh, damn you, you liked tormenting me! and she
turned from him into the house and ran up the stairs to the bed,
the bed that was hers and Ewan’s, and lay on it, and put her hands
over her ears trying not to hear a cry of agony in a lost French
field, not to think that the body that had lain by hers, frank and
free and kind and young, was torn and dead and unmoving
flesh, blood twisted upon it, not Ewan at all, riven and terrible,
still and dead when the harvest stood out in Blawearie’s land
and the snipe were calling up on the loch and the beech trees
whispered and rustled. And SHE KNEW THAT IT WAS
A LIE!
He wasn’t dead, he could never have died or been killed for
262
SUNSET SONG
nothing at all, far away from her over the sea, what matter to
him their War and their fighting, their King and their country?
Kinraddie was his land, Blawearie his, he was never dead for
those things of no concern, he’d the crops to put in and the
loch to drain and her to come back to. It had nothing to do
with Ewan this telegram. They were only tormenting her,
cowards and liars and bloody men, the English generals and their
like down their in London. But she wouldn’t bear it, she’d have
the law on them, cowards and liars as she knew them to be!
It was only then that she knew she was moaning, dreadful
to hear; and they heard it outside, John Brigson heard it and
nearly went daft, he caught up young Ewan and ran with him
into the kitchen and then to the foot of the stairs; and told
him to go up to his mother, she wanted him. And young
Ewan came, it was his hand tugging at her skirts that brought
her out of that moaning coma, and he wasn’t crying, fearsome
the sounds though she made, his face was white and resolute,
Mother, mother! She picked him up then and held him close,
rocking in an agony of despair because of that look on his face,
that lost look and the smouldering eyes he had. Oh Ewan,
your father's dead! she told him the lie that the world believed.
And she wept at last, blindly, freeingly, for a little, old Brigson
was to say it was the boy that had saved her from going mad.
But throughout Kinraddie the news went underbreath
that mad she’d gone, the death of her man had fair unhinged
her. For still she swore it was a lie, that Ewan wasn’t dead,
he could never have died for nothing. Kirsty Strachan and
Mistress Munro came up to see her, they shook their heads and
said he’d died fine, for his country and his King he’d died,
young Ewan would grow up to be proud of his father. They
said that sitting at tea, with long faces on them, and then Chris
laughed, they quivered away from her at that laugh.
Country and King? You're havering, havering! IVhat
HARVEST
263
have they to do with my Ewan> what was the King to him, what
their damned country? Blawearie's his land, it's not his wight
that others fight wars!
She went fair daft with rage then, seeing the pity in their
faces. And also it was then, and then only, staring through
an angry haze at them, that she knew at last she was living a
dream in a world gone mad. Ewan was dead, they knew it
and she knew it herself; and he’d died for nothing, for nothing,
hurt and murdered and crying for her, maybe, killed for
nothing : and those bitches sat and spoke of their King and
country. . . .
They ran out of the house and down the brae, and, panting,
she stood and screamed after them. It was fair the speak of
Kinraddie next day the way she’d behaved, and nobody else
came up to see her. But she’d finished with screaming, she
went quiet and cold. Mornings came up, and she saw them
come, she minded that morning she’d sent him away and she
might not cry him back. Noons with their sun and rain came
over the Howe and she saw the cruelty and pain of life as
crimson rainbows that spanned the horizons of the wheeling
hours. Nights came soft and grey and quiet across Kinraddie’s
fields, they brought neither terror nor hope to her now. Behind
the walls of a sanity cold and high, locked in from the lie of
life, she would live, from the world that had murdered her man
for nothing, for a madman’s gibberish heard in the night
behind the hills.
And then Chae Strachan came home at last on leave, he
came home and came swift to Blawearie. She met him out
by the kitchen door, a sergeant by then, grown thinner and
taller, and he stopped and looked in her frozen face. Then,
as her hand dropped down from his, he went past her with
swinging kilts, into the kitchen, and sat him down and took
off his bonnet. Chris, I've come to tell you of Ewan.
264 SUNSET SONG
She stared at him, waking, a hope like a fluttering bird in her
breast. Eivan? Chae—Chae, he's not living? And then, as
he shook his head, the frozen wall came down on her heart
again. Ewan's dead, don't vex yourself hoping else. They
can't hurt him more, even this can't hurt him, though I swore I'd
tell you nothing about it. But I know right well you should know
it, Chris. Ewan was shot as a coward and deserter out there
in France.
* * * *
Chae had lain in a camp near by and had heard of the thing
by chance, he’d read Ewan’s name in some list of papers that
was posted up. And he’d gone the night before Ewan was
shot, and they’d let him see Ewan, and he’d heard it all, the
story he was telling her now—better always to know what
truth's in a thing, for lies come creeping home to roost on unco
rees, Chris quean. You're young yet, you've hardly begun to live,
and I swore to myself that I'd tell you it all, that you'd never be
vexed with some twisted bit in the years to come. Ewan zuas
shot as a deserter, it was fair enough, he'd deserted from the
front line trenches.
He had deserted in a blink of fine weather between the
rains that splashed the glutted rat-runs of the front. He had
done it quickly and easily, he told to Chae, he had just turned
and walked back. And other soldiers that met him had thought
him a messenger, or wounded, or maybe on leave, none had
questioned him, he’d set out at ten o’clock in the morning
and by afternoon, taking to the fields, was ten miles or more
from the front. Then the military policemen came on him
and took him, he was marched back and court-martialled
and found to be guilty.
And Chae said to him, they sat together in the hut where
he waited the coming of the morning, But why did you do it,
Ewan? You might well have known you'd never get free. And
Ewan looked at him and shook his head, It was that wind that
HJRVEST 265
came with the sun, I minded Blawearie, I seemed to ivaken up
smelling that smell. And I couldn't believe it was me that stood
in the trench, it was just daft to be there. So I turned and got
out of it.
In a flash it had come on him, he had wakened up, he was
daft and a fool to be there; and, like somebody minding things
done in a coarse wild dream there had flashed on him memory
of Chris at Blawearie and his last days there, mad and mad he
had been, he had treated her as a devil might, he had tried to
hurt her and maul her, trying in the nightmare to waken, to
make her waken him up; and now in the blink of sun he saw
her face as last he’d seen it while she quivered away from his
taunts. He knew he had lost her, she’d never be his again, he’d
known it in that moment he clambered back from the trenches;
but he knew that he’d be a coward if he didn t try though all
hope was past.
So out he had gone for that, remembering Chris, wanting
to reach her, knowing as he tramped mile on mile that he
never would. But he d made her that promise that he d never
fail her, long syne he had made it that night when he’d held
her so bonny and sweet and a quean in his arms, young and
desirous and kind. So mile on mile on the laired French roads:
she was lost to him, but that didn’t help, he’d to try to win to her
side again, to see her again, to tell her nothing he’d said was his
saying, it was the foulness dripping from the dream that
devoured him. And young Ewan came into his thoughts,
he’d so much to tell her of him, so much he’d to say and do if
only he might win to Blawearie. ...
Then the military policemen had taken him and he’d listened
to them and others in the days that followed, listening and
not listening at all, wearied and quiet. Oh, wearied and
wakened at last, Chae, and 1 haven't cared, they can take me
out fine and shoot me to-?norrow, I'll be glad for the rest of it,
Chris lost to me through my own coarse daftness. She didn't
even come to give me a kiss at good-bye, Chae, we never said
good-bye; but 1 mind the bonny head of her down-bent there in the
266 SUNSET SONG
dose. She'll never know, my dear quean, and that's best—
they tell lies about folk they shoot and she'll think I just died like
the rest; you're not to tell her.
Then he d been silent long, and Chae’d had nothing to say,
he knew it was useless to make try for reprieve, he was only
a sergeant and had no business even in the hut with the prisoner.
And then Ewan said, sudden-like, it clean took Chae by
surprise, Mind the smell of dung in the parks on an April morning,
Chae? And the peewits over the rigs? Bonny they're flying
this night in Kinraddie, and Chris sleeping there, and all the
Howe happed in mist. Chae said that he mustn’t mind about
that, he was feared that the dawn was closej and Ewan should
be thinking of other things now, had he seen a minister? And
Ewan said that an old bit billy had come and blethered, an
officer creature, but he’d paid no heed, it had nothing to do with
him. Even as he spoke there rose a great clamour of guns far
up in the front, it was four miles off, not more; and Chae
thought of the hurried watches climbing to their posts and the
blash and flare of the Verey lights, the machine-gun crackle
from pits in the mud, things he himself mightn’t hear for long:
Ewan’d never hear it at all beyond this night.
And not feared at all he looked, Chae saw, he sat there in
his kilt and shirt-sleeves, and he looked no more than a young
lad still, his head between his hands, he didn’t seem to be
thinking at all of the morning so close. For he started to
speak of Blawearie then and the parks that he would have
drained, though he thought the land would go fair to hell without
the woods to shelter it. And Chae said that he thought the
same, there were sore changes waiting them when they went
back; and then he minded that Ewan would never go back, and
could near have bitten his tongue in half, but Ewan hadn’t
noticed, he’d been speaking of the horses he’d had, Clyde and
old Bess, fine beasts, fine beasts—did Chae mind that night of
lightning when they found Chris wandering the fields with
those two horses? That was the night he had known she liked
him well nothing more than that, so quick andfierce she was, Chae
HJRFEST
267
man, she guarded herself like a queen in a palace, there was
nothing between her and me till the night we married. Mind
that—and the singing there was, Chae? IVhat was it that
Chris sang then?
And neither could remember that, it had vexed Ewan a
while, and then he forgot it, sitting quiet in that hut on the
edge of morning. Then at last he’d stood up and gone to the
window and said There's bare a quarter of an hour now, Chae,
you'll need to be getting back.
And they’d shaken hands, the sentry opened the door for
Chae, and he tried to say all he could for comfort, the fore¬
shadowing of the morning in Ewan’s young eyes was strange
and terrible, he couldn’t take out his hand from that grip.
And all that Ewan said was Oh man, mind me when next you
hear the peewits over Blawearie—look at my lass for me when
you see her again, close and close, for that kiss that I'll never give
her. So he’d turned back into the hut, he wasn’t feared or
crying, he went quiet and calm; and Chae went down through
the hut lines grouped about that place, a farm-place it had been,
he’d got to the lorry that waited him, he was cursing and weeping
then and the driver thought him daft, he hadn’t known himself
how he’d been. So they’d driven off, the wet morning had
come crawling across the laired fields, and Chae had never
seen Ewan again, they killed him that morning.
* * * *
This was the story Chae told to Chris, sitting the two of
them in the kitchen of Blawearie. Then he moved and got
up and she did the same, and like one coming from a far,
dark country, she saw his face now, he’d been all that time
but a voice in the dark. And at last she found speech herself
Never vex for me or the telling me this, it was best, it was best!
She crept up the stairs to their room when he’d gone, she
opened the press where Ewan’s clothes were, and kissed them
and held them close, those clothes that had once been his,
268
SUNSET SONG
near as ever he’d come to her now. And she whispered then
in the stillness, with only the beech for a listener, Oh, Ewan,
Ewan, sleep quiet and sound now, lad, I understand! You did
it for me, and Em proud and proud, for me and Blawearie, my
dear, my dear—sleep quiet and brave, for Eve understood!
'The beech listened and whispered, whispered and listened,
on and on. And a strange impulse and urge came on Chris
Tavendale as she too listened. She ran down the stairs and
found young Ewan and kissed him, Let's go a jaunt up to the
hill.
Below them, Kinraddie; above, the hill; the loch shim¬
mering and sleeping in the autumn sun; young Ewan at her
feet; the peewits crying down the Howe.
She gave a long sigh and withdrew her hand from the face
of the Standing Stone. The mist of memories fell away and
the aching urge came back—for what, for what? Sun and
sky and the loneliness of the hills, they had cried her up here—
for what?
And then something made her raise her eyes, she stood
awful and rigid, fronting him, coming up the path through
the broom. Laired with glaur was his uniform, his face was
white and the great hole sagged and opened, sagged and opened,
red-glazed and black, at every upwards step he took. Up
through the broom: she saw the grass wave with no press below
his feet, her lad, the light in his eyes that aye she could bring.
'The snipe stilled their calling, a cloud came over the sun.
He was close to her now and she held out her hands to him,
blind with tears and bright her eyes, the bright weather in their
faces, her voice shaping a question that she heard him answer
in the rustle of the loch-side rushes as closer his soundless feet
carried him to her lips and hands.
Oh lassie, Eve come home! he said, and went into the heart
that was his forever.
THE EPILUDE
EPILUDE
THE UNFURROWED FIELD
FOLK said that winter that the War had done feint the
much good to Mutch of Bridge End. In spite of his
blowing and boasting, his silver he might as well have flung
into a midden as poured in his belly, though faith! there wasn’t
much difference in destination. He’d gone in for the Irish
cattle, had Mutch, quick you bought them and quick you
sold and reaped a fine profit with prices so brave. More
especially you did that if you crammed the beasts up with hay and
water the morning before they were driven to the mart, they’d
fairly seem to bulge with beef. But sometimes old Aitken of
Bervie, a sly old brute, would give a bit stirk a wallop in the
wame and it would belch like a bellows, and Aitken would
say, Ay, Mutch, the wind still bloweth as it listeth, 1 see, he was
aye quoting his bits of poetry, Aitken.
But he’d made silver for all that, Mutch, and many an awful
feed had his great red lugs overhung, there in the Bridge End
while the War went on. For that was how it struck him and
his family, they’d gorge from morn till night, the grocer
would stop three times a week and out to him Alec and his
mistress would come, the bairns racing at the heels of them,
and they’d buy up ham and biscuits and cheese and sausage,
and tins of this and tins of that, enough to feed the German
army, folk told—it that was said to be so hungry it was eating
up its own bit corpses, feuch!
Though faith! it was little more than eating their own
corpses they did at Bridge End. And what little they left
uneaten they turned to drink, by the end of the War he’d got
him a car, had Alec, it was only a Ford but it clattered up and
down the road to Drumlithie every day of the week, and back
it would bump to the Bridge End place with beer in crates
and whisky in bottles wagging drunken-like over the hinder
end. But Alec would blow and boast as much as ever, he’d
say the Bridge End was a fine bit place and could easily
271
272
SUNSET SONG
stand him a dram—it’s the knack of farming you want,
that’s all.
Mutch had just got up and come out blear-eyed that day
when the postman handed him the letter from Kinraddie
House. So he had one read of it and then another, syne he
cried to his wife Nine hundred pounds—have YOU got nine
hundred pounds, you? And she answered him back, canty and
cool, No, I’ve seen neither silver nor sense since I married you.
Why do you need nine hundred pounds? So Alec showed her the
letter, ’twas long and dreich and went on and on; but the gist
of it was the Trustees were to sell up Kinraddie at last; and the
farmers that wanted them could buy their own places; and if
Mutch of Bridge End still wanted his the price was nine
hundred pounds.
So that was how the Mutches left Kinraddie, they said never
a word about buying the place, Alec sold off his stock fell
quietly and they did a moonlight flit; some said they heard the
Ford that night go rattling up by Laurencekirk, others swore
that Mutch had gone north to Aberdeen and had got him a
fine bit job in a public-house there. North or south, feint the
thing more folk saw of him; and before the New Year was out
old Gordon of Upperhill had bought up the Bridge End forbye
his own place, he said he would farm the fields with a tractor.
But damn the tractor ever appeared, he put sheep on the place
instead, and sometimes the shepherd would wander into the
kitchen where that gley-eyed wife of Mutch had sat to smoke
her bit cigarettes; and he said that the smell of the damned
things lingered there still, they’d been as unco at changing
their shirts, the Mutches, as ever old Booty had been.
What with his Germans and ghosts and dirt, he’d fair been
in a way, had old Booty. Long ere the War had finished
he’d have nothing to do with the mending of boots, he wouldn t
let the grocer up to the door, but would scraich at him to leave
the messages out by the road. And at last he clean went oyer
the gate, as a man might say, he took in his cuddy to live with
him there in the kitchen, and the farmer lads going by on their
THE UNFURROJVED FIELD
273
bicycles of a Saturday night would hear the two of them speaking
together, old Pooty they’d hear, thinking himself back at some
concert or other in the olden days, reciting his TIM ROUS
BE ASTI E, stuttering and stammering at the head of his voice.
And then he’d be heard to give the donkey a bit clout, and Damn
you! Clap, you creature! he’d cry; and it was a fair entertainment.
But at last it grew overmuch to bear, that was just about
the month when the letters went out from the Trustee childes,
and folk said that fell awful sounds were heard coming from the
Pooty place, the creature was clean demented. Not a body
would do a thing till at last old Gordon did, he roaded off with
his foreman, they went in old Gordon’s car, it was night, and
the nearer they came to Pooty’s the more awful came the
sounds. The cuddy was braying and braying in an awful
stamash, they tried to look through the window, but there was
a thick leather blind there and feint the thing could they see.
So the foreman tried the door and it wouldn’t budge, but the
braying of the cuddy grew worse and worse; and the foreman
was a big bit childe and he took a great run at the door and
open it flew and the sight he saw would have scunnered a sow
from its supper, the coarse old creature was tormenting the
donkey this way and that with a red-hot poker, he scraiched the
beast was a German, and they had to tie him up.
So the foreman went back for his gun and to send a message
to bring the police; and when the police came down next day the
donkey was shot, and some said old Pooty should have been
instead. But they took the old creature away to the madhouse,
fair a good riddance to Kinraddie it was. For a while after
that there was speak of the Upperhill’s foreman biding at
Pooty’s, he wanted to marry and it would be fine and close for
his work. And the foreman said the place was fine if you
thought of breeding a family of swine: but he was neither a
boar himself nor was his quean a bit sow.
So the place began to moulder away, soon the roof went all
agley and half fell in, it was fit for neither man nor beast, the
thistles and weeds were all over the close, right they’d have
274 SUNSET SONG
pleased old Pooty’s cuddy if he’d lived to see them. It looked
a dreich, cold place as you rode by at night, near as lonesome as
the old Mill was, and not near so handy. For the Mill was a
place you could take your quean to, you d lean your lcyc es
up by the wall and take a peek through the kitchen window;
syne off you’d go, your two selves, and sit inside the old Mill
itself; and your quean would say Don't! and smooth her short
skirts; and she’d tell you you would be lucky if you got two
dances at the Fordoun ball, John Edwards was to take her
there in his side-car, mind. r u ,1
For Long Rob had never come back to the Mill. It had
fair been a wonder him joining the soldiers and going o
War the way he did—after swearing black was blue that he d
never fight, that the one was as bad as the other, Scotch or
German. Some said it was just plain daft he had gone, with
no need for him to enlist; but when Munro of the 9Jud1dieSt?U j
told that to Chris Tavendale up at Blawearie she said there had
been more sweetness and sense in Rob’s little finger than in a
the Munro carcases decked since the Flood. Ill to say tha
to a man of an age with your father, it showed you the kind ot
creature Chris Tavendale was, folk shook their heads, mm mg
how she’d gone near mad when her man was killed; as it hed
been the only one! And there was her brother, Will was is
name, that had come from the War in a queer bit uniform,
French he had said that it was; but them that were hne
acquainted with uniforms weren’t so sure, the Uhlans had
worn uniforms just like that. . ,
They had been the German horse-billies away back at tne
War’s beginning, you minded, and syne shook your head
over that, and turned to thinking of Long Rob again, him
that was killed in the April of the last year s fighting. e
been one of the soldiers they’d rushed to France in such hurry
when it seemed that the German childes were fair over us,
and he’d never come back to Kinraddie again, just notice ot his
death came through and syne a bit in the paper about him.
You could hardly believe your eyes when you read it, him sucn
THE UN FURROWED FIELD 275
a fell pacifist, too, he’d been killed in a bit retreat that they
made, him and two-three more billies had stood up to the
Germans right well and held them back while the Scots
retreated; they’d held on long after the others had gone, and
Rob had been given a medal for that. Not that he got it,
faith! he was dead, they came on his corpse long after, the
British, but just as a mark of respect.
And you minded Long Rob right well, the long rangy
childe, with his twinkling eyes and his great bit mouser and
those stories of his that he’d deave you with, horses and horses,
damn’t! he had horses on the brain. There’d been his coarse
speak about religion, too, fair a scandal once in the Howe,
but for all that he’d been a fine stock, had Rob, you minded
him singing out there in the morning, he’d sung  And
you couldn’t mind what the song had been till maybe a bairn
would up and tell you, they’d heard it often on the way to
school, and Ay, it was Ladies of Spain. You heard feint the
meikle of those old songs now, they were daft and old-fashioned,
there were fine new ones in their places, right from America,
folk said, and all about the queer blue babies that were born
there, they were clever brutes, the Americans.
Well, that was the Mill, all its trade was gone, old Gordon
bought up its land for a two-three pounds, and joined the lot
on to Upperhill. Jock Gordon came blinded back from the
War, they said he’d been near demented at first when he lost
the use of his eyes. But old Gordon was making silver like dirt,
he coddled up Jock like a pig with a tit, and he’d settled down fell
content, as well the creature might be, with all he could smoke
or drink at his elbow, and his mother near ready to lick his
boots. Fell gentry and all they were now, the Gordons, you
couldn’t get within a mile of the Upperhill without you’d hear
a blast of the English, so fine and genteel; and the ploughmen
grew fair mad when they dropped in for a dram at Drumlithie
Hotel and some billy would up and ask, Is’t true they dish you out
white dickies at Upperhill now and you've all to go to the Academy?
He was one of the folk that broke up the ploughmen’s
SUNSET SONG
276
Union, old Gordon, right proud he was of it, tooj and faith,
the man was but right, whoever heard tell of such nonsense, a
Union for ploughmen? But he didn’t get off scot-free, faith,
no! For what should happen in the General Election but that
the secretary of the Farm Servants’ Union put up as a candidate
for the Mearnsj and from far and near over Scotland a drove
of those socialist creatures came riding to help him, dressed
up in specs and baggy breeks and stockings with meikle checks.
Now, one of them was a doctor childe and up to the Upperhill
he came on a canvass, like, when old Gordon and the wife had
driven off to lend help to the Coalition. The door was opened
by Maggie Jean, she’d grown up bonny as a flower in spring,
a fine quean, sweet and kind, with no English airs. And
damn’t if they didn’t take up, the doctor and her, all in a minute,
the doctor forgot about the bothy he’d come to canvass and
Maggie Jean had him in to tea, and they spoke on politics for
hours and hours, the servant quean told, she said it was nothing
but politics; and there have been greater miracles.
Well, the next thing was that old Gordon found his men
being harried to vote for the Labour man, harried by his own
lass Maggie Jean, it sent him fair wild and the blind son too.
But Maggie Jean didn’t care a fig, the doctor childe had turned
her head; and when the election was over and the Labour man
beaten she told her father she wasn’t going on to the college
any longer, she was set on marrying her Labour doctor.
Gordon said he’d soon put his foot on that, she wasn’t of age
and he’d stop the marriage. But Maggie Jean put her arms
round his neck, I know, but you wouldn’t like people to point
at you and say (Have you heard of old Gordon’s illegitimate
grandchild?’ And at that they say old Gordon fair caved in,
Oh, my lass, my Maggie Jean, you haven’t done that! For
answer Maggie Jean just stood and laughed, shaky-like, though,
till ben came Mistress Gordon herself and heard the news,
and started in on the lass. Syne Maggie Jean grew cool as ice,
Very well, then, mother, I hear there’s a good bed in Stonehaven
IVorkhouse where women can have their babies.
THE UNFURROtVED FIELD 277
So she won in the end, you may well be sure, the Gordons
fair rushed the marriage, and every now and then the doctor
and Maggie Jean would take a bit look at each other and laugh
out loud, they weren’t a bit ashamed or decent. And when the
wedding was over Mistress Gordon said It s glad I am that
you're off from Kinraddie to Edinburgh^ where the shame of
your half-named bairn won't aye be cast in my face. And Maggie
Jean said IVhat bairnt mother? I'm not to have a baby yet, you
know, unless George and 1 get over-enthusiastic to-night, f air
dumbfoundered was Mistress Gordon, she gasped, But you said
that you were with a bairn! and Maggie Jean just shook her head
and laughed, Oh, no, I just asked father if he d like to grand¬
father one. And I don't suppose that he would. I won't have
time for babies for years yet, mother. I'm to help ORGANISING
THE FARM SERVANTS!
Ah well, folk said there was damned little chance of Nellie,
the other bit daughter, ever having anything legitimate or
illegitimate, she was growing up as sour and wizened as an old
potato, for all her English she’d sleep cold and unhandled, an
old maid all her days. But faith! you’re sure of nothing in this
world, or whoever would have guessed that Sarah Sinclair, the
daft old skate, would go marrying? It all came through the
War and the stir at the Netherhill when old Sinclair bought up
the Knapp and his own bit place all at one whip. Soon’s she
heard of that Sarah went to him and said You did plenty for
Kirsty and she'll not be needing the Knapp any more, you can
bravely settle me there!
Old Sinclair, he was nearly ninety and blind, he stared at her
like a stirk at a water-jump, and then cried for his wife. And
Sarah told them she meant what she said, Dave Brown, the
Gourdon childe, would marry her the morn if they d Peesie s
Knapp to sit down in.
And she got her way, but she didn’t get the land, old Sinclair
pastured his sheep on it, and Dave stayed on as a Netherhill
ploughman. So Sarah was married off at last and taken to bed
in the house that had been her sister’s. She soon had her man
SUNSET SONG
278
well in hand, had Sarah, folk said she’d to take him to bed by
the lug the first night, but there are aye coarse brutes to say
things like that. And damn it, if before a twelvemonth was
up she didn’t have a bairn, a peely-wally girl, but a bairn for
all that. It wasn’t much, but still it was something, and when
old Sinclair heard the news he got it all mixed, he was in bed
by then and sinking fast, he thought it was Kirsty’s first bairn
that they told of, and all the time he kept whispering Chae! he
wanted his good-son, Chae, that had married Kirsty long syne.
But Chae had been gone long ere that, he was killed in the
first fighting of Armistice Day, an hour before the guns grew
quiet. You minded him well and the arguings he’d have with
Long Rob of the Mill; he’d have been keen for the Labour
candidate, for Rich and Poor were as far off being Equal as
ever they’d been, poor Chae. Ay, it struck you strange that
he’d gone, fine childe he had been though a bit of a fool that you
laughed at behind his back. In his last bit leave folk said he’d
been awful quiet, maybe he knew right well he would never
come back, he tramped the parks most of the time, muttering
of the woods they’d cut and the land that would never get over
it. And when he said good-bye to Kirsty it wasn’t just the
usual slap on the shoulder and fVell, Vm away! He held her
and kissed her, folk saw it at the station, and he said Be good
to the bairns, lass. And Kirsty, the meikle sumph, had stood
there crying as the train went out, you’d have thought she’d
have had more sense with all the folk glowering at her. And
that was the last of Chae, you’d say, except that in the November
of nineteen-eighteen they sent home his pocket-book and
hankies and things; and they’d been well washed, but blood lay
still in a pouch of the pocket-book, cold and black, and when
Kirsty saw it she screamed and fainted away.
Women had little guts, except one or two, said Munro of
the Cuddiestoun, as though he himself had been killing a German
for breakfast every day of the War. And maybe that’s what he d
liked to think as he chased the hens and thrawed their necks for
the hospital trade, or swore at the daftie, Tony, over this or that.
THE UNFURROIVED FIELD 279
Feint the much heed paid Tony, though he’d
^ " TofS whenX’d sent ht^lower the
heatTn*/ne incub^or or raise it up in opposite^f what
than likely the creature would do clean the °PP™te ^
he’d been told, and syne stand and S1®*” at,‘f ghim and
whole afternoon till somebody came out o ^ cold as
r“ "''TX/'TVST.w. * j.., i. •««
£ s.z ,£d s;«... • “• h-
t"jk “Tto” ’ItJ'v “ - TwilL.,l-J m«l in J. ho*
L It .»rh, b«l link In “
books knew no lack, maybe one more th . i k the only
^ Scotch Ke^^Kl^t makl
UPThroaughhtha“nly the kind of speak yWd expect from
his belly ^led’dtn'llg^nearm his^nees and hrs breeks
notice "t^buy,1 folk wondered what he’d ^ ^e’d he a,^end
And where had he got all that money except that he
28o
SUNSET SONG
Fair Kinraddie’s big man he thought himself, faith! folk
laughed at him and called him the waiter-laird, Cospatric that
killed the gryphon would have looked at him sore surprised.
He spoke fell big about tractors for ploughing, but then the
slump came down and his blowing with it, he bought up sheep
for Blawearie instead. And that was the way things went in
the end on the old bit place up there on the brae, sheep baaed
and scrunched where once the parks flowed thick with corn,
no corn would come at all, they said, since the woods went
down. And the new minister when he preached his incoming
sermon cried They have made a desert and they call it peace;
and some had no liking of the creature for that, but God!
there was truth in his speak.
For the Gibbons had gone clean out of Kinraddie, there’d
be far more room and far less smell, folk said, Stuart Gibbon
had never come back from the War to stand in the pulpit his
father had held. Not that he’d been killed, no, no, you might
well depend that the great, curled steer had more sense in him
than that. But the gentry liked him in Edinburgh right well
in his chaplain’s uniform, and syne he fell in with some
American creatures that controlled a kirk in New York.
And they asked him if he’d like to have that kirk, all the well-
off Scots went to it} and he took the offer like a shot and was
off to America before you could wink, him and that thin
bit English wife of his and their young bit daughter. Well,
well, he’d done well for himself, it was plain to see ; no doubt the
Americans would like him fine, they could stand near anything
out in America, their stomachs were awful tough with all the
coarse things that they ate out of tins.
As for the father, the old man that had had such an ill-will
for the Germans, he’d grown over-frail to preach and had to
retire; and faith! if the British armies had killed half the
Germans with their guns that he did with his mouth it would
have been a clean deserted Germany long ere the end of the
War. But off he went at last and only two ministers made try
for the pulpit, both of them young, the one just a bit student from
THE UN FURROW ED FIELD 281
Aberdeen, the other new out of the Army. There seemed little to
choose between the pair, they’d no pulpit voices, either of them,
but folk thought it only fair to give the soldier billy the chance.
And it was only after he headed the leet, Colquohoun was
his name, that the story went round he was son to that old
minister from Banff that made try for Kinraddie before the War
and was fair out-preached by the Reverend Gibbon. You
minded him, surely?—he’d preached about beasts and the
Golden Age, that the dragons still lived but sometime they d
die and the Golden Age come back. Feuch ay! no sermon
at all, you might say. Well, that was him and this was the
son, thin and tall, with a clean-shaved face, and he lectured
on this and he wrote on that and he made himself fair objec¬
tionable before he’d been there a month. For he chummed up
with ploughmen, he drove his own coal, he never wore a collar
that fastened at the back, and when folk called him the Reverend
he pulled them up sharp—reverent, I am, no more, my friend.
And he whistled when he went on a Sunday walk and he
stormed at farmers for the pay they paid and he helped the
ploughmen’s Union; and he’d preach just rank sedition about
it, and speak as though Christ had meant Kinraddie, and folk
would grow fair uncomfortable.
You couldn’t well call him pro-German, like, for he d been
a plain soldier all through the War. Folk felt clean lost without
a bit name to hit at him with, till Ellison said that he was a
Bolshevik, one of those awful creatures, coarse tinks, that had
made such a spleiter in Russia. They’d shot their king-creature,
the Tsar they called him, and they bedded all over the place,
folk said, a man would go home and find his wife commandeered
any bit night and Lenin and Trotsky lying with her. And
Ellison said that the same would come in Kinraddie if Mr.
Colquohoun had his way; maybe he was feared for his mistress,
was Ellison, though God knows there’d be little danger of her
being commandeered, even Lenin and Trotsky would fair be
desperate before they would go to that length.
Well, that was your new minister, then; and nextj there
282 SUNSET SONG
came scandalous stories that he’d taken up with young Chris
Tavendale. Nearly every evening of the week he d ride up
to Blawearie, and bide there all the hours of the night, or so
folk said. And what could he want with a common bit quean
like the Tavendale widow? Ministers took up with ladies
if they meant no jookery-packery. But when Munro said that
to old Brigson the creature fair flew into a rage; and he said
that many a decent thing had gone out of Kdnraddie with the
War but that only one had come in, and that was the new
minister. Well, well, it might be so and it mightn t; but one
night Dave Brown climbed up the hill from the Knapp, to see
old Brigson about buying a horse, and he heard folk speaking
inside the kitchen and he took a bit keek round the door. And
there near the fire stood Chris herself, and the Reverend
Colquohoun was before her, she was looking up into the
minister’s face and he’d both her hands in his. And Oh, my
dear, maybe the second Chris, maybe the third, but Ewan has the
first forever! she was saying, whatever she meant by that;
and syne as Dave Brown still looked the minister bent down
and kissed her, the fool.
Folk said that fair proved the stories were true, but the very
next Sunday the minister stood up in the pulpit, and, calm as
ever, read out the banns of Upperhill’s foreman and his quean
from Fordoun, and syne the banns of Robert Colquohoun,
bachelor of this parish, and Christine Tavendale, widow, also of
this same parish. You could near have heard a pin drop then,
so quiet it was in the kirk, folk sat fair stunned. And there’d
never been such a claik in Kinraddie as when the service was
over and the congregation got out—ay, Chris Tavendale had
feathered her nest right well, the sleeked creature, who’d have
thought it of her? #
And that made the minister no more well-liked with Kin-
raddie’s new gentry, you may well be sure. But worse than that
came: he’d been handed the money, the minister, to raise a
memorial for Kinraddie’s bit men that the War had killed.
Folk thought he’d have a fine stone angel, with a night-gown
THE UNFURR0IVED FIELD 283
on. raised up at Kinraddie cross-roads. But he sent for a mason
instead and had the old stone circle by Blaweane loch raised
up and cleaned and set all in place, real heathen-hke, and a
paling put round it. And after reading out his banns on that
Sunday the minister read that next Saturday the Kinraddie
Memorial would be unveiled on Blawearie brae, and that he
expected a fine attendance, whatever the weather they d to
attend in ill weather, the folk that fell.
Fine weather for January that Saturday brought, sunny,
yet caller, you could see the clouds come sailing down from t le
north and over the sun and off again. But there was rain not
far, the seagulls had come sooming inland; for once the snipe
were still. Nearly every soul in Kinraddie seemed climbing
Blawearie brae as the afternoon wore on, a fair bit stir there was
in the close, the place was empty of horses and stock, Chris
would be leaving there at the term. Soon she’d be down at the
Manse instead, and a proud-like creature no doubt she d e.
Well, up on the brae through the road in the broom there
drew a fell concourse of folk, Ellison was there, and his mistress,
and the Gordons and gentry generally, forbye a reischle of
ploughmen and queans, lying round on the grass and sniggering.
There was the old circle of the Standing Stones, the middle
one draped with a clout, you wondered what couM be under
it and how much the mason had charged. It was high, there,
you saw as you sat on the grass and looked round, you cou
see all Kinraddie and near half the Howe shine under 7°^
feet in the sun, Out of the IVorld and into Blawearie as the ol
speak went. And faith! the land looked unco and woe with its
woods all gone, even in the thin sun-glimmer there came a cold
shiver up over the parks of the Knapp and Blawearie, folk said
that the land had gone cold and wet right up to the very Mains.
Snow was shining in the Grampians, far in the coarse hills
there, and it wouldn’t be long ere the dark came. Syne at last
SUNSET SONG
284
the minister was seen coming up, he’d on the bit robes that he
hardly ever wore, Chris Tavendale walked by the side of him
and behind was a third childe that nobody knew, a Highlander
in kilts and with pipes on his shoulder, great and red-headed,
who could he be? And then Ellison minded, he said the man
had been friend to young Ewan Tavendale, he’d been the best
man at Ewan’s marriage, Mclvor his name was.
The minister held open the gate for Chris and through it
she came, all clad in her black, young Ewan’s hand held fast
in hers, he’d grown fair like his father, the bairn, dark-like and
solemn he was. Chris’s face was white and solemn as well
except when she looked at the minister as he held the gate open,
it was hardly decent the look that she gave him, they might
keep their courting till the two were alone. Folk cried Jy,
minister! and he cried back cheerily and went striding to the
midst of the old stone circle, John Brigson was standing there
with his hands on the strings that held the bit clout.
The minister said, Let us pray^ and folk took off their hats,
it smote cold on your pow. The sun was fleering up in the
clouds, it was quiet on the hill, you saw young Chris stand
looking down on Kinraddie with her bairn’s hand in hers.
And then the Lord’s Prayer was finished, the minister was
speaking just ordinary, he said they had come to honour the
folk whom the War had taken, and that the clearing of this
ancient site was maybe the memory that best they’d have liked.
And he gave a nod to old Brigson and the strings were pulled
and off came the clout and there on the Standing Stone the
words shone out in their dark grey lettering, plain and short:
FOR : THE : MEMORY : OF: CHA
RLES : STRACHAN : JAMES:
LESLIE : ROBERT : DUNCAN:
EWAN : TAVENDALE : WHO:
WERE : OF : THIS : LAND : AND :
FELL : IN : THE : GREAT : WAR :
IN : FRANCE : REVELATION:
II CH : 28 VERSE
THE UNFURROJVED FIELD 285
And then, with the night waiting out by on Blaweane brae,
and the sun just verging the coarse hills, the minister began
to speak again, his short hair blowing in t e w111 * ^ .
come, his voice not decent and a kirk-like bumble, but ringing
out over the loch:
FOR I WILL GIVE YOU THE MORNING ST JR.
In the sunset of an age and an epoch we may write that for
epitaph of the men who were of it. They went quiet and brave
from the lands they loved, though seldom of that love might they
speak, it was not in them to tell in words of the earth that moved
and lived and abided, their life and enduring love. n wo
knows at the last what memories of it were with them, the springs
and the winters of this land and all the sounds an scents oj 1
that had once been theirs, deep, and a passion of their blood and
spirit, those four who died in France? With them we may
say there died a thing older than themselves, these were the
Last of the Peasants, the last of the Old Scots folk. A new
generation comes up that will know them not, except as a memory
in a song, they pass with the things that seemed good to them,
with loves and desires that grow dim and alien in the days to e.
It was the old Scotland that perished then, and we may believe
that never again will the old speech and the old songs, t e 0 c
curses and the old benedictions, rise but with alien effort to our
lips. The last of the peasants, those four that you knew, took
that with them to the darkness and the quietness of the p aces
where they sleep. And the land changes, their parks and their
steadings are a desolation where the sheep are pastured, we are
told that great machines come soon to till the land, and the Sre^
herds come to feed on it, the crofter is gone, the man with t e
house and the steading of his own and the land closer to his heart
than the flesh of his body. Nothing, it has been said, is true ut
change, nothing abides, and here in Kinraddie where we watc 1
the building of those little prides and those little fortunes on t \e
ruins of the little farms we must give heed that these also do not
286 SUNSET SONG
abide, that a new spirit shall come to the land with the greater
herd and the great machines. For greed of place and possession
and great estate those four had little heed, the kindness of friends
and the warmth of toil and the peace of rest—they asked no more
from God or man, and no less would they endure. So, lest we shame
them, let us believe that the new oppressions and foolish greeds
are no more than mists that pass. They died for a world that is
past, these men, but they did not die for this that we seem to
inherit. Beyond it and us there shines a greater hope and a
newer world, undreamt when these four died. But need we
doubt which side the battle they would range themselves did they
live to-day, need we doubt the answer they cry to us even now,
the four of them, from the places of the sunset?
And then, as folk stood dumbfounded, this was just sheer
politics, plain what he meant, the Highlandman Mclvor
tuned up his pipes and began to step slow round the stone
circle by Blawearie Loch, slow and quiet, and folk watched
him, the dark was near, it lifted your hair and was eerie and
uncanny, the Flowers of the Forest as he played it:
1 ) l
gt/ Cj-i ^
f ..JWnrfVW,
x/ tfKlI J X-sUx-l
I
J-r-T^r-n^ ft-'
Lr1J r
airFlrl
11
iliiil
287
THE UNFURROWED FIELD
If ( (
It rose and rose and wept and cried, that crying for the
men that fell in battle, and there was Kirsty Strachan weeping
quietly and others with her, and the young ploughmen they
stood with glum, white faces, they’d no understanding or caring,
it was something that vexed and tore at them, it belonged to
times they had no knowing of.
He fair could play, the piper, he tore at your heart marching
there with the tune leaping up the moor and echoing across the
loch, folk said that Chris Tavendale alone shed never a tear,
she stood quiet, holding her boy by the hand, looking down on
Blawearie’s fields till the playing was over. And syne folk
saw that the dark had come and began to stream down the hill,
leaving her there, some were uncertain and looked them
back. But they saw the minister was standing behind her,
waiting for her, they’d the last of the light with them up there,
and maybe they didn’t need it or heed it, you can do without
the day if you’ve a lamp quiet-lighted and kind in your heart.
THE END
fHE qRwmN^MounTAini:
VETM"
JuPPERHlbb
KINRADDIE
