National Library of Scotland
‘B000029372*
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
By the same Author
ESSAY
HANNO, OR THE FUTURE OF
EXPLORATION
(To-day and To-morrow Series)
NOVELS
STAINED RADIANCE
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
V
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
THE CALENDS
OF CAIRO
Introduced by
Mr. H. G. WELLS
and
Dr. LEONARD HUXLEY
WVi. /Wx r°lJ- {^>>1 fOi ron. /-Oo. -fOi. r<VL
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34 Paternoster Row E.G.^
MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
The Mayflower Press, Plymouth. William Brendon & Son, Ltd,
TO
MY FATHER and MOTHER
CONTENTS
PROEM
page
For Ten s Sake
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
I. He Who Seeks 37
II. The Lost Prophetess 54
III. Daybreak 73
IV. The Epic 92
V. A Volcano in the Moon 109
VI. The Life and Death of Elia Constantinides 13 i
VII. Cockcrow x j 3
VIII. Vernal X74
IX. East is West x^j
X. Gift of the River 2i8
XL It is Written 239
XII. The Passage of the Dawn 261
L’ENVOI
To Colonel Saloney, By A. J. Hall 283
7
Mr. H. G. WELLS to Mr. LESLIE MITCHELL
April 4, 1927
Dear Sir
Very good story. Stick to it ! You can do this
sort of thing and will certainly come through.
Very sincerely yours
H. G. Wells
June 24, 1931
Dear Leslie Mitchell
I never write prefaces, but why not print this
and my letter of April 4, ’27 ?
It will add more to my reputation as a prophet—
since I had then seen only your first short story—than
to yours as a short story writer.
Yours
H. G. Wells
INTRODUCTION
NEARLY three years ago there came to the Cornhill
Magazine the manuscript of a story with a covering
letter from the author to the editor he had never met.
The manuscript, this letter explained, had undergone
one rejection after another from the * popular ’ maga¬
zines : it had even been refused as * too good ’—too
far above the literary standard of the ordinary reader.
Finally, it had drawn a private appreciation from Mr.
H. G. Wells, who recommended the author to try the
Cornhill.
Mr. Wells was right. Its sweep of imagination, its
human sympathies, its skill in hinting the finer issues
to which dramatic romance could be turned, made
instant appeal, and with one or two minor retouchings
the story appeared in the Cornhill under the title of
‘ For Ten’s Sake.’
This was the beginning. Mr. Mitchell, with his
vivid knowledge of the East, went on to plan a set of
stories which would have the mysterious heart of Cairo
for background, and should be linked together as the
experiences of a Russian exile living in the city. The
result was the series of a dozen tales of many-coloured
romance/ Polychromata,’ which duly appeared in the
Cornhill and are now issued as The Calends of Cairo. In
the pages of the magazine the ‘ Polychromata ’ tales
have always found eager friends : now that they are
gathered up into a book, may they find many more !
Leonard Huxley
9
PROEM
FOR TEN’S SAKE
i
IT was Easter Day.
Under the feet of the watcher on the Hill of
Burial the earth suddenly shook, quivered for a moment
as might one in a nightmare, and then slowly subsided.
Mevr, the Hell-Gate of the East, lying asleep in the
afternoon heat, scarcely stirred from its siesta ; since its
foundation in the days of Asoka as a meeting-place of
the Central Asian caravans it had known the shocks of
minor earthquakes. Like an obscene, sated animal
it sprawled under the vacant grey eyes of the watcher.
The heat-haze shimmered above it; northwards, its
streets straggled towards the dim bulking of the Kablurz
Beg ; westwards, across the dun tundra, wound the white
tract to Persia and far Iraq ; eastwards, another caravan
route vanished on the horizon towards Baluchistan.
As so many streams they seemed, these roads ; streams
flowing into the dark cesspool of Mevr and emerging
from it—cleansed. Behind, in the City of the Plain,
the caravans left their floating scum to fester and reek
under the brassy noonday sky, under the sickened
stars, under the seemingly endless patience of God. . . .
The vacantness vanished from the eyes of the watcher :
they blazed with the hatred of the fanatic, the mono¬
maniac. A tall, gaunt figure, he rose from beside the
dark mound where he had been crouching and out-
reached thin, clutching hands.
‘ How long, O Lord ? ’
So, for a moment, he stood, threateningly, weird in
his shabby black, a prophet of wrath above Mevr. Then
13
i4
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
the dullness returned to his eyes ; his glance grew
wandering and fell on the mound at his feet. Suddenly
he dropped to his knees; in his throat came a dry
sob.
‘ Oh, Dick, Dick 1 Mevr might have spared at least
you. * . » Janet it took, me it will take, but you 
Oh, my son I . . .’
Farther up the Hill of Burial two grave-robbers,
Abdul Khaled and Osman the Nameless, had also been
squatting on their haunches and looking down on Mevr,
The cry of the man below reached their ears and they
peered down at his black-coated figure. Then Osman
(who was nameless in that, being a Turk, he was known
merely by a contraction of Osmanli) spat expressively
and contemptuously.
‘ It is the Englishman, the mad hakim, making
prayers by the grave of his son.’
Abdul grunted. He was a soured man, for their
day’s work had so far disgorged nothing of value—
not even a skeleton hand bearing a ring. In’sh allah!
the greed of relatives these days was growing to un¬
believable bounds, so poorly were kindred disposed
of. The mad hakim did not interest him, except
professionally.
c The grave of this son of his may contain some trifle
of value,’ he suggested.
The Nameless One shook his head. ‘ No unbeliever
buries even a brooch with his dead. Did we not but
yesterday spend two hours over the resting-place of
that accursed Russian pig—may his bones poison the
jackals who have since doubtlessly come to scrape
FOR TEN’S SAKE
15
them, seeing we did not fill in the pit I—and find
nothing ? ’ He rose up wearily, a burly brute, bestial
faced, with squinting, red-rimmed little eyes. ‘ We’ll
seek a night’s lodging at Miriam’s. Eh ? ’
The fat Abdul had uttered a sudden gasp of pain.
Now, clutching at his side, he rolled over on the turf.
Then he tore something from the dirty djibbeh which
enveloped him and flung it a yard or so away. Osman
saw hit the ground a small green viper, yellow under¬
neath upturned, broken-backed, writhing.
‘ Allah ! It is the end.’ Abdul began to beat the
ground with his feet and suddenly composed himself
and drew a knife from his belt, for it is better to die
by the bite of steel than the slow virus of the green-
backed viper. Osman tore away the knife.
‘ Wait. I will call the hakim.’ Forthwith, waving
his arms, he shouted down the hill to the far, black-
coated figure. In a little the latter stirred, stood upright.
Down the windless air was borne Osman’s shout.
‘ Haste, effendi. My brother has been bit by a
yellow scorpion I ’
For a moment the old man, who had once been
Richard Southcote, M.D., stared up at the gesticulating
Turk. Then returned to his eyes the same light as had
been there when he had risen and threatened Mevr.
He laughed, laughed aloud, ringingly, unemotionally,
so that Osman dropped his arms and stared, and
presently saw the hakim deliberately turn his back and
walk down the hill towards Mevr. From the ground
Abdul groaned.
‘ Give me the knife, Nameless.’
i6
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
The bestial-faced Turk stared down at his fellow-
scoundrel. His hands began to shake. Then, abruptly,
he dropped by Abdul’s side and tore away the stained
djibbeh. His intention was evident. Abdul shrank
away.
‘ Fool! Not that 1 It is death ! ’
The Turk’s great hands gripped him. ‘ Peace! I
drink worse poison every day in the Street of Ten ! ’
With that, he bent his trembling lips towards the
little oozing incision on the brown hide of Abdul the
grave-robber.
ii
As the mad hakim entered Mevr from the Hill of
Burial, the foetid city began to stir to life. In a narrow
alley beggars squabbled querulously, stealing the chance
alms dropped amongst their blind. The old man
passed unseeingly amidst the sprawl of diseased, wasted
bodies. In front he heard a shouting and commotion
and the beat of a little drum. Coming to the great
bazaar of the Suq es Iraq he was in the midst of a familiar
scene.
A caravan—lines of laden, dusty camels and thirstily
vociferous drivers—had newly arrived from Bokhara.
The dust arose in clouds, babel of many tongues filled
the air. From the near-by streets the vile things which
had once been women were already flocking into the
Suq. They mingled with the caravan drivers. One,
a ragged harpy with a shrill voice, Southcote saw
wheedling at a black-bearded camelier, already drunk
and sitting, cup of arrack in hand. Suddenly, with an
FOR TEN'S SAKE
insane ferocity, the ruffian leapt to his feet and smote
the woman a blow that cracked her jaw. She fell with
a scream of pain, and wild guffaws of merriment broke
out. Loudest of all laughed the two Persian gendarmes
who patrolled the bazaar. The camelier stared vacuously
down at the woman. ... It was, set against its background
of heat and dust, a scene that might have been filched
from hell.
The old man looked about him with smouldering
eyes. Slowly he made his way towards the centre of
Mevr. Presently he found himself passing by the
entrance to that which stank in the nostrils of even the
City of the Plain—the entrance to the vile Street of Ten,
a loathsome resort of thieves and murderers, where
were practised unnameable vices of which even Mevr
talked under breath, where no gendarme had ever
dared patrol, where of a morning the knifed and rifled
bodies of the night’s victims were flung out into the
reeking gutters of sunrise, whence, two years before to a
day, young Dick Southcote had been brought, a bruised
and lifeless and dreadful thing, to his father’s house.
As Southcote passed there stood by the entrance to
the Street of Ten two whom he—and, indeed, all Mevr—
knew by repute. One, pock-marked, lithe, white-clad,
was a murderer who killed openly, with bravado, who
sold the services of his knife to any who sought them ;
the other, Selim of Damascus, was a spy of the desert
robbers, warning them of unarmed caravans, sharing
in the loot of massacred trains.
Yet in Mevr they went scatheless. No gendarme
dared lay hands on those whom, it was openly rumoured.
B
18 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
the Governor himself had hired upon occasion. In¬
dolently, insolently, they lounged in the hot afternoon
sunshine. About them, from the cotes near by, pigeons
wheeled with a blue flirr of wings.
Two horsemen, Europeans both, came trotting past
the entrance to the Street of Ten. To the lounging
scoundrels they nodded, under the pigeon-cloud ducked.
Then in front of them, disappearing up a side street,
they caught a glimpse of the bent figure of Southcote.
‘ The old man has been visiting his son’s grave.’ It
was the short, burly man who spoke. He was the
German Consul, not long transferred from Alexandria,
but finding Mevr congenial and reminiscent of East
African days.
c Then he has been visiting the foulest spot in Mevr.’
The thin, debauched-looking Greek in white ducks
who was known as ‘ Mitri ’, called himself a doctor,
and had a reputation so unsavoury that the German
raised amused eyebrows at his remark, looked after
Southcote with a twisted grin. c Poor fool! And to
think, Herr Consul, that that crazed Englishman had
once a European reputation ! ’
‘ So ? ’ The German was indifferent. He had pulled
out his watch, looked at it, and was now mopping his
moist forehead. ’Twixt his horse’s ears ‘ Mitri ’ was
surveying Mevr with the owlishness of one unsoberly
reminiscent.
European. He was “ Earthquake ” Southcote. In
Italy and Syria he spent years in seismological studies,
was decorated by the English Society, and was famous.
These things I know, for I learned them from his son.’
FOR TEN'S SAKE
J9
‘Ah yes, the son.’ The German, newcomer though he
was, had heard something of the Southcote story. ‘And
how came this—Academician and his son to Mevr ? ’
‘ Because this place is in the Central Asian earthquake
belt. The Doctor Southcote came to study it, and
brought his wife and son, who was a boy of eighteen.
The wife died of malaria six months after they came.
Though a scientist, the old Southcote was a Calvinist
with a God waiting round the corner ready to be un¬
pleasant. In such manner he took the death of his wife.
Six months after that, when his son was killed, he
became a madman and now abides in Mevr he knows
not why.’
‘ You knew him once ? *
‘ Mitri ’ stared unwinkingly ahead. ‘ I knew the son.
Pfuu 1 . . . Me the old Southcote looked on as a native,
and hated me on some Old Testament authority; me
he considered an evil influence on his son.’
The German chuckled greasily. ‘ Mitri ’ abruptly
reined up his pony. They had come to the Midan.
The Greek pointed leftwards.
‘ You will be late for your festa, Herr Consul. And
the Governor’s desires are his belly’s.
‘ Auf wiedersehen.’
‘ Auf wiedersehen.’
‘ Mitri ’ slowly rode down the rightward wall of the
Midan. An ‘ evil influence ? ’ He ?
Something dreadful came in his face. Then, with a
twisted grin, he looked down at his shaking hands—
the hands which had strangled the life out of Dick
Southcote.
20
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
in
Coming towards the tumble-down native house
which he and Janet had furnished three years before,
the mad hakim encountered Ahmed, the water-seller
and scavenger. The latter was slinking along in the
gutter in his usual fashion. Though it was late in the
day, his bleared eyes were of a habit fixed on the ground,
for from the pockets of such numerous drunkards as
speckled the early morning gutters of Mevr he gathered
the wherewithal to augment his scanty legitimate
earnings. At the old Englishman’s approach he glanced
up swiftly and shiftily. Dull, tortured eyes met dull,
evil ones. Upon his thigh Ahmed made with two
crossed fingers an obscure sign—the age-old sign
wherewith the East wards off the evil eye.
Southcote’s face twitched unhumorously. Ahmed was
well known to him. He paused in the doorway and
looked after the scavenger, broodingly. Impersonated
in the foul carrion-grubber was Mevr itself. . . .
Entering from the street, he made his way to the room
which was study, laboratory, and dispensary in one.
The dingy walls showed streaked with a steamy damp,
the furniture was ragged and thick with dust, for,
beyond seeing to meals, the old Iraqi woman who
acted as housekeeper did nothing. Southcote laid aside
his hat, sank into a chair by the window, and there,
upright and still, sat staring bleakly and unseeingly.
Minutes went by. On a ledge of the window which
tunnelled the thick wall a golden-eyed lizard flittered
to and fro. The house was utterly quiet.
FOR TEN'S SAKE
21
Presently Southcote moved. Under his heel some¬
thing crunched. He glanced down and saw that the
floor was strewn with broken glass. Then, catching a
glimpse of a broken photo-frame under the table, he
bent, gaspingly, and picked it up. It was a photo¬
graph of Dick, shaken from a ledge by the recent
tremor.
Beside it, flung to the floor by the same cause, was a
small, black-bound book. That Southcote let lie.
With thin, unsteady fingers he smoothed the crumpled
cardboard of the photograph. From a narrow, slatted
window the sunlight streamed in and dappled the
pictured face of the boy who lay beneath the mound on
the Hill of Burial. Over the youth and freshness and the
gladness in the young eyes the mad hakim sat and
yearned, as a thousand times he had done. Dick, the
strong, the light-hearted, his murdered boy. . . .
Two years to a day since the murdered lad had been
carried into this very room : two years to a day since
that black morning when something inside his brain
had seemed to crack as he called down God’s vengeance
on the City of the Plain. Certain of its coming, certain
of the doom that would fall on Mevr, he had ever
since waited, his hatred of the foul place growing
upon him month by month so that he shunned the
native populace and the moving scum of the caravans,
refusing help to the hurt even when they came to his v
door begging it. Never dependent on practice for a
livelihood, he avoided even the few whites of Mevr
because of that otherness of purpose for which he knew
that God had designed him.
22
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Once, when Kuchik Khan was sweeping down from
the north with his army raised on Soviet gold, it had
seemed to Southcote—unconsciously grown Eastern,
un-European, a fanatic at once egotistic and sublimely
selfless—that the hour was nigh, that in fire and rapine
was God about to cleanse the earth of Mevr as once
before He had cleansed the world with the sword of
Tamerlane. But Kuchik’s army had melted away, and
Mevr breathed again, and Southcote, with vacant,
staring eyes, had climbed the Hill of Burial and looked
to the skies and prayed for even such patience as God’s
own. . . .
But now, sitting with the crumpled photograph in
his hand, an aching misery came upon him. He was
only the mad hakim, dreaming a dreadful vengeance,
living an insane hope. Of Dick was left nothing more
than the captured beauty of his pictured face.
Upon that face he had never noted—as any stranger
would at once have done—the heavy, sensual mouth,
the contraction about the eyes which, spite the youth¬
fulness of the latter, spelt viciousness. To the father
they were the eyes of murdered hope, staring unavail-
in a black world that knew not retribution.
It was the first moment of doubt within Southcote’s
last two years, and, in the instant of it, the ground
shook under his feet. Upon the floor the little pieces
of glass danced : the walls groaned ominously : a cup
fell and smashed.
It was the second tremor within an hour.
FOR TEN’S SAKE
23
IV
Into the eyes of the mad hakim had come an un¬
wonted interest. Now he laid aside the photograph
and rose to his feet. From the table he picked up a box
of matches, made his way from the still quivering room,
turned to the left, descended a flight of stone stairs.
On a landing some eight feet below ground-level he
stopped by the entrance to a small doorway and lit a
candle which stood on a stone ledge.
The door opened easily at his touch. The candle lit
up the smaller cellar of the house. In one corner was
a chair and table; in the centre of the room an instru¬
ment embedded in the floor, held down by iron clamps,
and rearing itself up, a cluster of thin glass rods, to a
graded aluminium dial and pointer.
The Southcote Seismometer is a scientific toy, a
mathematician’s dream gone astray in the realisation.
In seismological works its possibilities are constantly
referred to and its absolute unreliability demonstrated.
As an instrument the purpose of which is accurately
to gauge and foretell a many hours’ distant earthquake
it is recognised as a magnificent failure.
Yet there, in front of the old man in that stifling
cellar in Mevr, was that seismologist’s dream, the
Improved Southcote, standing as it had been left on the
day of its first installation, exactly two years before.
Candle in hand, Southcote approached it. Every
day—single surviving habit of the one-time scientist—
he came down into the cellar to clean the mechanism
and make readings. Mevr, situated as it was, seldom
24
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
failed to register some forthcoming or passing tremor.
On the twelve gradations of the dial the pointer more
often than not hovered between zero and one.
Southcote flecked some dust from off the instrument,
and then bent to read it.
The pointer quivered above nine.
v
For a moment, after his first amazed start, the old
man was merely the scientist, calm and deft. He tested
the apparatus, searching for flaws, altered gauges,
diminished the mercury pressure in one of the long
glass rods, and then changed back again to normal.
Promptly, with the last move, the pointer swung again
to nine. Then it began to creep up the dial towards
ten. . . .
And then, equally suddenly, the scientist died in
Richard Southcote. Realisation smote him like a breath
of fire. Back to his eyes flashed their uncanny glow,
only with it was now triumphant assurance as well.
Mevr was doomed I
In less than an hour, uprising out of the earth, its
fate, swift and awful, would leap upon it. Richard
Southcote’s prayers had been answered, his faith and his
patience justified. Far in the bowels of the earth an
awful force, more stupendous than that of the San
Francisco earthquake, was minute by minute gathering
to rise and smite and utterly blot out in torrents of
falling masonry and crashing landslides the Hell-Gate
of the East,
FOR TEN’S SAKE
25
VI
Quietly the mad hakim left the cellar and went to the
room above. There his preparations were simple.
Alone of Mevr had he been warned, alone knew of the
impending doom. And from the Hill of Burial he
would watch, as, ah God ! how often had he watched
and prayed, that doom overtake it.
He picked up his hat, glanced round the bare, dismal
room, and turned, God’s witness as he knew himself,
to leave the house and Mevr for ever. Then his eye fell
on the book which had lain on the floor beside the
photograph of his son.
It had been Jenny’s Bible. He picked it up, mechani¬
cally seeking to reset it in its shattered binding, to
smooth its soiled edges. As he did so, with a strange
deliberation it opened in his hands.
‘ Peradventure there be fifty righteous men within
the city. Wilt Thou also destroy and not spare the
place for the fifty righteous men that are therein ?
‘. . . And He said, I will not destroy it for ten’s sake.’
Outside, through the drifting heat-waves, came the
droning purr that was the voice of Mevr ; within his
house the mad hakim stood and reread of the mercy
promised to another City of the Plain.
£. . . And He said, I will not destroy it for ten’s
sake.’
If there should be ten righteous men in Mevr 
Suddenly Southcote’s laughter cracked the silence.
The Bible, hurled against the wall, showered the floor
with flimsy leaves. . . .
26 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Underfoot, in Mevr, and for the third time that after¬
noon, the ground shook.
VII
It was near sunset. Out of the east the massing clouds
drove swiftly towards the City of the Plain. A thin
wind blew.
Through the deserted Suq es Iraq a mule clattered.
Its rider was an old man with smouldering eyes.
Squatting in an alley-way were two beggars, and one
of them leant out to peer after the rider.
‘ God ! Saw you the mad hakim ? His face ’
‘ I see only the sky,’ said the other, uneasily. ‘ There
is death in it.’
Upon the foulness of Mevr, in its brutal pleasures
and its jaded vices, began to descend some such feeling.
A strange quiet held the city. And overhead, steadily,
unwonted storm-clouds massed.
Hastening from the doomed city to the Hill of Burial,
the mad hakim looked down the street towards the
Southern Gate and saw it thronged with the stalls of
the afternoon’s chaffering. The way was blocked.
Southcote pulled up his mule. One other way out
of the city remained for him to take—through the street
unvisited and loathed, the place where his son had been
murdered. Was it not fitting that he should pass
through there ?
At the thought he shuddered and turned his mule.
Then he glanced up at the sky. He must hasten.
Right down through the narrow opening he drove
FOR TEN'S SAKE
27
his mount, betwixt open cesspools, under the evil lower
of overhanging, crumbling balconies. And then, above
his head, in Persian in the Arab script, he read an ancient
inscription :
The Street of Ten
viii
What was that? Some dim associations of numbers
clashed in his mind. He half-halted the mule, and the
beast, clumsily, swung to one side 
‘ Curse you 15
The mad hakim looked down. Almost under the
mule’s feet sprawled a naked brown child. Its mouth
was open, its eyes pierced upwards a surprised terror.
. . . Came a stamping of unshod feet in the dust, a lean
arm outreached, and the brown mite whisked away.
Ahmed the scavenger, weeping salvage in his arms, and
cursing with the resourceful obscenity of the East,
glared up at Southcote.
Dazedly the old man met his eyes. Within his
brain, as at the stroke of a bell, he heard some voice
count.
‘One!’
The mule plunged on. The street twisted leftwards.
On the sidewalk a man and woman moved lurchingly.
An everyday sight in the tainted city; some woman
of the streets leading a customer to her house. Yet,
passing, it seemed to the mad hakim that somewhere,
before, he had seen those two 
An unnameable impulse made him look back. The
28
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
man was the black-bearded camelier of the Suq es Iraq :
the woman, she whom Southcote had seen him fell to
the gound. Came the ruffian’s shamed voice :
‘ Courage, little sister. I will not leave you.’
And again, within Southcote, spoke an unknown
voice:
‘ Tm ! ’
With the mad hakim rode some haunting presence.
Up to the sky he looked again. The sun had vanished.
The overhead wind was a thin scream. A lowering
greyness had fallen on Mevr. Far thunder rumbled.
From the path of the mule a strange group arose and
staggered aside.
It was a man, bent almost double under the inert
body of another. Southcote pulled his beast up, heard
a voice that was not his own question :
‘ What ails the man ? ’
From under the weight of the Turk, Abdul the grave-
robber looked up at the Englishman with red-rimmed
eyes.
‘ He is my brother. I was stung of a viper. You
would not come when he cried your help on the Hill of
Burial. He sucked the poison from my wound. Now
he dies.’
Haggardly the old doctor stared. Within him, ever
since entering the vile stew where his son had been
murdered, had arisen an awful doubt. Now it clamoured
in his brain. Ahmed, the camelier, these grave-
robbers—
Crash ! went the thunder. For a moment, blindingly,
a dagger of fire quivered down the Street of Ten.
FOR TEN'S SAKE
29
Southcote’s terrified mule bucked and pawed at the
air. . . .
IX
When he came to himself he seemed to be peering
through a red mist. In his back was a terrible pain.
He tried to move and lay unmoving.
The red mist cleared. A crowd of faces were peering
down at him. The mule had flung him violently against
a great corner-stone.
He tried to moisten his lips ; failed ; made a desperate
effort to sit up ; lay still.... And then, yet seeing clearly,
hearing distinctly, he understood.
Paralysis. Death.
And upon his tortured brain at the thought, wearily,
there came great peace.
x
In Damascus, twenty-three years before, a querulous
old man had died, cursing the son who had disgraced
his name, and who stood by his bedside, dry-eyed and
scornful, to the last. In life the old man had availed
little ; in death he left a memory that had consequences
unguessable.
Through the crowd Selim of Damascus pushed his
way and knelt by the side of the mad hakim, and gathered
him in his arms. As he strained to lift the limp body,
one touched him on the shoulder.
‘ I will take his feet, brother.’
It was Ali, the murderer-bravo.
‘ For he is old, Selim.’
30
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Together they lifted him. Homeless themselves,
they looked around them doubtfully. Then a woman’s
voice called near-by.
‘ In here.’
In the doorway of a house of shame stood a weary-
faced woman, beckoning. Overhead the thunder
rumbled as Selim and Ali bore the body of South-
cote into the dark entrance of the house of Miriam
the harlot. She guided them down a corridor into a
large room where, on a bed, another woman lay'
moaning and fever-flushed. The heat of the place was
stifling.
At a table a man was pouring a dose from a medicine
bottle. He looked up. Miriam nodded.
‘ I bring another, “ Mitri.” He was thrown by his
mule.’
She motioned to the two men. Southcote they laid
on a pile of rags which did duty as another bed. Miriam
knelt behind him and raised his head. ‘ Mitri ’ came
across the room, halted suddenly, stood swaying
unsteadily.
‘ My God ! Southcote 1 ’
So, for a minute, ‘ Mitri ’ standing as if petrified,
Selim and Ali lingering in the doorway, the harlot
kneeling, weary-faced. Then, drunkenly,4 Mitri ’ spoke.
4 Do you know who this is, Miriam ?—The father
of Anah’s seducer ; the father of the thief who ruined
the daughter whom you reared to be other than you are ;
the father of the man who made your daughter—that.’
He pointed to the wasted woman upon the bed, and
ceased, and swayed a little upon his feet,
FOR TEN'S SAKE
3i
Outside the lightning flashed. Miriam looked up
with weary, unchanging eyes.
‘ I know it is the mad hakim—the father of Dick,
whom you killed because always you loved Anah and
I prayed you to do it. But our hate helped nothing,
friend. Anah dies, remembering only the dead lover
whom she tried to save. . . . You must help this old
man. And God will judge.’
By the side of the Englishman ‘ Mitri ’ knelt unsteadily.
As he did so the old eyes opened, and slowly from them
a tear trickled down the still face.
XI
A living soul in a dead body he had lain, the while
blinding revelation came upon him. Dick, the son for
whom he had cursed Mevr—Dick, a seducer and thief;
Dick, righteously killed by the drunken ‘ Mitri.’ . . .
For a little, listening to their voices, that alone had
been upon him, and bitter as death was the taste of the
knowledge. And then, printed as in letters of fire across
his vision, he saw the passage in Jenny’s Bible.
‘ Peradventure there be fifty righteous men within
the city. Wilt Thou also destroy and not spare the
place for the fifty righteous men that are therein ?
‘. . . And He said, I will not destroy it for ten’s sake.’
Blindly, blasphemously, he had rejected what was
surely a command. Righteousness ? Who were the
righteous ? Who, in the shadow-show of life, might
lift him a light whereby to judge and condemn his
fellows ? Yet he, vengeful and hating, had done so.
32
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
the while the harlot and the thief, the drunkard and the
murderer, reached to unguessed heights of pity and
forgiveness, heroism and shamed kindliness. . . .
Righteousness ? As a silver thread he saw it now,
winding through the lusts and cruelties, the filth and
crime of every life in Mevr. And of Hope and Faith
and Charity was it woven. Before him he saw the
scavenger, the two grave-robbers, the camelier, the
murderer and the thief, ‘ Mitri,’ Miriam, Anah—those
in whom, unguessed of him, had lain the seeds of
righteousness—passing in the vomiting doom of Mevr,
the doom of which he alone had been warned, the
doom he was helpless now to avert. . . .
Was that God’s will ? Up at ‘ Mitri ’ he stared, and
remembered that voice which had counted within
himself as he witnessed the unguessed heroisms of the
Street of Ten. Surely he heard it speak again. . . .
Kneeling beside him, they saw the sweat start out on
his forhead, heard him breathe as one in a nightmare,
saw the glare in his eyes. Then, with an awful effort,
he sat upright, heedless of their attempt to restrain him.
His head swam.
For an awful fear had suddenly gripped him. Was
his vision false ? By some new law other than that
which had doomed the Cities of the Plain could righteous¬
ness indeed be reckoned ?
Aloud, in the stifling room—desperately, with sudden
inspiration—he began to count. Ten righteous. . . .
From Ahmed the scavenger to the murderer of his
son. ...
... If then should be but Ten. . . .
FOR TEN'S SAKE
33
And there were but Nine.
Again, peering round the dusking room, he counted.
Then, in the shadows about the doorway, between Ali
the murderer and Selim the thief, he saw stand for a
moment One whom he had never known, One with
bleeding hands and feet and hidden face.
A quarter of an hour later the bells of warning
clanged out over Mevr, and from house to house the
watchmen cried the message brought to the Governor
from a brothel in the slums. Out into the safety of the
plains and the falling dusk of that Easter Day, just as the
first tremors of doom shook the City of the Plain,
streamed the multitudes of fugitives.
And through the multitudes a murderer and a thief,
two of those reckoned in the sum of the righteous Ten,
carried Southcote to safety.
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
I
HE WHO SEEKS
i
Many-coloured ? it is one of the names
of our little Cairo — Polychromata. She has
many names, the Gift of the River, and nowhere do
her colours flaunt as here, in the Khalig el Masri.
Long the evenings I sat and puzzled till I knew the
Khalig and Life for one. Key-colour to the kaleido¬
scope, master-note in the syncopation—it is Quest.
For what ? Full bellies and purses, laughter and
love, woman and fame and fantasy. . . . All the so-
desired apples of that mirage-orchard that flourishes
by the Dead Sea. ... Eh ? A cynic ? God mine, I am
only a dragoman !
Happy he who finds not what he seeks—it is the
oldest of axioms. But when the desperate seeker him¬
self acknowledges it, he grows a wonder and a legend
in the eyes of men. As, indeed, may yet the tale of
Andrei BaPmont and his quest. . . .
But of course. And beer—English beer. I think
the gods must drink of English beer in Olympus these
days, when they have laid aside their bowler hats and
the last so-bluff American has made his tip and gone.
The little Simon first stocked it here, not by command
of the Anglo-Saxon, but at wish of me, Anton Saloney,
dragoman, guide, ex-colonel of horse in the army of
Deniken, and one-time Professor of English Literature
in the Gymnasium of Kazan.
The tale of Andrei ? See, I have become a teller of
37
38
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
tales—I have invented more so-scandalous royalties
than ever the dynastic tables held, I had a madam-
tourist in tears this morning when I told of the suicide
of Rameses II from the top of Kheops’ Pyramid, be¬
cause of the false love who jilted him—yet this tale of
Andrei. ... I have loved and hated it, as must all men,
felt the ache of it and the beauty of it. Yet it needs
some subtle tale-smith as your own Morris to tell it.
Indeed, I think the little Andrei himself was of the
Hollow Land, a faery-knight and a faery-saint. . . .
Yet perhaps he was a Russian of the Russians, the
Slav eternal. Perhaps he was Man himself.
Look, my friend, I once knew and talked with this
Andrei, yet already to me he is half a myth, a figure on
that painted gauze of legend that covers the face of the
East. How shall I make him live in English eyes—he
and his tale and his quest ?
n
I met him twice in life. The first time was at Perekop,
on the bridge of the Crimea, twenty-four hours before
the Communists stormed our lines and littered the seas
with the wreckage of our armies. He was a captain,
holding an outpost on the marshes, and I came on him
the last inspection I made. He was alone, holding an
outpost, for his men had deserted ; he marched on
sentry-beat, rifle slung on his shoulders, head bare to
the cutting wind, thoughts far in dreams. . . . Long I
remembered him.
He was a youth, a student, with the pale, dark¬
framed face of the Little Russian. He had come south
HE WHO SEEKS
39
to fight the Red Terror, even as thousands beyond
Perekop had come south with the Sovyets to fight the
White Reaction. He was lighter of heart than I ever
knew soldier in the shadow of defeat.
‘ The world is wide, and there are other dreams,’
he said.
I waved him good-bye and went back to my squadron.
In twenty-four hours I was riding to the coast and
safety on a French destroyer. Of Andrei Bal’mont I
saw nothing more, nor ever again expected to see.
Yet he also escaped. Somehow he cleared the rout,
and drifted south across the bitter Crimea. Late in the
hours of the second day he tramped through the whoom
of a snowstorm, and so, half-blinded, yet still with
untroubled heart, came to Yalta and the sting of the
sleet-wind from the Black Sea.
It was night-time as he made his way through the
deserted streets on the outskirts. The snow whirled
thickly about him, and not a light could be seen in the
harbour, though he heard the beating of the waves.
Then he tripped and almost fell over something that
lay in his path.
He lighted a match, and looked, and in the momentary
radiance of the little flame saw the drift of the snow,
saw the white glimmer of a face. Then the match went
out. He lighted another, shielding it in his hand against
the bitter wind-drive. Then he looked down at the
girl who had been asleep in the snow.
She was dark and sweet and fair, even there in that
hour of storm and terror. She had a little hollow in her
throat, and the light gleamed in it, wonderfully.
40
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
‘ I have been sleeping,’ she said, and rubbed her eyes
like a child, then smiled up at him so that he loved her.
He bent to help her. ‘ If you stay here you will die.
What is your name ? ’
‘ I am Natasha Grodine. I am refugee from the
Sovyeti. In the darkness I twisted my ankle and lost
my way. But now you have come and I am safe.
You are ’
* I am Andrei BaPmont,’ he said, and lifted her in his
arms. He could not see her face till her cheek touched
his. The snowstorm had cleared, but in the overhead,
thin and bitter, high up, screamed veter, the wail-wind
of the Russian winter. And suddenly, so-lost and
desolate as they were, their lips met and they kissed
each other with great gladness. In the night she wound
her arms around his neck, and laughed a little, tremu¬
lously, pressed against his heart.
And to the little Andrei, bearing her to the seashore,
it was as if a light had suddenly sprung and flamed in
the darkness. All his years he knew had been but
prelude to the moment when Natasha’s lips touched his.
He stopped and bent and spoke in an urgent amazement.
‘ I love you.’
£ My dear,’ she whispered, and kissed him again.
in
And all that night, sheltered in a hut on the quays,
he knew of her presence near him in the darkness, and
the fragrance of her hair. And because of love and
Natasha, life was sweet in his mouth. The kisses
HE WHO SEEKS
4i
of love—sweet they are in the shadow of death!
Close-pressed for warmth, they sat and talked of the
wonder of this which had come to them. Once Natasha
fell asleep, and, hour after hour, unmoving, he sat
and held her in his arms. Once she moved and whispered
in sleep, and he soothed her, as one might a tired child.
Then he rose and looked out, and it was morning.
With that dawn they found a refugee-ship putting
out to Stamboul. Andrei carried Natasha aboard and
paid their passage with the last of his French money.
The ship was crowded, but shelter they made in the lee
of a hatchway, and lay wrapped together in Andrei’s
greatcoat the while the white coasts rose and fell, and
flickered and dimmed through the driving sleet. Misted
were the eyes of Natasha looking back at the fading shore.
Andrei kissed the little hollow in her throat; it had
seemed to him that a man might die to kiss that place.
But she turned to him and caught his hands, and
suddenly was weeping.
‘ Oh, Andrei, I’m lost—lost and afraid. Russia
I’ve lost and all its days and sunshine and kindliness
and laughter. They seemed everlasting. I never
thought they could pass and finish. . . . My dear, my
dear! Say you will always love me, that it won’t pass
and fade, that you’ll never forget! ’
And Andrei kissed her hands, and swore that never
would he cease to love her, that never would his love
grow old and tame, that never would he forget the
night and snow wherein he had found her. So he
swore to keep time and fate and life itself at bay. . . .
Twenty miles out from Yalta, up out of the mists of
42
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
dawn came a Sovyet gunboat, shelling the refugee-boat
and signalling it to stop. Andrei and six others were
in the uniform of the White Raiders. For them there
would be no mercy.
Then Natasha planned to save them. She flung
aside the coat of Andrei, and beckoned to the far side
of the refugee-boat as it slowed down. The soldiers
must go over the side of the ship, and hide in the water
till the search by the Tovarishii was over. When the
Red sailors had gone, they could climb aboard again.
Andrei was last to slide down the rope to the buoys.
To these the others already clung in the shadow of the
ship. Death to remain aboard—death perhaps in the
freezing waters. And then, for a moment, it mattered
nothing, for in that moment Natasha, as he clung there,
bent and kissed him, and her lips were salt with tears. . . .
Paddling and freezing in the lee of the refugee-boat,
Andrei heard a sudden shouting and confusion. Then
one of the others by his side cried out and gestured.
The scream of shell-fire woke the sea. From the west,
dimly, he saw a great French cruiser steaming out of
the sleet-storm to engage the gunboat.
‘ Look—the ship ! ’ cried one of the men.
Andrei turned his head and also cried out. They
had drifted many feet from the refugee-boat, and, as
they looked, it forged away with beating screw into the
bank of fog that had crept out all morning from the
coast. Into the same bank, with guns flashing redly,
went the cruiser, half a mile to the left.
For a little they swam and paddled and shouted,
deserted, in that suddenly vacant sea, under the sting of
HE WHO SEEKS
43
the sleet. Then one cried out and sank, and two others
drifted away into the fog. Inside that fog the gun-fire
had clamoured for a little, then ceased. Andrei and his
two soldiers tied themselves upon their buoys, and
lashed the buoys together. ... It seemed to Andrei
that only a moment had passed when, looking at the
two beside him, he saw that they were dead.
Already, in the icy water, his own legs and the lower
half of his body had grown numb. Then a strange
warmth surged slowly, steadily, up through his frozen
body, and when it came to his heart he knew he would
be dead. He began to paddle again, desperately. He
cried out, and sang, and shouted, to stay the menace
creeping upon him from the waters. And then he was
suddenly tired, so tired, and sleep more desirable than
ever life had been. He ceased to struggle, and the
grey waste of beaten water blurred in his eyes. Night.
And then a great light awoke on the sea and beckoned
and beckoned. He knew it and rose and struggled
again, and cried c Natasha ! ’
IV
He was picked up by an oil-carrier and taken to
Stamboul. There, in hospital, raving, for two months
he lay, and at the end of that time, weak and a pauper,
came back again, with the spring come, to the world
of men and the memory of Natasha’s lips.
But he came not back the same Andrei, I think. He
had wandered in mist and dreams for many days. He
came out to a world that had dimmed and blurred at the
44
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
edges. One memory, one hunger of desire alone
possessed him. So clear was that memory, clear and
unforgotten his oath as he held Natasha’s hands. c Always
will I love you. Never shall I forget.’
You see him, dreamer and saint as I think he was,
he who had tasted of love and seen that tenderness
no man may ever awaken twice in the eyes of a
woman. He set out to seek Natasha as once men
went forth to seek the Holy Grail. Found—God mine !
he would have peace, would kneel at Natasha’s feet
and lay his head in her hands, and sleep and sleep till
the world died. . . .
He set out to search in the nameless flotsam-drift
heaped on the Golden Horn with the destruction of
the last White Raid. He tramped from consulate to
consulate, from shipping-office to shipping-office,
through a drift and tangle of rumour and legend. For
we of the last White Raid were already legendary. Now
he would glimpse at some street-crossing men whom
he had once known ; one time he saw his own brother,
an officer of the Imperial Army, selling fruit outside
the Mosque Sophia. And to Andrei these men—even
his own brother—were but the faintest shadows. Yet
half-remembered faces rising up out of the street throngs
would set his mind to ache and ache, seeking names
and memories and associations. Had they known
Natasha ?
Sometimes, on gutter ledge or wharf, he would
all asleep for he was still a sick man—or into long
trances when he sat unsleeping, yet unthinking, the
mind fainting and fainting within him, crying, ‘ Cease !
HE WHO SEEKS
45
Come and sleep ! ’ And from such moments he would
rouse with a passion of anger at himself, because of
that memory of Natasha’s face, her eyes so pitifully
misted. . . .
But neither of her nor of the refugee-ship in which
they had sailed from Yalta could he find any trace. He
had never known the name of the ship, nor the name of
its captain.
Yet day after day, working here and there for bread,
sleeping only when exhaustion came on him, he tramped
the quays of the Golden Horn. In those miles of jetties
his intent, white face must have become familiar. I
think the story of his quest long followed after him in
rumour and surmise. Because of that rumour, because
of the ache of sympathy which every lost lover may
stir, he was met with unbelievable kindness—that
amazing kindliness of the kennels. He was helped by
the stray and the waif with whom he would never have
associated the pity of the Christ.
And one morning he awoke to find his spirit had
fought his body, and triumphed, and health was return¬
ing to him again.
Out of delirium into monomania ? So, perhaps.
But I think his face grew the more gentle, and the
hunger went from his eyes, and there the dreams came
back. Yet was he the passionate pilgrim, with his ache
of quest. But all the winds and dawns and colours of
life were his again, interpreting that ache even as they
accentuated it.
And then, late one evening, when he stood on a quay
watching a ship unload, a man cried out at sight of him,
46
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
and swore in Russian. In the smoke-blur that was
Andrei’s memory flamed remembrance. The man was
the captain of the refugee-ship.
He stared and stood, and grew white, thinking
Andrei a ghost. Then he talked. The refugee-ship
had left the swimmers and made its escape that it might
not be blown out of the waters in the fight between
the Sovyet gunboat and the French cruiser. When
presently the two warships, still shelling, had passed
into the haze on the Crimean coast, the refugee-ship
lowered its boats and sought in the fog for the swimmers.
But they were nowhere to be found. . . .
‘ Natasha Grodine ? I remember her ; you carried
her aboard at Yalta. After we came to Stamboul I
heard she joined the ship of refugees that sailed to
Jaffa, to the Russian colony in Palestine.’
v
He was a pauper, as I have said. But a Greek boat
of the coasts took him for deckhand, and on that boat
he drifted southwards, down the painted coast of the
Levant, so magical in summer days, more magical still
at night when the masts dipped against the stars and the
forecastle tuned its guitars. He learned the ways of a
ship and the lives and beliefs of the men who with him
worked, and he entered their poor, stupid dreams,
and forgave those dreamers of their kind who had
driven him from Russia. Food on the ship was bad,
and the captain a bully, but when they stagnated in semi¬
mutiny it was Andrei who made the peace, and brought
HE WHO SEEKS
47
concord, and lured the ship south, ever in pursuit of his
tireless quest.
So, in midsummer, they came to Jaffa, and Andrei
bade farewell to the Greeks. They wept at parting
with him, and cried farewells for long as he waved
from the shore. Then he made his way to the shipping
companies and set his enquiries afoot. A day later,
when he came back to the quays, the Greek ship had
gone.
He found no Russian in the town, but instead street
fighting between the so-brave Arabs and the immigrant
Jews. For a day, stayed strangely by memory of Natasha,
he forewent his quest and helped in the streets, carrying
the wounded to safety, walking through rifle-fire
unscathed and unafraid.
Then at length, from the Greek consul, he learned
that six months before a party of Russians had indeed
come to Jaffa. But they had gone up to settle in
Jerusalem, to live by the tourist trade.
So Andrei took the road to the north, working his
way across the dusty tundras, through the brown mud-
villages, up to the green foothills. A week he stayed to
help in the harvest of an orange grove, then set out
again. And one nightfall, outside a convent of the
Irish nuns, where he sat drinking milk and eating bread
and goat-cheese, he looked up and saw the black
bulking of the Mountains of Moab.
Because he never begged for money, but only food
in return for work, he was a pauper as on the day when
he left the Golden Horn in the Greek coaster. But
now the mountains, in a moment of weakness, awed
4B
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
him. He went down to the railway, waited for another
evening to come, climbed aboard a covered truck, and
in the morning found himself in Jerusalem, in a land
of greenery and sudden rain.
He went up to the city in that rain, with beating
hope in his heart that here certainly was his quest to
end. Yet where to begin ?
Then, as he stood mazed in the streets of English
Jerusalem, came that adventure that was yet to tell no
tale of his hidden self to Andrei’s heart. For he saw a
girl go by—a white girl in the brown-skinned throngs.
And at sight of her he stood suddenly sick at heart.
For it had seemed to him that it was Natasha, his lost
love.
Then he awoke, and cried out, and turned, and ran
down the street in the direction she had gone. But
the crowds had swallowed her.
All that day, in a mad passion of fear and the remorse,
he hunted the streets and stews of Jerusalem. . . .
He knelt, wearied, yet finding a little peace, in the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre, in that little room where
legend tells was the gentle Christ laid when brought
from the Cross. Then he went out on the steps of the
Church and so again came face to face with the girl
whom he had thought Natasha.
And it was not Natasha.
She drew aside, then stared at his white face, faltering
a query in words which stayed him. For she spoke
in Russian, with just such voice as Natasha herself.
‘ I am not ill,’ he answered, ‘ only I thought you one
for whom I search. My name is Andrei Bal’mont, and
HE WHO SEEKS
49
I was of Deniken’s raid. Have you ever heard of a
Crimean refugee, a girl Natasha Grodine ? ’
At that she gave a cry, and caught his hands, and
flushed and paled. ‘ Andrei Bahmont 1 But I have
heard of you. Oh, I have heard of you. I knew your
dear Natasha in Stamboul and loved her. You are the
captain who saved her in Yalta, and hid in the sea from
the Sovyet gunboat ’
‘ She is here—in Jerusalem ? ’
‘ But no—she went to Alexandria with an uncle she
found in Stamboul. . . . Andrei Bal’mont—oh, I have
heard of you. Natasha remembers. She does not
believe you dead. . . .’
But she knew nothing of Natasha’s address in
Alexandria.
4 Stay with us here, us Russians. We will help you,
though we are so poor. Stay with us and write letters
to Alexandria. There is a Colonel Saloney in Alexandria,
he made the Refugee Committee, and may know where
your Natasha is.’
He bent and kissed her hands. c I cannot stay a
day, little sister. For Natasha remembers and I
remember.’
Then she wept a little, I think because of his youth
and his saint’s face. But he went out through the rain,
up the dark alleys, and on the outskirts of Jerusalem
turned south again.
vi
And of all that Odyssey that finally led him to Egypt
I know only in outline—in the outline and surmise.
D
5°
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Westwards and southwards he went, crossing the
mountains of Moab on foot that second time, holding
south by the jungle swamps of Ludd and so on and on,
as the summer waxed, to the fringe of the desert. And,
as he went, and the days passed into weeks and so to
months, ever clear and shining, a pillar of light by night
and a pillar of smoke by day led his quest.
And he learned to know the stars of the beggar’s
night, and thirst and hunger and the sleep of exhaustion.
Sunsets he would watch the Evening Star come out,
in morning would see it lead the sunrise up over the
sands. He came to look for it as one looks for the
face of a friend—the star that crowned his quest and
led his feet.
On the wild highroads of Palestine and Transjordania
none sought to harm him. He tramped them, a man
invisibly shielded and guarded. Near Amman he joined
a camel-train, and went south and east, into the desert,
to some Arab city of the wastes. From there he struck
out north-west again, and, at the long length, live months
after leaving Jerusalem, came to Kantara on the Suez.
There, for a little, he was stayed, and, as on the Golden
Horn, searched from ship to ship for work. Luck
favoured him again, for on the third day he was taken
on as stoker of a boat going to Alexandria.
He landed at Alexandria in November. No Russian
consulate was left, nor Refugees’ Committee any longer,
so from house to house his searchings began anew. At
night he slept in the kennels of the poor, for bread
worked at the wharfs an hour each day, unloading coal.
At these wharfs he heard by chance of me, ‘ English ’
HE WHO SEEKS
51
Saloney, the hotel guide, and remembered the name
the girl in Jerusalem had mentioned.
Brown and sinewy, desert Arab in speech and ap¬
pearance, I yet knew him on the instant that evening I
found him awaiting me on the hotel steps. I took him
to my room, gave him food and clothes, and sat and
listened to him and all the story of his quest from
far-off Yalta.
‘ Grodine ? ’ I said, ‘ I remember the name. And the
old Committee records contain the address of every
White Russian in Egypt. Your quest is ended, my
friend.’
VII
We looked up the books, and there was the entry :
‘ Lef Ilyavetch Grodine and niece Natasha, 12, Harun-
Badrawi, Khalig-el-Masri, Le Cake.’ Andrei Bal’mont
stared at it as though it had been the writing of Bel¬
shazzar’s feast, then kissed me, and was suddenly gone
from the room. I ran after him.
‘ But you will need money—I will lend you ’
‘ Little friend, leave me my last road.’
So he waved and went, and I never saw him again.
VIII
Now has my story been as Andrei himself told it
me. But hereafter is only the dream I built on the so-
few facts I sought out later that year. One man there
was who saw him enter Cairo in the sunset, one who
5*
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
saw him pass over the Bulaq Bridge. And there was
Aida ed-Dowlah, the cripple, who squatted in the
shadow of a garden wall in the Khalig. . . .
But of that tramp from Alexandria to Cairo and its
Khalig of many colours—how shall we guess ? Certain
at last, at last on his final road, he went eastwards.
But as he walked the night ways he saw with an ache
and an amazement the stars less bright than of yore.
And his feet were heavier, and the smell of the wind
stung him not at all. . . .
It was sunset when he came to Cairo and sought
his way to the Khalig-el-Masri, through the throngs of
Polychromata. Up there, perhaps, beyond Abbassieh,
were the Red Hills crowned in fire, and he stopped and
looked at them and looked back across all the days and
roads he had traversed. And suddenly his eyes were
blind with tears.
Sunset over Cairo. . . .
Then, at length, out beyond the Khalig’s colour and
clamour, he came to the garden wall of a house, and
looked, and suddenly stood still. For there in the
gloaming lowe of the garden, no dream, but sweet and
real, stood Natasha herself, more dear and desirable
than in all his memories.
He clenched his hands and choked back the cry that
quivered up into his throat. He stood suddenly sick
at heart.
Knowing nothing of his nearness, white and dim in
the fading light, she stretched out her hands, and he
heard the sound of her tears, heard her whisper to the
sunset his name. . . .
HE WHO SEEKS
53
Night and dreams and questi the dream that was Natasha
herself—or a weeping girl in a garden ?
He stood heart-wrung, his lips half-opened to call.
Then, overhead, faintly, came out the Evening Star.
IX
Half an hour afterwards, out from Cairo over the
Bulaq Bridge, to the night and the high road and the
sting of the wind, Andrei Bal’mont tramped forth again
on his quest.
II
THE LOST PROPHETESS
i
SOME religious procession, I think. Ah no, the
Warren strikers. . . . And look—God mine, here in
Cairo !—a women's contingent!
The first I have ever seen. Surely Jane Hatoun
marches there, surely somewhere in that brown drift
is her face and voice uplifted ! Surely at least she turns
in dream, dreaming she hears the ring of feet on that
Road she prophesied these thirty years ago !
Some friend of mine ? Jane Hatoun ? She was
memory blowing down the night before ever the good
sovyeti replaced in Kazan Gymnasium—if replaced him
they have—the Professor of English Literature who
fled to join the Whites. A legend of the bazaars, a tale
of the harm and soq, embroidered and miracle-adorned,
that Woman’s Deliverer who was once Jane Hatoun
and walked your English fields. . . .
But the legend that stirred me to an aching wonder
that night I heard it in a room beyond Khan Khalil—
stirred me so that I wrote to England for the upturning
of records, so that even to Angora I wrote. . . . What
irony of fate that with me alone, alien in race and sex,
should rest the full tale of the Prophet of Sharikhan 1
Powder and dust, and yet—and yet—I may never hear
a discussion or read a book on the women’s regenera¬
tion but I hear Jane Platoun’s voice come ringing across
the years.
54
THE LOST PROPHETESS
55
ii
This from your records English and those of the
Egyptian official: In 1878 one Lutf Hatoun, a student,
was expelled from El-Azhar for the heretical beliefs
and liberalism. He escaped but narrowly with his life.
Yet he was rich, an orphan, had no ties, and reached to
Alexandria in safety.
From there he sailed to France, and so to England,
to gather yet more of the foreign liberalism. Three
months after this arrival in London he married an
English girl; before the lapse of the eighteen months
he and his wife were dead, killed in the great train
accident.
They left but one child, a daughter.
Such the ragged record of official fact upon which
I, with my letter from Angora, may weave the imagin¬
ings. She was brought up, this child Jane Hatoun,
by the aunt artistic and advanced. There was much of
talk and poetry and misty idealism all through her
early years. She was given the education and freedom
beyond that decade even in England.
The aunt, an artist, was member of some society of
the painters that may have been your Pre-Raphaelite
Brotherhood ; she was friend of Ruskin and Morris
and the gentle rebels of those days. The New Age was
nigh when all men would be free and kindly and happy,
and all women not only the equals of men, but the god¬
desses to inspire. . . . Except in the brown lands of the
Nile, which had haunted Jane Hatoun from childhood
—her father’s country, where was still the untinged
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
56
darkness, where women were the cattle-slaves and dolls,
where the light Pre-Raphaelite had never shone.
In the breathless resolve that grew stronger and
stronger with her adolescence, Jane Hatoun determined
herself as the missionary to carry the gospel unique to
Egypt. In England were many to guide the coming
age, but she—she would go to Egypt, where were
none. . . .
In 1899 the aunt died. Six months later Jane
Hatoun, aged twenty-one, with the little luggage and
the great faith and the incomplete knowledge of Arabic,
sailed for Alexandria, which her father had left in flight
twenty-two years before.
in
‘ She was tall and slender, yet with full bosom
and eyes like a deer,’ was one to write of her. The
type forgotten—of heroic mould, large of limb, young
and eager and unawakened. She had little evidence of
the Egyptian blood, but colourful hair and the white
skin whereneath would rise the quick blood. And of
her is there one phrase written that is curiously illuminat-
ing. She had beautiful hands—kind hands. They
were kinder than the mercy of God, her hands.’
And for background our Polychromata—brown and
seething and sullen and vivid, aged and unwearied,
veiled of face and soul.
She came alone, but with letters of introduction
to notabilities, native and European, and with the
youthfulness and enthusiasm set about her intention
THE LOST PROPHETESS
57
express of seeking out the intelligent women of Cairo
and holding with them the meetings and discussions.
From the women of the harm soon drifted strange
accounts of those talks. For she urged them to learn
the reading and writing, to demand the freedom and
the shedding of the pusht, to organise the Women’s
League of Al-Islam.
It sounds a teaching harmless and pitiful enough—
Freedom and the Alphabet. But to that Cairo it was a
gospel of blasphemy, and there grew the mutter of anger
against this English girl. It might have become an
official protest, have resulted in the closed door and
expulsion from Egypt. But for the happening mysterious.
Jane Hatoun disappeared. In a night she disappeared.
Followed the questionings and the searchings by
native police, but they were the searchings unavailing.
She had been wont to walk the bazaars and hovel-
lanes unguarded and unattended. ... It was the quest
regrettably hopeless.
IV
Sixty years of age, politician, schemer, a Muslim
of the Plaj, and, had he had his way, a Muslim of the
Jihad. Such Ali Mabkhut esh-Shihada, Bey, high in
favour with the Khedive, but uncertain friend of the
English.
He was the strange hybrid, an Egyptian-Japanese.
His mother, of one of the few Muslim families in Japan,
had been brought to Egypt in 1840 to implement some
primitive Pan-Islamic plotting of Holy War.
Old and with the shrivelled face and the beast eyes.
58
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
a man like a hyena, he lived in the barrack-palace of
Sharikhan, upon the Nile. When Jane Hatoun first
came to Cairo he was in the Yemen, making the marriage
in the rich Yahya clan, and from there he at length
returned with his new bride to those rooms in Sharikhan
that had known so many women, where I think the
very air was choked with the murdered soul-stuff of
women. . . .
A week thereafter he heard of the English girl, but
saw her not, and his harm remained undisturbed, as
was he himself. Until the one day when, coming from
the visit to a friend in the Muski, they pointed to her
passing in the street.
You understand, she was friendless and counselless
in Cairo, and with confidence and enthusiasm un¬
bounded. Presently was she receiving the invitations
to visit a house on Nile-bank, the small house where
lived two women Egyptian, widows, eager for the
new knowledge. She was delighted, and made the
many calls, and at length, one night after the long
talk, was induced to sleep there. A servant promised
to take a note to the hotel, telling the guest’s where¬
abouts. . . .
In the night that guest awoke with stifling breath and
the feet and hands bound in cloths. Across her face
were also bound the cloths. Underneath was the
motion of a boat on water, and overhead the dip and
sway of a lateen sail. She was upon the Nile.
She sought to struggle, but a great hand stayed her,
and she lay wide-eyed in the unquiet darkness. Then
the boat stopped, and she was carried up a dark flight
THE LOST PROPHETESS
59
of water-steps till the lap of the Nile was lost. Through
the many corridors with the unpainted walls she was
borne, then into a room that with lights blazed, that
hung sick with the smell of musk, that was strewn with
the gorgeous rugs in the barbarian clamour of colours.
He who carried her was a giant negro, but she had
no eyes for him. On the divan sat one who smiled at
her, who smiled the tigerish smile from withered, evil
face the while her face and feet and hands were untied,
who smiled while she stood blanched and horrified,
who smiled even while her screams were echoing down
those corridors of night.
v
For the week she was a creature demented, raving
and weeping in that guarded room to which the Bey
went daily. And then from terror and agony came
merciful release. The screamings ceased to be heard
in the near-by harm. Instead, came other sounds—
sounds which smote the whispering groups to amulet-
clutching silence. They were peal upon peal of laughter,
laughter which rose and fell and never ceased, the
laughter of the mad.
The Bey’s visits ceased with abruptness and next
day Zuria, the new wife from Yemen who for a season
had been supplanted, overheard the conversation between
Shihada and the head eunuch, Aida-ed-Dowlah—a
negro who had for the beast-master of Sharikhan the
strange love and unclean devotion. The mad woman
was to be gagged and flung into the Nile in a sack, as
one drowns a dog.
6o
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
But the day following came the change in Jane
Hatoun. No longer was the wild laughter, but only the
crooning and the muttered talk, and when Zuria, with
the secret, vicious plan at heart, went and begged the
life of the mad girl as a new toy, Shihada did not
refuse. She who had been Jane Hatoun was taken from
the painted room, given the corner of a couch in the
harim, and set to the menial tasks.
vi
Drudge and slave and butt of the hartm she became,
as fear of her childlike insanity faded. Two of the
women indeed befriended her, and these—so strange
our hearts 1—Ayesha the Abyssinian and Namlah the
Copt the two who had posed as the widows in the
little house on Nile-bank. Ayesha was dark and secret
and of her friendliness made little show, but Namlah,
when she could, tended the mad girl with the scared
pity that presently waxed into a strange adoring love.
But the most followed in the blind hate of Zuria—
of her who could not forget that she had been robbed of
her lord a month after marriage. Freed though she was
from sight or touch of the Bey—he had the orthodox
horror of the mad—Jane Hatoun’s life was the un¬
ceasing persecution, the deliberate torment. There
were the orders not understood but mercilessly punished,
the setting of heart-breaking tasks, the blows and
jeers all the slow, evil cruelty of the idle and sex-
obsessed.
At the first, in the visits from other Cairene harm.
THE LOST PROPHETESS
61
it had been the custom to hide the mad Englishwoman
away. But with the passing of time even that ceased,
for there was none who dared betray the secrets of
Sharikhan. And the chatter and coffee drinking would
interrupt the while of the white slave of Zuria was
made the exhibition and mock.
‘ I saved her for our amusement—from the death
of a drowned dog I saved her,’ Zuria would repeat
the many times, and not until one afternoon in late
October, when the room was crowded and Jane Hatoun
crouched at the feet of Shihada Bey’s chief wife, did the
miracle happen.
They saw the slave suddenly rise and confront Zuria.
Suddenly, and for the first time, she spoke in the clear
and ringing Arabic.
‘ From such death will none save you, O evil woman.
... Be silent, fool who has vexed my hours. Silence—
and look 1 ’
She flung her arm towards the deserted end of the
room, where hung the heavy velvet curtain above the
doorway. Aghast, silenced, they turned and stared.
And it seemed to them as they looked that upon
that curtain was flung a sudden picture. Ever the
darker grew the room and the picture ever the brighter,
and when it stood clear and yet shaking and fading in
the wind movement of the curtain, there arose a moan
of terror.
For the picture showed the water-steps of the palace
at night, and a woman, naked and bound, being up¬
lifted and flung into the water by the giant negro, Aida.
Behind was flicker of a lantern upon the dark Nile,
6z THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
and lighting the face of the woman whom death
awaited.
And the face was the face of Zuria.
She screamed, falling forward on her hands, and
at that the picture ceased and vanished. Above the
grovelling thing at her feet stood Jane Hatoun, with
the light unearthly in her eyes and hands outstretched
to the terrified women.
‘ Look and believe, women of Egypt 1 By this sign
shall you know me, the Prophetess of God ! ’
VII
Shihada Bey was not in Cairo. He had gone on
the secret political mission to Turkey, leaving Aida-ed-
Dowlah in charge of Sharikhan. And, while all un¬
knowing he plotted in Stamboul, from his zenana, on
the Nile, there spread through women’s Cairo the story
amazing of the Prophetess of God.
No mere thaumaturgist, but the first woman
Prophet of God, one who superseded Christ and
Mohammed, one who came to deliver the women of
the world. . . . Nightly to her came the revelations and
each dawn she would chant account of them to the
rapt and shivering audiences of the zenana. Not one
of her audience could read or write, and no record but
the fragmentary verbal survives.
‘ And the day shall come when our bodies shall be
no more houses of shame but temples of the living
God.’
‘ And Woman shall build a City, and its name shall
THE LOST PROPHETESS
63
be Freedom; and Man shall come against that City
with a Torch, and its name shall be Lust; then woe to
that City if it trust in walls, for it shall not endure. . .
Yet she preached no war on men, but rather the
flaming creed that was to purge love of cruelty and
abomination for those who set their feet on the way,
E/ Darb, the Road of abstinence and sacrifice and
selflessness. . . .
E/ Darb—it haunted her teachings. Somewhere,
attainable by a mystic Road, was an amazing, essayable
happiness, life free and eager, life in the sunlight beyond
the prisons of fear and cruelty. . . . The Buddhist Eight¬
fold path, the Aryan Way, and yet also a Road to be
built and laid to the City of God.
And it was woman whom she called to the paving
of this Road, woman not as the lover or mother of men
but as that dispossessed half of humanity which has never
asserted the individual existence. She called her to an
Expedition, a nameless Venture, out in the open air
and the starlight, she preached her a God scorned
and denied of men, she preached her a soul and a
splendid endeavour. . . .
Aida-ed-Dowlah and his eunuchs, freed from their
master’s presence, kept but careless watch. They were
seldom seen, and from them was the Prophetess guarded
and shielded, so that of these happenings—other than
the increased number of visitors—they knew nothing.
First of disciples, first to come forward from the ranks
of those who merely looked and listened and feared,
were Namlah and Ayesha. But there was the convert
amazing almost as soon. Zuria, whose death the
64
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Prophetess’s first curtain-picture had foreshown, became
the Paul of the wild, new faith !
From that one may guess that there were things
other than the ascetic Road in the teachings—the
colourful, incoherent imaginings of the Eastern mystic,
the startling, incomprehensible revelations, the phrases
of magic and prophecy. . . . No mere thaumaturgist,
miracles were yet of the daily occurrence—the miracle-
pictures of the banm-cmtain, the laying-on of hands—
all those strange powers that lie with the spiritually
over-stirred.
Such our nature, perhaps through the wild prophecies
and miracles it was that her fame spread amidst the
Muslim women and even into the quarters of the
Greeks. She was not once betrayed, and presently the
story ceased to be a story, became the secret cult and the
kindled fire, awaiting to blow out in flames of faith
upon the winds of the world. : . .
And then over Cairo that November, out of the
lairs of the Black Warrens and the Khalig Canal, spread
the cholera plague.
VIII
When returning one night in secret from his political
mission, and bringing the secret guest, Shihada Bey
entered the palace of Sharikhan and found a quarter of
his servants dead, including two women of the harm.
Of those who still lived, half were smitten with the
plague of the fouled waters and Cairo no place for a
wise man to tarry.
Tarry he did not, but fled to Alexandria. With the
THE LOST PROPHETESS
65
dawn he was gone, but his secret guest remained still
in hiding, for entry into Egypt was forbidden Dirhem
Ragheb.
Ah, you have heard of him—Ragheb Pasha, the
Ghazi’s friend and confidant. Enemy of the Faith,
the mullahs have called him, him who has fought to
destroy the creed of his fathers, with all its tenets of
black bestiality and sex-enslavement. But this was some
thirty years ago, and though member of that society
that was later to become the Young Turk, he was not
yet the ascetic and fanatic, but a young man with the
courtesy and the ready smile, the humour and impatience
of restraint and convention. He had no illusions re¬
garding the Bey; they were but temporary political
allies.
He had a palace wing almost to himself, and passed
the days in reading and smoking, till on the fourth
afternoon of his coming he looked out on the great
central court, the bosh of Sharikhan, and saw that which
made him drop his book in wonder.
Pacing the btisb was a woman, a girl of the English
surely, or his eyes lied, a girl tall and stately, with the
eyes unearthly and a little smile upon her lips. And
after her, a pace behind, two native women.
They were Zuria and Namlah, who had brought
the Prophetess to walk in the open air after the hours
of nursing and prayer in the palace. And as he gazed
Ragheb saw the very beautiful happening—the English
girl stop till the two native women were beside her,
and put her arms about their shoulders, and point to
the sunset. So, in that grouping they stood for a minute.
66 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
so still and crowned with fire that he followed their
gaze.
Seen through the opening of the /josb, magically
paved in rippling gold upon the Nile, lay a road that
stretched from their feet to the sun.
IX
‘ I loved her from the first moment I saw her pass
below me,’ he was to write, and I have thought of him
and that very sweet and ancient song in your language.
c I would have burned down Sharikhan for her,’ he says,
the grey-headed confidant of Kemal. . , .
But he did not burn Sharikhan. Instead, he waylaid
her next evening she walked, and that time alone. She
stopped and stared at him with the mysterious eyes,
unafraid and unrealising. He stood bare-headed in
front of her, and fumbled in his English.
‘ My lady, who are you ? ’
She put her hand to her forehead, still standing so
and staring at him. She stammered the confused words,
and then suddenly her face was suffused with blood, and
she gave a low, wailing cry and would have fallen but
for his arms. So holding her he was aware how fragile
she was, but at his touch she struggled like the mad
thing and sank to her knees.
He stood over her in the pity and the doubt, and
something of apprehension also, for he knew not that
the eunuchs of the palace were but recovering from
cholera, and none but women likely to interrupt them.
THE LOST PROPHETESS 67
And suddenly, he says, unknowing her story, he was
blindly angry.
‘ By God, the Bey ! You are no Muslim woman.
He stole you, abducted you ? ’
She raised a frightened face from which the light
unearthly had gone. It was the face of a child,
remembering horror.
‘ Stay with me,’ she whispered. ‘ Stay with me. You
are my friend ? ’
x
The madness that had veiled from her the past had
shivered away in an instant. Came back horror and
remembrance and understanding. . . . And then sight
of the kind and compassionate eyes of the one human
being who seemed not alien.
That night she passed through nightmare hours.
One of the women was dying, and she found herself
kneeling with the whole of the harim, praying an insane
ritual prayer through which revolved and returned
some jargon of a Road, some means to salvation which
she had preached in her madness. And when the woman,
her eyes fixed in adoration on the Prophetess, gave the
last gasp, Jane Hatoun found herself bending over the
corpse and making upon it the mystic sign she had
taught. . . .
Almost that night her reason reeled again, in the
smell and reek and the chanting, and there came on her
a shuddering horror and disgust of the harim women
who seemed to be her especial disciples—the eager
Zuria and the faithful Namlah.
68
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
But alone, early in the dawn, she managed to steal
away from them to the room where hung the great
curtain, and attempted unavailingly to summon upon
it the images. Morning was breaking outside, and she
unlatched the never-opened windows and watched the
light come upon the Nile.
That day she had again a secret meeting with Ragheb.
‘ I swore I would take her away as she begged—to
France, to England. Nor did I make any conditions.
Oh, sometime, beyond the seas—for I was to abandon
politics and country for her, my English lady—perhaps
then she would come to me.’
He made the arrangements for a boat to come from
Bulaq and take them away next sunset. All over Cairo
the cholera plague was receding, and there was no
difficulty.
But of the new conditions in Cairo another was
aware, for that night there arrived at Sharikhan the
messenger with news that Shihada Bey was returning in
twenty-four hours.
XI
All that momentous next day were the swift rain-
showers upon the Nile, and—thing unprecedented in
Cairo—a haze that almost blotted out the opposite bank.
And within Sharikhan, in the harim of Shihada, Jane
Hatoun sat and listened to the dying Ayesha.
Sometimes she wandered in delirium, sometimes
came out of dreams and recognised the Prophetess, and
made the little struggles to remembrance, the pitiful
confessions.
THE LOST PROPHETESS
69
‘ The Road, the Road, O khdtun ! So little I have done,
I have been weak. And the Way is steep and hard,
the shining Way of Women. I have hardly trod it.
Will God understand ? ’
Over and over again. And it seemed that not the
miracles and chantings, but vision of some wondrous
Way of Life had lighted her dark, starved soul. . . .
Kneeling there, repulsion forgot, Jane Hatoun listened
with a breaking heart.
And against the window the wonder of Cairene
rain !... Rain that fell on the long fields and the pleasant
lanes and the lamplit streets of the kindly towns, rain
of the lost England to which Ragheb would take her. . . .
‘ I found her at sunset waiting on the water-steps,
as we had planned. She was transformed to wonder,
with flushed cheeks and breathless laughter. She
hardly seemed to see me, but pointed across the Nile.
‘ I looked. It was our boat.’
XII
They started and fell apart, and Ragheb turned with
pistol gleaming in his hand. But from the shadows
came no eunuch, but only the Coptic slave-woman—the
hysterical woman who stared and then fell on her knees
and caught the skirt of Jane Hatoun.
c Oh, leave us not, us who are your children, us to
whom you have brought the Faith—leave us not, O
khdtun ! ’
Ragheb caught the stem of the boat, and steadied
it, and turned with outstretched hand. But Namlah
?o
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
clung to the Prophetess with the courage of desperation.
‘ Ayesha is dying and calls for you, she who is passing
from the Road. She calls your blessing *
‘ I thrust her aside. “ Quick, into the boat. We can
be at Bulaq before darkness. And then the road to the
sea ! ”
‘ But from my English lady came the strange, strangled
sob, and she looked at me wildly, and drew back with
strange words.
Go you, go you. Haste, for the Bey comes, and
already Aida-ed-Dowlah has seen you speak with
me.”
‘ I stared at her and did not understand. The shadows
grew deep upon the waters. And then my English lady
raised the slave-woman and stood with her arms around
her, and looked at me with tormented eyes. And these
are the words she said, as I remember them :
Oh, I cannot come! ” And suddenly she wept,
and spoke my name, which she had never done. “ So
easy to escape—my heart is breaking to come with you !
Love and you—there was never woman who heard
such call but went. Oh, I am only the mad Prophetess
still, I think, and these women have followed and
believed in me, and how may I desert them ? ”
I pleaded with her, but she did not seem to hear.
The boatmen, frightened at nearness to Sharikhan, kept
calling from the water-steps. And then I saw come
°n lady’s face the unearthly light.
Forget me. Dirhem, I have never been. Yet
beyond the Road I would have loved—more than life
I would have loved you ! ”
THE LOST PROPHETESS
7i
‘ And then for the quick moment she kissed me, I
who had never known of her love, and so was gone.
‘ I never saw her again.’
XIII
What happened with the return of Shihada is the dim
and tangled tale, the swift confused falling of last sands
heard in darkness. Perhaps he looked upon Jane
Hatoun again, and the beast-desires stirred in him.
Perhaps he had heard from Aida-ed-Dowlah of the meet¬
ings with Dirhem Ragheb and the flight of the latter.
At the least, there occurred in that harim room a scene
unprecedented. Zuria, in defence of the Prophetess,
struck with her knife at Shihada, and while the Bey-
grappled with her Jane Hatoun picked that knife from
the floor and drove it through his hyena-heart. . . .
They stripped and bound the two women, the
eunuchs, and carried them down to the water-steps,
Aida-ed-Dowlah, who had loved Shihada, transformed
to a raving madman with no thought of the morrow
and its explanations. Behind them they clanged to the
great door above the water-steps and thereon beat the
demented women the while murder was done in the
rain and darkness.
But through that door they heard Jane Hatoun
crying courage to Zuria, crying that the sunset Road
was theirs. And then they heard her singing by the
waters, in the alien tongue and the unknown words.
Struggling and splash, a single sharp cry, wild and
agonised. And then the singing ceased for ever.
72
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
XIV
But in the women’s legends of Cairo Jane Hatoun
perished not that night at the hands of the eunuchs.
She escaped upon the water and the darkness, and some
day—surely from that Avalon where Arthur dreams,
and sleeps the Danish king—she will come again and
preach the faith that is to deliver the women of the
world. . . .
And who may say that she will not ?
Ill
DAYBREAK
i
THE little cluster of bell-flowers—From Scotland ?
But it has travelled far! I may smell it ? . . .
God mine, it is heather !
It cloaks your mountains in purple this time of year,
does it not ? Never have I seen it before ; but I have
smelt this smell. I have smelt it blowing on a wind
from those mountains I have never trod, a breath of
that autumn I have never known. . . .
Eh ? In imagination ? But no, in reality—here in
our Cairo, almost the year ago to-day.
ii
And the tale begins, if I must tell it, not here at all.
It begins in the far Scotland that sent you the heather,
with Roger Mantell on the autumn walking tour up
through your Urals.
He was the young journalist in London, this Roger,
and very poor, as is proper for the journalist. Some¬
thing of your own height and appearance he had, with
that brownness of hair and eyes that indistinguishes
the Englishman, and a certain far-awayness of outlook
that made of him the not too-good journalist. History
was his passion, and he had taken the walking-tour to
plan the writing of a book. This book was to refute
the foolish Spengler—him who believes all history
goes in cycles, like the mad dog chasing its tail.
73
74
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
And one night-time, very late, passing through a
village amongst those hills, he heard a girl singing a
peasant song—so sweet and strange and beautiful in
the dark that he halted and listened. And the song
was this :
‘ Oh, the memory and the ache
They have stown the heart fra me,
And there’s heather on the hills
In my ain countree.’
All next day, though many miles away, he found
memory of singer and song haunting him. So pressing
was it that he turned about and went back to lay this
ghostly thing. Outside the village school he heard the
voice again.
Then, in growing amazement at himself, he rented
a room at the village inn, in three days obtained intro¬
duction to his singer, and within the week, though his
history had not progressed even in the draft beyond
so-hairy Eoanthropus, was planning nothing of greater
import than to steal the singer from her hills.
Her father had been the village schoolmaster and
she was teacher of the school. And because he had
been a poet this dead father of hers had called her
Dawn. To watch her stand against the sunrise, as
many a morning she did when they tramped the hills
together and the mists were rising, caught the amaze¬
ment ever again in the throat of Roger. Slight and slim
and dark and quick, this singer of the hills, with clear
eyes, grey and grave, but with the little twinkle-lights
deep down in them. She had a pale, clear skin with the
DAYBREAK
75
faint blood-flush. She detested the poor Spengler and
could run like a deer.
Indeed, though one who had lived in the hills all her
life, she was of the most modern—one of that woman’s
miracle-generation that knows nothing of the reserves
and hesitations and tantalisations. She had the body
of a gracious boy and the mind of an eager
Greek.
If Roger first loved her for her voice, I think she
loved him at first sight, protectingly, because of that
far-awayness of his look. Under painted skies, children
in a world transformed, they walked that autumn.
Roger had been the unawakened tourist, but Dawn
took him out into mornings of wonder when, in the
silence, he would hear the sun come audibly up from the
east, hear the earth stir and move as from its sleep. Or
into fervid noons, to lie on a mountain-side and listen
to the drowsy under-song of bees rising and falling on
the never-coming wind. And the brown night would
creep over this land of Dawn’s as one very ancient
who went home from toil. . . .
It seemed to him that she had deeper kinship with
those things than he would ever fathom. ‘ I don’t
believe you are human at all,’ he said to her once.
‘ You’re out of the hills and the sunrise.’
She laughed at him, and then was grave, in that
fashion that somehow had power to wring his heart
absurdly. ‘ I never remember my mother. She died
when I was born. And my father was always lost in his
books. I carried all my desperate wrongs and fears
to the hills.’ She sat with cheek in hand and looked
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
76
across the sun-hazed valleys. * I think they love me,
those hills, almost as much as I love them.’
‘ How can they help it ? ’ said Roger, her lover.
in
In the little time they were deciding when they would
marry and how many children they would have, and
whether it would be better to wait until Roger made
the thousand a year or only eight hundred. Not till
there was security and certainty were they to mate. . . .
At the least, that was Roger’s planning, and Dawn,
this so-amazing Greek boy who was more than boy,
sat and looked at him and her hills, I think perhaps
with the twinkle-tapers lighting her grey eyes.
For he had come in the first months of the autumn.
Day by day it deepened around them. Purple grew the
mountains and under the long heats of day climbed to
heaven in a shimmering blaze. Out of the earth rose all
the songs of fruition and ending, and that second week
there was a moon that came and never seemed to set.
They could not keep their beds, these two, but
stole out to meet each other in the white radiant
wonder.
Till one night—this but the guess-work of mine—
they kissed each other and in their kiss was already a
wild regret. The hours are on wings, on wings ! beat
the shadows that were night-birds. Now, now 1 beat
their own hearts. . . . Perhaps Dawn held him at arms
length, and laughed at him with a little breathlessness.
‘ But, Roger ! . . . A thousand a year ! ’
DAYBREAK
77
And then, whatever his answer, in some such hour
of the earth-magic they came to their decision.
One night, under a moon that trembled on the wane,
but waited for them still, they climbed together up into
the hills and the radiance, and not a bird that called in
the shadows but was their friend, and there was none
of the need to say good night.
IV
But no moons endure for ever, and presently Dawn
was with Roger in a little flat in London and those days
on the hills dimmed till they were of a dream.
I have never seen your London or known its life,
but it seems they went to live there in the season of the
fogs which rise from a blind little river amidst the
streets. They began their life in a half-twilight, with the
million under-murmurs of other life a still roar about
them. In the morning Roger was gone to the office
of his gazette ; often he did not return until midnight.
For many weeks they would see each other only at
night-time, each wearied and a little tired. . . .
And in the little was the amazement, I think, and
silent tears shed in the darkness that love could ever
tarnish so. For they came to look on each other
searchingly, even on the wild occasion angrily—Dawn
to see her dreamer of the hills visionary and unpractical,
immersed in his book and the refutations of cyclic
catastrophe, irritable over the refractory phrase or the
inadequate reference. And to Roger it sometimes
seemed that he was tied, by all unreasonable bonds, to a
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
78
boy quickly bored and swift to anger, one whose eyes
could light with other than mirth, one whose laughter
could ring cruel and very clear. . . .
But these are things inevitable ? They are not the
less heart-breaking. Sometime, both knew, they would
come to the adjustments and live with lesser friction.
They would, in their English phrase, ‘ settle down.’
But the ache in the dark of love, a thing so shining, to
look forward to the settle-down !
Yet was that never to be, for a day came when they
looked at each other in unbelief and the settle-down
fled out into the blinded streets and romance rang her
bugles for them again. The great secret was theirs,
theirs partnership in the abiding mystery. . . .
But who am I to speak of it or understand ? We of
the unmarried are emotionally unborn, even though,
wistfully, we catch a glimpse of understanding. This
child of theirs was to be—oh, that hero that every child
may be !—a captain of the hosts of the morning, Dawn
and Roger in one, doer and dreamer, one who was to
confound all erring Germans and bear the torch of vision
yet another league up the Defile through which march
the hosts that have climbed from the beast.
And they named him, and dreamt of him and hoped
for him ; and the months fell away, into spring warming
London, into summer, till there came the day when
Dawn must pass through her hours of agony and Roger
doubt his vision of history. For there arose the com¬
plications and the bringing of a surgeon. . . .
In the end was the child born dead, and for the little
it seemed that Dawn herself would die.
DAYBREAK
79
v
But she lived, returning to life wan and a stranger
from a desolate land. She must bear no more children,
nor must she stay the winter in England, the doctors
said.
Roger—a Roger grown practical at last—took her
north to the brief summer-autumn of her hills. So
soon as he could leave her he went back to London
again. In a week he was sending her the news that he
had found a gazette willing to send him abroad for a
year, to Egypt, to act as the correspondent and write a
series-impression of Cairo and the Nile-country.
VI
So they came to our Polychromata, those two. On
the voyage Dawn grew again the Greek boy, and her
laughter came back, and the little twinkle that changed
and yet abided in her grey eyes. They came from the
ship at Alexandria and found a pension at Kubbah.
From there they set to search for a house.
At the length, up on Nile-bank to the north of Gezireh
Island, they came one afternoon on that at sight of which
Dawn cried ‘ Oh Roger ! ’ in the tone that stirred in
him always a memoried cry from a day of agony. They
stopped and looked at the desired possession and laughed
eagerly, and kissed like the children they were.
For that was the supreme wonder of their days—their
love that had flamed anew. As never before it flamed.
But the burning is the wrong simile. It burgeoned and
8o
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
blossomed, strange and sweet, not the love of the first
early days nor yet the compassionate passion of the
dark London time. It was something that made of
their first wild desire a childish greed, of the settle-down
necessity a humour and a fantasy. . . .
They surveyed the empty house by Nile-bank and
went back to Kubbah in the apprehension that it would
be gone by morning. But the next day they found the
agent, rented ‘ La maison Saniosu,’ and engaged two
Egyptian servants. It jutted out upon the Nile, the
house, old and of crumbling stone, mantled with a brown
creeper that reached down its tendrils to the water. It
was two stories in height and had a high-walled garden
also skirted by the Nile.
They had taken it furnished, so after a few necessary
purchases in the bazaars, and in the intervals of Roger
writing the so masterly series-impressions, they had but
to debate a new name for it.
Above the door was its name carved—Maison Saniosu.
c Let’s call it Sans-Sous and be done,’ said Roger.
And this, because they were very young and very poor
and very happy, was a great jest, and almost on that
name they decided.
But one morning—a morning early in October—
happened that which solved the so urgent matter. In
their room Dawn was the first to awake. Upon the
window was the urgent tapping of a twig and she
looked out on the wonder of a Nile daybreak. Presently
she awakened Roger and they sat side by side watching
in the sky the silver that changed to amber and so to
copper and then into the blind flush of azure.
DAYBREAK
81
They had been awakened by the first of the seasonal
morning winds which bring the end of the khamsin
time, but that they did not know until later. Only that
unexpected wind had brought to Dawn an inspiration.
‘ I know—name for our house 1 Was there ever such
suitable name 1J
Roger stared at her. ‘ What ? ’
‘ Why, Daybreak.’
He teased her. ‘ But that is your own name. It is
Dawn.’ Then he laughed, and there were words in your
English Bible that he remembered, very wonderful and
beautiful words :
‘ “ Unti/ the day break and the shadows flee away ” ’
VII
I met them first in mid-November, in front of the
Sphinx, when Dawn was posing it and her Roger and
an Egyptian dragoman for the photograph. I also had
come to photograph it for a client I had.
Roger apologised for his Philistine wife who insisted
that he and the dragoman should stand beside the
Riddle of the Sands. I made her the bow.
‘ I think she is wise,’ I said, ‘ for this is no Riddle;
only a foolish vanity in stone. If I might I would
have madame in my photograph with the Sphinx.’
I have that photograph still, with the little madame,
slight and sweet and brave, standing beside that owlish
carving of the foolish dead. Then I helped them catch
the donkeys which had strayed and we went to Mena
House and drank the much-needed tea, for the donkey-
82 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
catching had been a task of the mirth and great
speed.
From the first I think their liking was for me as mine
for them. Presently, when we had ceased to laugh at
memory of a donkey which had raced Roger for almost
a mile, they were telling me of the house called Daybreak
and that sudden wind from the Nile that now tapped
their window each morning.
‘ It is a green wind/ said the little madame, and paused
in the doubt of my understanding.
‘ I know/ I said. ‘ It is of the Delta crops and har¬
vesting. Yet few know it for a green wind.’
‘ I am a peasant myself/ she said. ‘ Is that why ? ’
I looked at her and wove the fantasy. ‘ You are of the
most ancient race, I think. Of the brunet race that held
the Mediterranean lands long before there was Celt or
Saxon or Slav. They are not of the history-books :
they passed north and south into bleaker lands before
history opened. But perhaps there was one of them,
some far-father of yours, who once tilled the Delta
lands and woke to that green wind. Perhaps it is a
memory that has come to you across ten thousand
years.’
c That is a wonderful thought,’ said Dawn, and looked
at her Roger.
‘ I will steal it for an article/ said Roger, and there
was the laughter amongst us.
vm
In the little I was a frequent visitor at the house
called Daybreak. I talked of the Nile and Cairo and
DAYBREAK
83
gave to Roger good copy for his London gazette. Soon
to both of them I was the close friend, and knew this
tale of theirs I have told you, even as they knew mine.
When I told Roger of those Four Years which ended
for me in the storming of Perekop by the Sovyet heroes
—heroes they were, though my enemies—I remember
the long silence that fell.
‘ That is life,’ he said. ‘ And it seems blind chance
and aimlessness. . . . But there’s something behind it
greater than a dark malignancy. Though that malignancy
is real enough. Perhaps in ancient Egypt they saw it,
the Dark Shadow, and built the Sphinx and Pyramids
to ward it off.’
‘ And this other thing,’ I said. * What is it ? ’
‘ Oh, something equally nameless and untheological.
It has led us up through the dark Defile of history, has
turned in many guises to help again and again the
stragglers and the lost in their hour of utmost despair.
It will lead us to the sunrise yet.’
‘ That Daybreak the poor Spenglers have never
visioned,’ I jested at him, though I loved his faith. We
heard the singing of Dawn inside the house. ‘ And
the little madame is its prophet.’
He laughed and was a poet. ‘ She was made in secret
when the Dark Gods slept! ’
Never since Kazan had I known such friendship as
those nights when the little madame and I would sit
and talk under our Cairene moon, with the bulking
of Bulaq beyond the garden wall and the far wail of
native song in our ears. Sometimes was Roger with
us, but often indoors, working on the so-great book
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
84
that was not in the contract with his London gazette—
the book that was to bring him reputation and money.
I brought my violin to that garden, and Dawn would
sing for me peasants’ songs that left me homesick for
my Volga lands—though they were songs of that
Scotland I have never seen. Once she sang that verse
which had halted Roger in the hills, and I have forgotten
it never:
‘ Oh, the memory and the ache
They have stown the heart fra me,
And there’s heather on the hills
In my ain countree.’
But of course I loved her. From the first moment
I think I loved her. And with Roger also I was in love.
They were to me the surety of my dreams. I loved
them as one loves those dream-children, keen and
beautiful, who will people our happy world a thousand
years after we are dead.
IX
And then, in February, there came the horror into
their lives.
At the first I did not understand their silences and
strangeness. I said to myself that I was the too-frequent
visitor—what need had these lovers of such alien as
myself? For a little there was bitterness with me, and
I stayed away from the house called Daybreak, going
there not at all until the passing of two weeks. When
next I went it was to endure their reproach and in the
eyes of the little madame a hurt puzzlement.
DAYBREAK 85
‘ You have tired of us ? Why have you stayed
away ? J
I kissed her hand. ‘ But I had thought you tired of
me,’ I said, and blundered over words which I desired
not to say. ‘ There seemed a difference the last time
I came. . . .’
Then was the silence, though Roger broke it with a
sudden laugh and talk of indifferent matter. His eyes
were the eyes of a sick animal. And when presently
we were alone he went to the window, and looked
blindly out on the sunlight and the Nile, then turned
and told me.
And then, God mine! I also knew the sudden
sickness of mind, and had no word to say because of
the horror of the thing.
For another child was coming, and, as they had been
told, Dawn could never live through such a thing
again.
x
I proposed the committee of doctors which may deal
with such cases, but Dawn, modern of moderns though
she was, would have none of it. For she could talk of
these things, being my friend and of her miracle-
generation.
c I think—oh, I don’t know, but it would be
cheating.’
‘ But this is the absurd fatalism,’ I pleaded, as Roger
also had pleaded. The little twinkle set its lights in her
grave eyes.
‘ Anton, my dear, was it absurd fatalism that led
86
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
you to fight a hopeless fight in your White army ? . . .
And have you lost—even yet ? *
That was in the garden of Daybreak, in the late
March, and we were silent as she leant on the wall and
looked down on the hastening waters. She had a
sudden idle thought.
* Oh, that morning wind from the Delta—it does
not blow now.’
‘ Eh ? ’ I said. ‘ The wind ? It will not come again
for many months.’
XI
I procured for them Dr. Adrian, the English gynae¬
cologist, who is my friend. Dawn liked him, for he is
the droll, but to Roger he talked with a grave face, for
he had from London the particulars of the case when
the other child had died. The little madame must
know no unhappiness or worry. Also, she must leave
Cairo.
For the summer months drew on. They blazed their
strong heat that summer as never before, I think. Yet
Dawn, even when Roger at this would have written to
his London gazette and made resignation, refused.
They would stay on at Daybreak. On the little madame
was the Cairene spell—that spell which makes of a
chance house and garden in this strange city more
homely than home.
But never so long a summer. ... A tent was set in
the garden, and through those long days of white
warmth we watched Dawn with the stealthiness of
criminals who fear their gaze may be detected. So
DAYBREAK
87
she told us, laughing, but with wistfulness. I doubt
if Roger comforted her; it was she who gave the
comfort. For him it was to start out of even the happiest
moment into the blank silence when terror walked his
brain and looked from his eyes. And from that would
he be awakened with her arms about him, and her
teasing tenderness. . . . Then I would stride away, with
the sick fear upon me also.
God mine, it was pitiful, heart-breaking.
But I set out to be the droll, even as did Adrian—
he who has said that no gynaecologist can be anything
but gynaecolatrist—in his visits to the house called
Daybreak. We sought to weave the conspiracy, we
three—the conspiracy to keep afar the malignant shadow
of which Roger had talked. Presently the Egyptian
servants also understood and were in that conspiracy.
With the ending of the khamsin-time I organised many
of the late afternoon excursions—to the Barrage, to
Heliopolis, to the desert, borrowing a car from Adrian
to take them to those places.
One afternoon in late September I took them to Abu
Zabal. For mile on mile we went into that brown
country, where stand in sleep the whitewashed villages
under their smoke pencillings, and there is no other
colour at all, but only the white and black. We had
tea as a picnic, making it under the lee of a ruined dyke
in the sunset. It was such sunset as seemed to fire the
world.
‘ It is the Ragnarok,’ I said, and Dawn poured sand
on Roger, who was lazy and lay flatwise, to make him
sit up and look at it.
88
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
‘ I’ve seen a Grampians sunset like that,’ he said.
The little madame caught her breath. She began to
speak in a whisper.
‘ It’s autumn there now. Oh, my hills, my dear hills!
Can’t you see them and smell them, Roger, climbing
purple into the sunset ? And hear the curlews crying
down the glen ? ’
We said nothing, and then we saw that she was
weeping—desolately, with uncovered face, she who
had been so brave. . . .
And the time drew ever nearer like a black wall of
sand.
XII
There came a night when Roger Mantell and I tramped
that garden through hours that seemed never-ending.
The cruel aloofness of the yellow stars and the whispering
Nile 1 And it seemed to me then, as I think to Roger
himself, that the dream of his history was false, that
alone and unfriended man wandered amidst the cold
immensities of space and time. . . . Beside and above us,
against the southwards sky, were the lights of the house
called Daybreak.
To and fro, hour on hour, I walked Roger, and talked
to him of the stars. I remember I stood pointing out
to him Alpha in Centaur when Lesdiguieres, the French
colleague of Adrian, called him from the garden-door.
For Adrian was not there. That night of all nights he
was in Alexandria, and, though we had sent the telegram
for him, would not be back until morning. Lesdi¬
guieres, good and careful, but of the old school and the
DAYBREAK
89
old fashion—it seemed but a moment when I next
heard him calling me. But it must have been
longer, for in the east were the ghost-limnings of the
day.
‘ The child—born alive, yes. A boy, and of the
complications none. But the girl ’—and I knew he
meant the little madame—‘ is exhausted. She will not
see the day, I think. She is calling for you.’
I shall not tell you, my friend, of that so-close room—
the windows Lesdigui£res had closed against the night
miasmas—nor the smells of the antiseptics, nor the stout
French nurse who was presently gone out of the room
with the doctor. I knelt and kissed the hand of the
little madame—so tired, a child herself, lying there,
Roger’s arm under her head. She was sinking very
quickly, dying of exhaustion. But as I rose to go she
whispered ‘ Stay.’
I looked at Roger, but for me he had no eyes. I
turned to the closed window and saw in the sky a pallor
that waned and flushed and spread. And there came in
my mind then, into that silence a bitter memory-—the
words Roger had quoted the day they named their
house.
‘ Until the day break and the shadows flee away ’
Suddenly there was the rustling sound and I looked
round. The little madame had sat urgently up in the
arms of her lover, her eyes shining.
‘ Roger, Roger, look—the hills ! ’
And then upon the window I heard a little tapping. I
wheeled to it and saw the urgent twig beating upon the
pane. It was the first of the Delta winds. Of sudden
9°
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
impulse I undid the catch and flung the window open
to the Nile daybreak. . . .
And then I heard from Roger the little cry of wonder.
For suddenly, borne on that first Nile wind, out of
the dawn the room was flooded with a nameless scent,
and it seemed to me a moment I stood in a great valley,
and up the grey slopes climbed the dawn, and as it
climbed those hill-slopes mantled a misting purple. . . .
A moment the thing was, in a strange, sweet silence,
and then gone. I turned and looked at Roger’s white
face.
‘ My God 1 ’ he whispered. ‘ Did you smell it ?
7/ was heather ! *
We looked at the little madame lying silent in his
arms. I thought her dead, and then, while we stared,
we saw she was asleep.
XIII
And she lived, coming out of that health-giving
sleep with no memory of the morning happenings. In
the spring Roger took her and his son away from Cairo
and Egypt, back to her hills, for he was by then the
great man because of his book. And me she kissed
farewell—me, the dragoman !—and there was a mist in
her clear eyes. . . .
But Adrian when he came that morning: ‘You
saved her life,’ he said to me, while we three stood in
the garden and the little Dawn slept in the room above
the Nile. ‘ It was the Delta morning wind that did it—
the change in the temperature, you know. That fool
Lesdigui£res must have half-suffocated her.’
DAYBREAK
91
Yet until prevail the years that make all things dim
will it seem to Roger and me that once, in an hour of
desperate need, we were granted glimpse of the kindlier,
nameless thing that verily shines and abides behind all
the blind ways and destinies of Nature.
IV
THE EPIC
i
BUT you are of the moderns, my friend, and there¬
fore primitive. In the squatting-places of the dawn-
men also was the telling the story. They honoured the
stylist long before there was the written style. Art was
of art, not of life. But to me the tale without theme,
the poem without purpose—it is salt without meat.
The theme is the man. . . . God mine, as Connan
proved 1
Here, under the night-sky, above the Khalig, where
once Connan sat and planned to snare the immortals—
who may believe that all the tales are told ? Our Cairo—
she pens such plot and theme through every hour as
makes of all recorded tale a ghostly script, a story writ
in water.
Mother of aliens, alien to us all I Yet what city is
like to her ? In the scents and smells of her, her days
and nights, colours and chance voices there are that
wring the heart. Unreasonably. Unforgettably. Her
very street-names cry in our ears like bugles : Ismailia,
El Musky, El Manakh, Maghrabi, Shiekh Rihan. They
ring beyond their meaning. . . .
Surely no language like the English in which to tell
the Cairene tale ! Only this wayward, featureless, father¬
less tongue may sing our Polychromata. Not even the
Arabic, I think, comes near to English for him who
seeks to interpret Cairo’s soul.
As Connan sought to do.
92
THE EPIC
93
ii
He came to Cairo, this Englishman—though I think
he had perhaps the Irish blood—John Connan, early
one July, when there were but few tourists and the
khamsin blew every morning as a furnace back-blows
upon a stoker. I met him outside the Hotel Continental
and he engaged me as his guide because I did not call
him Mister nor say that I would take him to the place
of the genuine antiques.
He was a wit. ‘ Russian ? Good God I Do any
survive outside Dostoievsky ? ’ And he regarded
me with amazement and sadness, then selected one
driver of arabiyeh from the smellsome horde that
surrounded us.
‘ We will go to the Pyramids,’ he said. I assumed
surprise.
‘ Do they exist outside the little Hichens ? ’
Thereafter we became the more friendly, though he
did not cease to yawn. He was a man whose soul and
mind yawned; me he reminded of those bull-men of
Assyria whose faces are curved and cruel, yet stamped
with an awful weariness in their stone. Then I remem¬
bered the frontispiece of a little book.
‘ You are Connan the poet,’ I said. ‘ I read your
poems in Kazan.’
He closed his eyes and mimicked this book-English
of mine—for I have never made to learn your speech
argots—still wearily.
‘ I was Connan the poet. But now I am Connan the
lost. I write no poetry, because there is no poetry left
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
94
in the world. I know, for I have heard men screaming
on wire entanglements, and known a woman who sold
her body and taunted the buyer.’
‘ These things have been,’ I said. ‘ Always they
have been. They are old as the world is old.’
‘ I also am old,’ he said, ‘ and every minute I listen to
moralists—especially moralists out of Dostoievsky—I
age an hour.’
He followed me amidst the Pyramids, Kheops,
Khefren, and Men-kaura, yawning. Only the Sphinx
amused him. He said of it disrespectful things in that
fashion I cannot imitate, with the humorous no-humour
of the Englishman or American, comparing its face
to that of a notable pugilist. The next fortnight I took
him exploring the Cairene bazaars.
And slowly in that fortnight, in the hours we tramped
the Khan Khalil or the Suq el Fahlamin—where the
little artists of Europe pursue the local colour and the
wood-workers of Egypt pursue their art—I came to
know that his indifference was no pose. He was a sick
man. Mentally. He wrote no poetry. He never read
in books. Some thing in life there had been that blinded
the windows of his soul. Perhaps that woman who had
taunted the buyer.
Once he had been a poet of note in your English
world. But that time was long past. He had written
nothing for many years.
You must see him, a bull of a man, this Connan—
great, with the black-blue hair and the blue eyes and
ruddy face. His was no bodily sickness. Never I
learned the story of the wanderings that had brought
THE EPIC
95
him to Cairo or that thing which had shocked the
assurance from his heart. Perhaps the woman I imagined
was not all to blame: such the idea that grew on me.
Yet I liked him. . ; .
The English ‘ like 1 ’ So English a word, the word
of a-little-cold-love !
He had been the ruthless individualist, with a little
courage and a little splendour, one who could sing of
passion but not of pity. And he had found no pity.
He might have been a genius but that he was a brute.
in
And then, towards the end of that fortnight, came
the change upon him. He yawned not so much. He
walked and looked with a stirred interest, a dawning
wonder. All unknown to me, some Cairene colour
there had been, piercing his darkness, and he had
awakened. In a little while I saw in him grow, dimly
yet, a purpose and desire.
For evening after evening he turned, though we
were far in El Katal or El Fostat, and led back to this
place where I had once brought him—here to this table
in front of the cafe of Simon Papadrapoulnakophitos.
Then I understood that the Sharia Khalig had gripped
him also, though I knew not to what ends, and I told
him the history of it—this street young in Cairo, this
street where once was a canal and one may still see the
tide-markings of the waters. Young though it be, it
is somehow Cairo itself, and immemorably ancient, as
though the city had awaited this street since the first of
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
96
its years. If you sit long enough in the Khalig all Cairo
will sometime pass by—boyar and beggar, brown man
and black, and the men of the shades of white, and all
the women of the history of the world, the vile and
the fair and the pitiful. And you will hear the drifts
of all speech and all passion, all hope and all desire if
you sit and listen in the Street of All Egypt, that is older
in soul than the Ramesids and so young that it rides
the electric tram-car. . . .
Perhaps I told him these things, perhaps I told him
more. He listened, but the last night of the fortnight
it was he who talked. And he invented a little child-
game, as I thought it. We would sit and scrutinise the
Khalig’s throngs, looking for the face that symbolised
the Khalig’s—the soul of Cairo herself passing by.
‘ If we sit long enough we may—who knows ?—
look on Cairo herself. Eh, colonel ? And we’ll know
her at once. A face will rise from the crowd-drifts and
haunt us, and be gone in a minute, and we’ll know we’ve
looked on the Khalig. And all our lives we’ll remember
that face.’
I took up the jest and played with it, for I also have
been a poet. ‘ Why a woman ? And what will she
look like ? ’
‘ Could the Khalig or Cairo be anything else but a
woman ? Oh, she’ll look a princess and a dream, fair
and wild and dark and splendid, robed and crowned,
with jewelled feet and jewelled hands. Age-old and very
young, evil and dear and desirable, she’ll go by. . . .
With the pride of all her days and all her blood and all
the colours of Moqattam.’
THE EPIC
97
But there had come on me the irritation. This bull-
man unwearied I found I liked less. The Nietzsche,
the fascist, the bolshevik—how may any one of them
ever reach to the heart of a maid or a sunset ? ‘ Perhaps
like the Christ she will pass, poor and despised, with
hidden face, without splendour or sin, this Cairo’s
soul you dream.’
And I can still hear the roar of his bass-laughter.
IV
For a week or so I did not see him at all. He knew
his Cairo by then, and could heed to himself. But I
had to live and seek out other employers.
Just then came another my way, and for some days
I forgot Connan. He was a so-rich Egyptian millionaire,
my new client, and had made much money putting the
cattle into tins in Argentina. Now he had returned and
built a great house in Heliopolis, and me he chartered
to compile his family tree. At the end of three days I
had proved his descent from Akhnaton, Cleopatra, and
de Lesseps, but he was still unsatisfied. But also he
paid well, so I took no ease, but spent another three
days creating and allying his ancestors to Moses, Moham¬
med, and the Mamelukes. When I had run out of ances¬
tors I remembered Solga Yon, the Tartar who burned
the monks in Kiev. He was my own ancestor, but I
take no pride in him. So I brought him on a raid into
Egypt and married him into the millionaire’s family,
thereby ridding my family history of unpleasantness
and adding fresh valour to the blood that had tinned
the good bullocks of Argentina.
G
98
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
This work kept me away from the Khalig, and to the
cafe of the little Simon I came not. But the evening I
returned again, there, where you now sit, great and black
against the sunset, like an Assyrian bull-god, was
Connan. He was very drunk.
‘ I will have beer,’ I said, ‘ English beer.’
He shook his head, calling me Fedor, for it was still
his jest that I came out of Dostoievsky. ‘ A man who
will drink beer in the Khalig will crack monkey nuts
on Mount Olympus.’
‘ It is a kindlier drink than Greek brandy. I would
drink but little of the good Simon’s cellar, my friend.’
‘ I am very certainly drunk, Fedor. But it’s a cele¬
bration.’ He ordered beer for me. ‘ For I am no longer
homeless. I am a citizen of Cairo, and the rat-like
Simon boards me by the month, brandy and all.’
He had rented a bare room in the Khalig and bought
himself a table and chair and an Indian string-bed.
Simon Papadrapoulnakophitos sent him his meals, and
he spent his days in sleep and his nights in wandering
the streets.
‘ Down in the Gozi quarter, my room, and above
where the metal-smiths chink their tools in early dawn.
High up it is, Colonel, and you can hear the rustle of
Cairo awake and watch the morning come down the
streets like—oh, like Wilde’s girl with silver-sandalled
feet. And the wind comes from the early Nile, across
the Cairene roofs. . . . Must come and see me there.
Sometime. Moralise to your heart’s content, and I’ll
show you the ugliest nigger that ever salaamed outside
a Beardsley grotesque.
THE EPIC
99
‘ A decadent place, the Gozi.
‘ Rented the room from an old Jew who takes the
precaution of being an absentee landlord. The house
has canal tidemarks on it still, is five stories high, and
rocks in the traffic. Like a tomb inside—a greasy tomb
full of the unease of the unquiet dead—what a phrase 1
A warren where pallid things live like worms cut off
from the sunlight. When I am not listening to the
Khalig itself, I lie abed listening to the house up there in
my garret—as God probably lies and listens to the atten¬
uated whisperings of terrestrial life. . . . When you
come, look out for the stairs. Colonel. They’re of stone
and have no banisters, and they sweat in the night-time.’
‘ How long are you to stay there ? ’ I asked.
* Eh ? Till I die or Simon’s cellars empty.’ He
brooded for a little and was not drunk. The Khalig
cried below us. I heard his voice come in the half¬
whisper. ‘. . . Or I turn poet again.’
So, only for a moment, then he moved his glass of
brandy, and laughed his bass-laugh, and was the ruddy
animal.
‘ What a street 1 Even its ugliness is as nowhere else.
Should see the new femme de chambre in the Gozi
house. She came three days ago—brings up my food
from Simon’s waiter and cleans out the room. A
Sudanese I think she is, and as hideous as a harpy.
Kinky and clumsy, with a plague-pitted face; a body
and soul both embryonic. . . . Ugly as sin, though
willing enough. Hangs round unnecessarily, as though
she had something to say and had forgotten the way
to say it.’
IOO
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
‘ A slave, perhaps,’ I said. ‘ There are still slaves.’
‘ Are there ? ’ He had forgotten me again. So intent
did he sit that I turned to look at that which drew his
eyes. But it was only the Khalig. Then he spoke
again in a whisper.
‘ Oh, it’ll come to me yet. Some day it’ll come to
me, and I’ll write it all—stuff that’ll blind and drown
the Georgian poetasters.’
‘ Eh ? ’ I said. ‘ What stuff ? ’
‘God, man, haven’t you eyes? The Khalig—the
Epic of the Khalig ! ’
v
Next night, though I came here to the usual table,
there was no Connan. Nor the night after that, nor the
next. Perhaps he had gone from Cairo, grown wearied,
I thought, or wandered in some other part of our Many-
Coloured. I asked of him from the little Simon. He
still sent meals to the Gozi quarter, but himself had
seen nothing of the Lord.
By this he did not refer to divine revelation, but to
Connan, whom he believed a noble, being English, and
it being a proper thing for Englishmen to be lords.
Just as we of Russia who are neither bolsheviki nor
boyars are incomprehensible to English minds.
But the fourth evening the waiter told me a woman
awaited me with a message. I went down to the Khalig
and the woman who waited came out of shadow and
gave me an envelope. Then I saw her face and knew
she must be the Sudanese slave.
I turned my eyes quickly from that poor, hideous
THE EPIC
ioi
face, so alien and unlovely. She stood silent, looking
at the Khalig, the while I broke open the envelope. It
held an unsigned note.
e Come with the messenger, colonel. I have some¬
thing to show you/
‘ This is from the Khawaja Connan ? ’ I asked, not
looking upon the face I knew was turned towards me.
But she said nothing, and I raised my eyes to her. She
was making motions with her fingers. As she did so,
set in that so-grotesque mask of a face I saw her eyes,
deep and brown and sad, infinitely patient and beautiful
eyes. I made foolish noises before I understood.
She was dumb.
VI
The Sudanese left me to climb alone, and in the dark¬
ness I found that the stairs did verily sweat, as Connan
had made avow. The stairs were without the rail, and
far down, as in a well, was the lamp of the street doorway.
I spread my fingers against the wall and so climbed to
the ultimate attic, where was Connan’s room.
I knocked and went in, and Connan, sitting in his
chair, wheeled round. For a moment I thought him
again drunk. He sat with hair like feathers, and his
ruddy face as one sleepless. He read my thoughts and
laughed aloud, and at that his laughter echoed down and
down into the silence of the house. Not until I heard
the echo had I ever noted how cruel was that laugh
of his.
‘ Drunk as a mujik, Fedor. But not with brandy.
There was never yet man drunk what I’ve been drinking.’
102
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
He waved his hand to the room, and then I saw. It
was littered with the scrawled sheets of paper. On the
table in front of Connan was a disordered pile and on
the string-bed another. He thrust a bundle upon me.
c Sit down, man, sit down and read. Not all of it—
it would take you hours. Only that. Read it.’
I sat on the bed with the pile of pages on my knee,
and for the little while the so-dim light of the oil-lamp
and the English script vexed me; also it was a chance
page, and much had gone before. But almost at
once a line leapt to my eyes and rang in my brain. In a
minute I had forgotten Connan and his room, and was
far on the wings of Connan’s genius.
For I had lied. He was a genius, and I knew that this
century might never see his like. Once I was the
Professor of English Literature, and I have read
much in the language, but nothing to compare with
those sheets that lived and sang in Connan’s garret
of the Gozi.
For it was the song of the Khalig he had written, the
song of all Cairo, the song of Egypt and the world and
the days unnumbered since first the brown Stone Men
drifted their dusk hordes across the Nile. In the Khalig’s
colours and voices he had found the tale of all humanity
and told it as I had never read it told before—not even
in the songs of your Shelley. Of the daedal wars and
love and death and the birth was his tale; sunset and
morning and the travail of heat and the lash ; the
battle-song ringing across the waiting lines at dawn ;
the bridal song and the birthnight agony, and all the
quests and fulfilments of men. All the voices that
THE EPIC
io3
Cairo has ever known cried from his pages—the emir’s
voice and the voice of kings and the love-song of the
slave outside his wattle hut. . . . God mine 1 I can but
remember it now as one remembers the faint chords of
music once heard and lost. . . .
And I sat and read on and on, till presently, out of
the Khalig’s colour and clamour I heard arise a new
note, faint at first, but clearer growing till it dominated.
And I understood with sudden flash of memory of
Connan’s child-game at Simon’s cafe. What I had
read was but background and scene, and this was the
Epic of Cairo’s soul—of her who was life and more
than life. Purpose and Desire and Achievement. Out
of the dreams and changing fantasies she came, veiled
and singing, lonely and alien, she who was love divine
itself—and yet had known no lover. . . .
I knew of a great silence. I had finished the last page.
I looked at Connan, great, a bull-god in the black
shadows from the little lamp. But in the dimness his
eyes were bright-shining.
‘ Well ? ’
‘ You are a genius, friend Connan,’ I said, and could
think of no more.
‘ Genius ? I have achieved the impossible, colonel.’
His voice rang with arrogance. ‘ I’ve done what
every Cairene poet has dreamt of since the days of
Harun—found the Soul of the Khalig, as I swore I’d
do. One by one I draw the veils from her face.’ His
cruel laughter boomed again. ‘ To her first bridal I
bring the Spirit of the Khalig.’
I cannot explain it, but a strange shiver passed through
104
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
me then. I made ready to go. ‘ If you do not rest and
sleep you will have the breakdown.’
But he did not hear me. He had pulled more paper
towards him and had begun to write, and when I said
good night I might have been to him but one of the
murmurs that ever haunted that room.
Then I passed down through the dank darkness,
and so into the midnight Khalig, with the music of
Connan’s lines still ringing in my head. Out in the
night-quietened way it was cool and sweet, and I stopped
and looked up at the stars. * .
And suddenly a great desolation came on me, under
those bright stars. For I could not doubt the truth
of Connan’s vision. Life — beauty and splendour,
blood and strife and colour—and nothing more. Pity
and faith and hope—the foolish whispers drowned in
the roar of the Khalig. g < 4
I remember standing with that foolish, wistful ache
at heart, looking up at the light-glow from Connan’s
room.
VII
From dawn the next day I was followed and haunted
by a premonition—the foolish thought uprising urgent
and crying: This happens, this is Fear. It wheeled
through my brain as I worked in a room of the million¬
aire’s house at Heliopolis. Somehow its concern was
Connan. All day it haunted me, and in the evening
when I returned to change, before taking the millionaire
and his family on a moonlight excursion to Gizeh and
the tombs of their ancestors, I made a determination.
THE EPIC 105
I would go down the Khalig and call at the Gozi
house.
But opposite the little Simon’s I was seen and a letter
brought to me. It had been awaiting me since midday.
I looked at Connan’s writing. ‘ For God’s sake
come to me. I am afraid.’
That shock that follows a premonition justified was
mine. In ten minutes I was in the Gozi, had climbed
the stair, and knocked on Connan’s door.
He bade me come in, but in the dark doorway I stood
hesitant, I remember, till he lit a match, and so the lamp,
and we looked at each other. . . . And I looked upon
the face of a man who had seen terror.
His black-blue hair above the temples was patterned
in crisp-grey. I stared at that hair of his, and it seemed
to me that the markings were in shape like the impress
of fingers. Then I looked round the room. The
papers were gone, but in a corner—there was no fire¬
place—were heaped great piles of charred pages.
‘ Yes, that’s the Epic, that’s the song of Cairo’s own
soul that the world will never hear.’
I turned back to him. He laughed dreadfully and
covered his face with his hands. So doing, his fingers
covered the greyed lines on his hair, and I stood frozen
with understanding.
‘ God mine, but why ? ’
‘ Why ? If I hadn’t burned it, man, hadn’t sent for
you, I’d have gone mad. Do you hear ? ’ He stood
up and his voice rose to the scream. ‘ Mad. Look
at me. . . . God, say it—say I’m not mad 1 . . .’
And then, in a burst of remembered fear and horror,
io6 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
he told me of the happenings of the night and morning.
He had written all through the night, leading the Epic
triumphant to its triumphant conclusion, but with the
coming of dawn he had stopped exhausted. The
lightening of the East roused him a little. He went
to the window, and opened it, and leaned out into the
air. The false dawn had passed from the sky, and it
seemed to him quieter than the first morning of creation.
Down below, far off in the quarter, he heard the tinkling
tools of some Gozi smith. Something else also he
heard, but thought it a delusion, and still leant there,
leaning with closed eyes.
He had thought he heard a footstep. The delusion
persisted. He opened his eyes and turned round. . . .
‘ My God, don’t look at me like that, colonel! She
was real, I tell you. She stood not three feet away
from me, her arms outstretched—Tie Spirit of the
Khalig, the woman I had created ! ’
He covered his face again, then jumped up and raved
at my silence.
‘ She was real, I tell you, real. Veiled and unearthly,
but real. I think I cried out, for I knew I was mad.
And then, my God, she was in my arms, her arms around
my neck, and we kissed each other, and there was such
magic and wonder in the kiss as my Epic had never
known. ... A ghost, a dream, a symbol—she kissed
my lips, colonel!—and called me the one lover for whom
she had waited throughout the ages.’
I tried to laugh at him, but the laughter choked in
my throat. He was staring blindly in front of him, and
suddenly he broke into a whispered chant.
THE EPIC
io7
c Oh my beloved! you for whom I have sought so long ! So
weary and never-ending they've seemed, the years in their suns
and shadows. . . . To-night, at midnight, I come to our bridal.'
11 think I fainted then. When I awoke the Khalig
was stirring below, and I was alone in the room.’
VIII
So, in that early dawn, he had taken the Epic of the
Khalig, the thing of beauty which he had created, and
burned it. Page by page he had burned it, then spent
the rest of the day fighting wave after wave of madness
which rose up out of his heart to engulf him.
But the exhaustion he had held off crept on him now.
He had sat down on the bed, and, while I talked, his
head began to nod in weariness.
I talked on, and he lay back with closed eyes. Of
anything and everything I talked, except poetry and the
Khalig. I talked of autumn and stars and his English
fields, and smell of ploughed lands, and kindly peasant
song. Of all the quiet secure things I talked, and in a
little I looked at him and saw he was asleep.
I spoke on, dropping my voice to the whisper, then
stopped, and tip-toed over to him, and listened to his
breathing. Nature had come to his help and he was safe
from dream and delusion. ... I remember his face turned
from the light, and of how I thought it, in despite its
cruelty and wan strength, the face of a child, pitiful
and uncomprehending. . . .
I closed the door of his room and crept down the
stairs of that unquiet house. The darkness moved as if
io8 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
alive. There was no lamp and I had to feel for each
step. In the entrance doorway, in the radiance of the
street, I stopped and listened, hesitating, then shrugged
at the foolishness which had come upon me also.
For it had seemed to me that I heard, far in the depths
of the house, the sound of a woman weeping, desolately,
as one in despair.
IX
The stuff of dreams that we are ! How might I have
known—I who do not know even yet ?
For next morning Connan was discovered dead in
his room. Somewhere near midnight he had shot him¬
self through the heart with the second chamber of his
revolver.
In the doorway, also shot through the heart, lay the
Sudanese slave. . . .
Accident ? Coincidence ? Corf mine, she ms clad in the
bridal robes of a Cairo maiden !
V
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
i
THAT glow above the Khalig ? It is the moon-rise.
And the so-sudden hush ? Always is there this
hush at moon-rise. I think our Polychromata turns
nightly and looks with startled eyes at that mysterious¬
ness growing to being above the Khalig walls.
A lovers’ night and a lovers’ moon I But no moon
in the world like our Cairo’s. . . . To-night they’ll be
questing the skies from Palais de Kubbah, but perhaps
with me alone, who once watched human faith and hope
and hate battle amidst those crater-mountains three
hundred thousand miles away—battle in the cause
splendid beyond their own guessing in days when the
Great Shadow still lay black across the world—perhaps
with me alone, the spectator, remains the memory vivid
still.
Our Cairene moon—she has had the lovers other than
those who kiss beneath her light I Not least of them
Gellion and Freligrath—Gellion who died of the broken
heart because of her, Freligrath who in his last hour
must have sat at his study window and peered at that
glow in the wonder and the doubt. . . .
n
It was in dim days before the War that Thibaut
Gellion, coming to Cairo, took to the study of the
moon.
109
no
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
He was astronomer with the small private means, the
Gellion, a Frenchman of Frenchmen. To Egypt he
came because of the health of Mme Gellion and because
the clear skies would suit the adventurings of his nights.
In the little while the great telescope brought from the
Ardennes threatened the stars from an observatory
built on the roof of a house in Palais de Kubbah, and
in the less while, absorbed, Gellion had forgotten
madame. He forgot her often. For she said of the
stars that doubtlessly they were leaves in a book of which
k bon Dieu was author . . . but the first page gave her
to yawn. Unlike her was Flore, their daughter, who,
knowing not God out-moded, had a childish passion for
the skies.
He had but few friends in the astronomical world,
the little Gellion. Cantankerous, he was the born
heretic, the champion of the lost cause and the wild
surmise. Yet strict and impartial. His enthusiasm for
his heresy of the moment was but equalled by his severity
in the sifting of evidence that appeared to support that
heresy. As result, he never substantiated the single
belief of importance, nor had ever the illusion of so
doing—until the year before his death.
After three months of the moon-study in Cairo—in
France he had been a Martian, a champion of the good
canals—he entered into correspondence with the Bavarian
herr professor, August Freligrath, and with him, though
for all Germans he had the loathing, became fast friends.
Herr Freligrath was among the greatest of selenographers
and had long been supporter of the heretical belief
that volcanic life was not extinct upon the moon. . . .
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
in
I am the layman, and all the learned journals of Europe
wherein they fight these battles are to me the journals
closed. But of Freligrath’s belief Thibaut Gellion in
Cairo became the supporter enthusiastic. Both had
conviction of the play of gases from the volcano in
Schroter’s Valley (low down there, to the right, above
the moon North Pole), but their evidence and photo¬
graphic records went unaccepted. . . . There was not
enough evidence, nor was it strong enough, and like
Gellion, Freligrath was of himself the severest critic.
In the winter of 1913 the Bavarian professor—he
was a widower—came to Cairo with his son, Friedrich,
a boy of fifteen. Gellion and his guest passed their
days and nights in the Kubbah observatory, and the
kindly Mme Gellion, who had even less respect for
national animosities than she had for stars, took to her
heart the boy Friedrich. He said of the star-study that
it did not interest him, being hurtful to the back of the
neck, and these two were the pagans disrespectful in a
house of sky-worshippers.
He was the boy quick and certain and planful. Upon
sight of Flore and the Nile he loved both, and never
forgot either. Flore was a year younger. Dispossessed
of the observatory, she took Friedrich adventures through
the bazaars, into the forbidden Black Warrens, to the
far Caliphs’ Tombs, to the Ghizeh stones. They were
young and light-hearted enough, yet the children of
scientists both.
‘ When I’m grown up,’ said Flore, who was a dusky
child of the southland French, with the tanned cheeks
and steady eyes even then, ‘ I’ll be as Mme Curie. But
I 12
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
an astronomer. In America, at Mount Wilson obser¬
vatory. And discover many stars.’ She had an after¬
thought. ‘ Then I’ll marry Herr Friedrich, and he can
do my calculations because he’s so good at maths.’
They sat by the Nile, far from Kubbah, while she said
this. It was the March day on the seaward-making
waters, with Bulaq Bridge in the distance and the world
at their feet. Athwart the sunshine spattered and drifted
the occasional rain-shower. Long was Friedrich to
remember Flore sitting there. But he struggled with
the honesty he also possessed.
‘ You’ll be an astronomer, but I—I’ll be an engineer.’
His second love, the Nile, drew him. ‘ I’ll come to
Cairo and build aqueducts and dams to drain and flush
the streets each morning. And make an end of dirt
and disease and cholera in those horrible Black
Warrens.’
She drew a little away from him, being very woman
in spite of her youth and her stars. And if you think
of their love as childish you understand them not at all.
‘ But how can we live at Mount Wilson, then ? ’
He was miserable, but honest still, and you see him,
the tow-headed German boy with the puzzled blue
eyes, looking from Flore to the Nile. He made halting
confession. ‘ I do not know.’
There was a silence wherein his world cracked, then
a movement, and a tanned cheek against his. ‘ Perhaps
Kubbah will do for my telescope.’ She sighed a little,
abandoning Mount Wilson. c And I’ll love to come and
look at your dams.’
‘ And I at your stars,’ he said, and kissed her. A
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
113
shadow fell on them and the sunshine was suddenly
obscured. Flore jumped to her feet.
‘ We’ll have to run. Look at the water glimmering
under Bulaq Bridge. There’s a storm coming down the
Nile.*
in
Six months later, when the War broke out, the
Freligraths were again back in Bavaria. The Gellions
were at Alexandria, having moved there for the hot
weather, and on the first ship that would take him
Thibaut Gellion, patriot, was hasting across the troubled
Mediterranean of those days to the help of his France.
On the day he sailed Flore’s mind was troubled with
a terrible imagining.
‘ My father, if you met Herr Freligrath or—or
Friedrich—what would you do ? ’
‘ Shoot the animal,’ he said, and did not smile.
So dim those days—God mine, we may hardly
believe them I Least of all that insanity of hate and
vituperation which cloaked Europe like the miasma.
None of us escaped its poison. Not even science,
experimental science, most selfless and international of
things, was free. All over the world in the scientific
journals rose the wild accusation and the foolish chal¬
lenge. ... In that lunatic world a German could write
an article, in the responsible science gazette, accusing
the English of mathematical inability or the deliberate
falsifying of their biological experiments—and be
believed ! Of such cases were many, and of their class
were the war-writings of Thibaut Gellion.
H
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
114
He found himself in France too old for soldiering.
While he pestered the ministries for employment he
furnished the French gazettes with articles on the dis¬
honesty and stupidity of the German astronomers. At
the last he even published an attack on Herr Freligrath
as the liar and cheat.
No frontier is barrier to hate, and in Bavaria that
article was read by August Freligrath, friend and
colleague of Liebknecht, one of the two public men of
Germany who had tried to keep the peace.
iv
At length in December of 1918, Thibaut Gellion,
hospital worker, returned to Cairo to find his wife
dead and Flore, up-grown and strange, still holding
the house in Kubbah with the aid of her nurse,
Mathilde.
Almost a physical wreck came back the little Gellion,
and but slowly could his mind turn to the skies and the
forgotten stars. He sat amazed and furious in the
Kubbah house over the terms of peace and the re-admit-
tance of the German animals to the councils of civilisation.
But he might not long resist the lure of his observatory.
Flore, who in the years of his absence had made of herself
the competent selenographer, became again his assistant.
She found her father one strangely altered. There were
long periods when he was the student, quick and sceptical,
but those broken by the dark spells when mind and
soul seemed to forsake his body. It was as though some
shadow wavered across his days—the shadow to her
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
115
incomprehensible. Unanticipated, mysterious, it would
fall and darken even his happiest hour.
Spite all her pity and all her horror, Flore had looked
on the War with clear eyes. It was a stupidity; and
now it was over, and one might hope and dream again.
A week after the return of her father she wrote a letter
to Friedrich Freligrath, sending him greetings and
remembrances. I think her heart went with that letter,
that shy, wistful calling of the boy’s name across the
gulf of four nightmare years.
The letter was never answered.
v
On some infrequent portions of the dark side of the
moon is not always the darkness. In the drunken tilt
and libration of the satellite as it swings around our
world come the occasions when one at the powerful
telescope may glimpse uncharted lands ere these swing
back again into the darkness for long periods.
In survey of that shadow-land Thibaut Gellion
sought to find his old self—as Flore sought forgetfulness
of the wound to her young, proud heart. Hour by hour,
in the full-moon glow, they would chart and photograph
and sketch.
Then presently the happening unexpected—the night
when her father, with amazement in his voice, called
Flore to the telescope, and in the little observatory of
Kubbah were the strained hours of watching and the
hasty erection of camera apparatus. Next night was the
same, the while the telescope eye hung above a minute
n6
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
edge of the lunar disc, where the dazzling whiteness of
day on the moon fell sheerly off into utter darkness and
a snow of stars. On that edge of disc was a crater-
mountain, uncharted and little observed. It tilted
sunwards, and also almost full to the earth, and far
within its towering walls was a drifting smudge like the
smoke from a cigarette.
They were looking across the lifeless wastes at the
first active volcano indisputable upon the moon.
VI
So Gellion was convinced, for, unlike the volcanoes
he had once suspected in Schroter’s Valley, it was
evidently a crater in the eruption violent and continuous.
Yet to the proof of its existence in the astronomical
world were the difficulties most desperate. There was
no measuring its depths of crater-wall in the position
he had seen it, and not for an uncertain period of months
would that tract of the lunar land be again observable.
Lying inside that borderland where were to be con¬
sidered conditions and contingencies such as might
well dishearten even the super-mathematician, the
crater could be but seldom viewed from the earth, and
even then at different angles and power because of the
approach and recession of the moon-floor. In the
most moon observations it would be altogether beyond
telescopic range. . . .
Yet—to prove its existence and prophesy its reappear¬
ance would be to crown his life-work.
I can but glimpse the task enormous of the little
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
ll7
Gellion. Later was I to make of the matter a study
that I might understand a little. But that is still a
little.
Yet, after the stupendous toil of a month, he com¬
pleted the task of compiling a chart of periodicity—
the times when the volcano inside the crater might be
seen at its full and no other explanation of the smudge-
phenomenon be possible.
In that month of intensive calculation and rejection
occurred still the hours when the shadow mysterious
fell upon him and he was approachable by none but
Flore. But such moods grew the rarer with the nearing
of success, and he finished his thesis with the conclusion
that once in every three months the volcan-glow of
the lunar crater would be clear to earthly eyes.
VII
The day after that first momentous observation I had
had with Flore an encounter in the bazaars. It was in
Ramadan, and we were both the strayed and foolish
spectators of a procession Muslim. For the little it
seemed that El Azhar was to cut our throats for reasons
religious, but Flore, white-clad and slim like a boy,
and unafraid, stood smiling and whistling the little tune,
and I spoke in Arabic with the big voice. So they
allowed us to pass and we made acquaintance.
‘ I have to thank you, M. le Colonel/
I made protest. ‘ But it was you who saved us. The
Muslim—they believe a whistling woman to be possessed
of a devil.’
ii8 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
She had the entrancing laughter of the grave-eyed.
‘ So I would have been if they had touched me.’
So I became the occasional visitor at Kubbah, was
once—greatest of favours—allowed to look through
the telescope, and was many times lectured by the little
Gellion on the subject of star-charts and German
iniquity.
Flore had but few friends in Cairo—she had been
too busied with her stars—and I took her to the amuse¬
ment and relaxation she would have denied herself. Then,
for a little, she would forget moon and craters and her
father’s moods and that unanswered letter, and be
merely a girl, with the laughter and the teasing and the
enchantment.
She had the love for music and dancing and the
pretty clothes, and to me, the romantic, there seemed
but one way in which these could ever unite and mingle
with her passion for the stars. Once, in the half-jest,
as we sat in the scraping of violins in a house above the
Nile, I asked her when that would be.
Is there anything quite so tragic as the bitter laughter
of youth ? She turned away, that I might not see her
eyes.
‘ Oh—when the Nile runs back through Bulaq
Bridge 1 ’ she said.
VIII
He was the Frenchman, Gellion. On the eve of
publication of his discovery, which, if verified, would
change the face and nature of the science selenography,
he delayed that publication, remembering his one-time
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
”9
colleague, Freligrath of Bavaria. Forgetful of all that
had passed, he despatched his calculations to Bavaria
and invited verification of the phenomenon before it
was made known to the European societies. The time
for the second full observation of the crater was now
near.
But August Freligrath, who had gone through a
war and two revolutions, who had once rescued his
son with a signed pardon the while that son, young and
a rebel, stood facing a firing-squad, was a changed man
also. He had been shocked and embittered by the
Four Years and their aftermath, and there lingered with
him memory of that article which Gellion had written
in the far days of 1915.
Yet he was honest. When the letter came from Cairo
he was already a sick man dying as result of privations
suffered in political prisons. But he began the study
close and intent of that section of moon-surface where
Gellion believed he had made the epochal discovery.
On the night of the full observation he sat long hours
at his telescope in spite the remonstrances of Friedrich.
And within Gellion’s crater were only the black and
steady shadows of no light. . . .
All next day August Freligrath sat at his desk, writing
as in the fever. A week later, in the German astronomical
journal, appeared under his signature the savagely-satirical
account of the Gellion claim and his own disproval of it.
‘ The romantic French amateur, like the poor, is
always with us. To suggest—as undoubtedly M.
Gellion himself would do were he investigating the
claims of a “ Bosche ”—that he is either liar or cheat
120
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
is possibly to exaggerate. Rather is it a case of mis¬
taken devotion. With so strong a gift for self-deception
and undisciplined enthusiasm, astrology, not astronomy,
would seem to call M. Gellion.’
IX
That journal came to the Gellions already dismayed
and uncomprehending. They also had looked in a crater-
well of blackness and on no smudge of gases from the
volcano they believed existed.
To Flore’s father, in spite his pugnacity, the article
of Freligrath’s was as death-blow. He shrank from it,
very small and pitiful and suddenly aggressive not at all.
I went to see him, ill in bed, and he lay with closed eyes
and moving lips. Within the week he was dead.
He was buried next day, for it was summer, and of
stifling heat. I came back to the little house in Palais de
Kubbah, to one who did not weep but stood with
clenched fists and stormy eyes.
‘ Oh God, those Bosches, those German swine!
Father was right always, and I wrong. . . . Oh, Anton,
my friend, I am so lost. . . .’
And she wept a little then, so proud and angry and
desolate, and of comfort I had none. Instead, my friend,
I stood shamed in front of her—shamed that I was a
man and with all men responsible for those twin deserts
we make and call by the names of war and peace. . . .
I walked home from Palais de Kubbah that evening.
Near Zeitoun the moon came up, and I stopped and
stared at it and lighted my pipe, with about me on the
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
121
white road the shadows like dancing ghosts. And there
came on me with force of vivid revelation a fantastic
thought 
The adventure-soul in man—the sum of its selfless
achievements was as that volcano in the moon, the
flaring light, the beacon in the wastes. And perhaps,
like that volcano, it also was doomed to cease and pass,
was already flickering to extinguishment before vanishing
for ever in some final night of war and hate.
x
Unexpectedly the new development. I went one
night to Palais de Kubbah and found a cold, pale Flore
with eyes of a stranger. She had the story for me.
Friedrich Freligrath was in Cairo. He had called at
the Gellion house and been refused admittance. Then
he had written a letter and enclosed with it a sheet of
paper in another hand.
In hesitant French, set out in the ornate German
script, the letter. ‘ I tried to see you, but the good
Mathilde would not even know me. My dear, it is surely
a mistake. I had no part in the disagreements of my
father and M. Gellion.
‘ A month ago the Egyptian Government set a
European competitive examination for a constructional
engineer. Spite my deplorable youthfulness, I have been
selected to build those aqueducts I promised and which
you said you would love to see. May I come and look
at your stars ? . . .’
His father had been found dead at his study window
122
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
three weeks before, and the sheet of paper enclosed
held the beginnings of a letter found amongst Herr
Freligrath’s papers. It had probably been the last thing
written by the Bavarian astronomer.
I spelt out the German. It was a note addressed to
Thibaut Gellion. . . . They had both, perhaps, been too
hasty. There was a mistake in the calculations; they
had not allowed for. . . .
They had not allowed for death, for there the letter
ended.
XI
Secretly I noted the address of young Freligrath. He
lived in Abbassieh, and next evening I went to see him
and to him explain myself. He sat and stared at me,
then laughed and passed his fingers through the up¬
standing, tow-coloured hair he had retained from
boyhood. He was a personable young man, planful and
eager still, but with the surface flippancy of his generation.
‘ So I am the son of a murderer, eh ? And the little
Flore a chauvinist ? What a world ! Have a drink ? ’
We spoke in the French for a while, for I have little
German. Then we made a discovery. He was the
enthusiast of the language English, as I am. Some far-
uncle of his it was, he told me, who translated your
Tennyson into the so-exquisite German.
Thereafter we spoke English and were presently the
interested acquaintances. I took him with me to see
our Polychromata by night, and here, in the Khalig, in
the seat where you now sit, introduced him to the
little Simon and his so-surprising English beer. And then
^ VOLCANO IN THE MOON
123
I heard details that filled out the troubled Gellion-
Freligrath story.
‘ That letter you speak of—I never saw it. Bavaria
was too busied with bayonets those days to pay much
heed to its mails.’
I told him that in the next moon was another night of
the full observation, and that this time Flore Gellion
was confident of proving the volcano’s existence. He
shook his head.
‘ Her father’s calculations are correct enough—so
far as they go. Either his premises were wrong, or he
forgot some integral fact. I know. Mathematics is
my hobby also, and I spent the voyage from Europe in
checking myfather’s copy of the Gellion periodicity-chart.
It is absolutely correct. She’ll see no volcano.’
‘ But the uncompleted letter of Herr Freligrath ? ’
He shrugged. ‘ I do not know, and what he believed
we will never know. In his later years he worked and
thought like a man half-blinded in a shadow, my father—
the mountain-shadow of the War.’
XII
With but the short space of time for the task Flore,
whatever startled ache of memory Friedrich’s arrival
in Cairo had awakened, flung herself into the checking
of the Gellion calculations. To speak of my meeting
with Freligrath I could find no opportunity.
But I learned that nowhere in the calculations of her
father was a mistake to be found. They must have been
built on the false assumptions basically. Yet that was
124 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
impossible, else how could she have shared the telescopic
illusion ?
The matter of the uncompleted letter of August
Freligrath worried her, though she pretended to scorn
it. What had they not allowed for, the German and her
father ?
Once she and Friedrich met, in the Sharia Kamel,
coming face to face and knowing each other at once. I
heard of the chance meeting from Friedrich, for of it
Flore made no mention.
‘ She looked me through and then passed on.’ He
laughed; laughter was his cloak. But presently he
was angry. ‘ Yet she is Flore Gellion and I Friedrich
Freligrath spite our fathers and all the years of blood and
hate. What have we to do with those weary animosities ?
I tell you there was a half-moment, before she cut me,
when I could have taken her and kissed her, and she
kissed me. I saw it in her eyes. . . * And then the
Shadow.’
He forgot his laughter-cloak, this pleasant young
man, and I saw the Spartacist of Bavaria. ‘ Curse their
mean and dirty little nationalisms, their petty spites and
their petty patriotisms ! Curse the infernal moon and
all its volcanoes ! What have we to do with their
lunatic astronomical past, dead Gellion and dead Freli¬
grath ? ’
‘ Some day, being dead, the future may demand that
of your past,’ I said. But he paid no heed. Instead,
stood staring at the sky in the kind of desperation.
Overhead, like a portent, hung the sickle moon.
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
125
xm
From moon-rise on the calculated night Flore Gellion
sat long hours in the observatory, looking up under
her eye-shades through the light-flooded glass of the
giant lens. She sat in a little saddle below the telescope,
and in the observatory was a dead silence but for the
ticking of the clockwork which synchronised the
movements of the telescope with the minute motion of
the lunar disc. I sat and looked at her, or wandered to
the uncurtained portion of the glass roof and stared up,
foolishly, at the full moon. Sometimes Flore brought
the great camera into play and I helped with the changing
of slides. At moon-set I went down and brought up
the coffee Mathilde had made. Flore had come from the
telescope. She sat at a little table, her hands covering
her eyes.
‘ Only tired, Anton.’ There was the break in her
voice. * And my eyes.’
‘ And the volcano ? ’
‘ Look and see. Quick, for the disc is beginning to
fade.’
Our Cairene moon—she sails the sky a mystery and
wonder to the naked eye. No less the mystery of her
strange lands which start to the being under the telescope.
In a little was the blur gone from my eyes and that
unearthly landscape lay below me, etched in ink, under
its pitiless day.
Upstanding full in the centre of the lens, its outer
sides clothed in the dazzle of sunshine, I looked for the
first time upon the fateful Gellion crater.
126
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
XIV
Here, where I had promised to meet him, Friedrich
was awaiting me the following night, and I made no
greetings but answered the question in his eyes.
‘ There is no volcano. Flore herself could see no
trace of activity, and the photographs show none.’
There came on his face pity and something of dismay.
But I think it was no selfish dismay. ‘ I had hoped after
all. ... I spent the better part of last night, rechecking
the chart and trying to find some omission. If only I
were an astronomer ! . . . Did you look ? ’
‘ I looked. Tundra and rock and blazing daylight
and the mountain-shadows. Shadows like the spattered
drops of night. It is a world of shadow.’
There was silence, and then suddenly his quick
breathing. I looked up and found him staring at me.
‘ My God, of course it is ! ’
‘ It is ? ’
But he was on his feet. ‘ The seasonal orbit-roll 1
Why didn’t they think—but they were blinded in shadows
themselves !... Or did my father guess it before he died?
Eh ? The shadow, man, the mountain-shadow ! ’
And he was gone.
xv
I spent the next three days with a tourist-party down
in Helwan-les-Bains, and came back to Cairo in the
evening and the tiredness. It was late and I was about
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
127
to undress, when I was told of the messenger newly
come for me
I went down and found it the good Mathilde, grum¬
bling and indignant.
‘ You are to come with me, mon colonel. So
mademoiselle will have it.’
I made reflection that youth knows not of tiredness.
‘ She is ill ? ’
The old Frenchwoman was very indignant. ‘ Sick
of the mind, I think,’ and sat opposite me in the taxi
which had brought her, saying nothing more.
She showed me up into that moon-showered obser¬
vatory, with its clocks and instruments, and I knew the
telescope in action by the ceaseless tick. But the saddle-
seat was unoccupied. There were no lights, nothing but
the play of shadows, yet in those shadows the murmur
of voices that puzzled me.
Then the electric light came on, and Flore was in
front of me, and from the seat behind her rose someone
else. She stood as if to conceal this other from my
gaze, but I took her shoulders and put her aside, and
looked.
It was Friedrich Freligrath.
And then, while I stared from the one to the other,
they were as embarrassed children till Flore’s arm was
in mine. She pulled me to the telescope seat and sat
me in it.
‘ Look, colonel.’
It was the same lunar landscape, the same crater into
which I had looked. But in the crater-mouth, in place
of the inked shadow, was a fainter blackness, and
128
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
presently, as I looked, I caught my breath at that
wonderful sight and knew something of awe and fear.
For the shadow moved and changed, and suddenly
lightened and lightened till it was almost a glow, there,
in the wild lands a quarter of a million miles away. I
swung round to look at these two behind me, and then
back again to peer across the gulfs at that amazing
flicker of the gas-clouds.
And then Friedrich’s hand was on my shoulder, and
he was explaining.
‘ It was the shadow of the crater-walls M. Gellion did
not take into account. He found it impossible to measure
the depths of those walls, and then must have forgotten
them as a factor—the gradual encroaching of their
shadow, in a circular tilt, upon the crater itself. But for
that omission the chart of periodicity is correct. The
night you and Flore watched, that volcano was moving
there, but it lay in the shadow of its own crater-walls.
With the passing of the lunar year the acceleration of
the shadow is swifter than the tilt of the moon-floor.
... Oh, I’m an astronomer, colonel 1 I’ve been absorbing
lunar lore through the pores of my skin during the last
seventy hours ! ’
‘ And now— ? ’ I asked, and then stopped, for I
knew.
‘ Friedrich had inspiration when he heard you talk
of the shadows. He went home, estimated a depth of
crater-wall, allowed for the shadow, and amended my
father’s calculations. . . . Oh, the pity of it that they
should never know I Last time Herr Freligrath and my
father held their observations—if they had delayed two
A VOLCANO IN THE MOON
129
days they would have seen the volcano. This time it
was not observable until four days after the originally-
calculated date.’ She was silent, then laughed a little,
but with tears in her eyes and her hands outstretched
to the German enemy, putting the question to which she
should have known the answer. ‘ My dear, you’ve
surpassed us all! How did you do it—you whom
astronomy always so bored ? ’
XVI
I walked home again that night, for it was too late
to find a vehicle and my tiredness was gone. Flore and
Friedrich came part of the way with me, talking of the
Gellion-Freligrath discovery which they were to publish.
At parting they laughed and kissed me, being both
impulsive children of the Frankish blood, and whether
they ever went home that night to further scandalise the
good Mathilde or else walked the roads singing and
planning the storming of the stars, I do not know. But
I remember that as I heard their young voices crying
au revoir down the white moonlight, there came to me
a whimsical memory. Surely the Nile was running
back through Bulaq Bridge this night!
Then I forgot those lovers rediscovered ; they faded
from my mind, cyphers and symbols in a story yet
untold, an adventure uncompleted. For I found myself
on that stretch of Zeitoun road where, but a short
month before, I had stood in silence under the moon,
alone with my vision of human futility.
And then I knew that I had dreamed. While the truth
1
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
130
remains a passion even in the darkened and wounded
mind of a Gellion or Freligrath, while passion itself
flowers forth in a Friedrich a bloom that is other than
desire,there is no night that may ever blind the flame that
lights the wastes.
There are only the shadows that pass.
VI
THE LIFE'AND DEATH OF ELIA
CONSTANTINIDES
i
PULL in the deck-chair here, my friend. So. Now
we can sit and watch our Nile slip past, and pity
the poor Cairenes this sultry noon. . . . Eh, a book even
this holiday jaunt to Barrage! A light one, I trust—a
mystery of pursuit and villain-exposure ? Many such
I myself read, hoping that in one at last will the villain
triumph. . . .
Campanella 1 God mine, it is thirty years since I read
him, since I too walked the City of the Sun. In Russia ;
surely in the dawn of time ! Campanella. . . . Perhaps
they were his streets that Elia glimpsed; perhaps in
those pages long forgotten lies interpretation for another
dreamer who saw the Ghosts of Sunland.
Ghosts ? The unquiet dead who mow and moan
across the astral planes ? Not such were they who
haunted Elia from that first vision on the Asian hill
to the last dark hour of all. Not such are they with
whom—who knows ?—perhaps this hour, the exile
gone home, he walks the City of the Sun !
ii
And his tale : Three years younger than our century,
Elia, born in Samos, of the dark Ionian stock that has
watched the nations pass and repass to the Asian shore,
the processions phantasmagoric, since the days of
131
I32
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Homer. He was an unwanted child, the child indeed
unexpected and inexplicable. His mother, a strange,
irritating woman who all her life had loved solitude,
who would even linger in the night-fields to find that
wonder of silence, made no explanations at his birth, for
she was dead. So also, for the little, it seemed that
Elia would not live.
But live he did, and was normal but for the one ailment
that vexed his early years and the Island doctors. This
was some complication of the blood pressure, resulting
at the irregular intervals in the violent and erratic
functioning of his heart. Here, when in Cairo many
years later, my friend Dr. Adrian tested that heart, and
was by it the much and morbidly intrigued. . . .
From no such intriguement did Constantinides
papakes suffer. The brute farmer, desperately delving
a livelihood from his land, with already the adequate
family, and soured by the loss of his wife, Elia remained
to him the unwanted and mysterious interloper. With
such the atmosphere in that little farm of the Samian
slopes, where from dawn to dusk was the unending toil,
it was miracle that interloper survived childhood.
At the age of five or six he was working on the
vinelands or tending the goats on the hills. At night he
slept in a small room shared by his three brothers. The
bed held but three—a jeering three, and the little Elia’s
couch was a heap of sacking. By dawn he would be
out of doors again, trudging errands to the village or
driving the flock out to the hill-pastures.
And in that environment he grew into a boyhood the
living refutation of all philosophies determinist. He
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
133
had been born with some unquenchable well of friendli¬
ness and wonder—these the gifts that all his life he was
to give the world—in his heart. From the other Elia I
was to know I can build the mind-picture of that Samian
boy of six—slight, and pale, with the shock of the
matted dark hair, the broad brow and girl’s mouth,
the stare of friendly eyes. Not once, I think, in the
desperate wrongs and bullyings of those early years, did
he apprehend cruelty as conscious cruelty; always
puzzlement, never resentment, followed the tears of
pain in those eyes of his. . . . Once, in the moment of
discernment, his father cursed him for those his ‘ fey ’
eyes.
And then came the first of those happenings that
were to interweave throughout his life like the threads
of gold in a cloak of frieze. He was seven years of age,
had spent the day in the vine-plots, and was tramping
home in the sunset. It had been the day of desperate
toil and heat, and his boy’s head and body were alike
the throbbing ache. But something in that sunset he
was so long to remember caught even then his stare of
attention. ‘ It was so quiet I thought it waited for me,’
he was to tell.
So, for a moment, then, the thing unknown since
early childhood, came a sudden sick giddiness. He fell
to his knees and lay against a bank, gasping, the blood
throbbing in his ears. In his pain he gripped his head
with his hands, raised that head a little, and then, seeing,
gave a cry of wonder that he yet heard but as a whisper.
For, below his feet, from that hill that looked out to
the mainland and was called the Asian hill, was a Samos
134
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
and sea other than he had ever known. Where the
village had sprawled a moment before swept up to
sparkling points a great building of glittering walls,
and far in the haze of the sunset in Asia the light struck
fire from another such shining structure. Where had
straggled the rows of vine-poles were marshalled now
against the fervent sky line on line of giant trees, un¬
known. And upon the wind the smell of those trees
came to him, and the smell was as of flowers.
He sat and stared. He was not afraid, only wondering,
and then, for the swift moment of the utter conviction
that shone and passed upon his soul, he knew that he
had seen those trees before, had lain beneath them some
other sunset and watched the great birds go wheeling
into the gloaming of the Asian coast. . . .
There was not a sound but suddenly he became aware
that he was not alone. He turned his head and beside
him saw standing, very still and intent and grave against
the unearthly silence and the horizontal limnings of the
sunset, a naked boy.
So close was he that Elia could see the flex of muscles
in his neck as he moved his head. That head was
crowned with flowers, and, taller than Elia, he stood
with one hand resting manfully on an unclad hip and the
other shading his eyes. There was about him a still
friendliness, a companionship, miraculous when allied
to that strange beauty of sun-painted skin and crowned
valour of head. So, dimly apprehending, the little Elia
gazed at him, the moment of coloured and wonderful
silence.
And then, I think for the first and last time in his
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
i35
life, he knew fear. All the dark tales of the Islands and
the Asian shores, the debased imaginings and supersti¬
tions, clamoured suddenly in his boy-mind. It was a
devil who stood beside him, a phantasma, a ghost. He
crossed himself, tried to cry out, tried to stand up.
And at that the naked lad wheeled round on him with
lowered head and sheen of body, and in the so-doing
became a mist, a nothingness, leaving a scared and
remorseful Greek boy who sat a long hour to stare at the
brown-roofed village and later find his way home
through a palpitating darkness.
in
Nor, strangely, did memory of that fantastic vision
die. It crept with Elia up through the years. Alone
in the darkness, he would lie awake and think of it.
Out in the fields, in the moments of supreme weari¬
ness, bright as ever in remembrance it would return
to him. And once or twice, in moments of vivid
happiness and laughter—for even were these in that
resented childhood of his—it would seem to him that
in a moment he would look again on Sunland, that see
it indeed he did, dimly, through the shaken boughs of
scented trees. . . .
These are his words, and I try to follow, watching
that Greek lad grow up amidst his vines and goats and
the sunsets vision-bringing of the Asian hill. In the
little time, as it seemed, his brothers were men, broad of
shoulder, quarrelsome still, capable of the much wine¬
drinking and the sniggering tale. Elia remained the
136 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
drudge, silenter than when a child, yet quiet, I think,
with a quietness that invited no fresh imposition of
drudgery. From those eyes that his father held ‘ fey *
something of the wonder had perhaps faded and had
come the puzzlement. For all through the years and
that silence of his, the friendliness in him stilled but
unchanged, grew the questioning : Why ?
Drunkenness, blows, cruelty; the seeking of shelter
and stifling sleep when the night was a velvet miracle ;
shame of nakedness ; filth of body when the sea cried
its loveliness through each dawn; fear of solitude ;
patriotism and hate ; unwanted fatherhood ; worship
of an incomprehensible and unlovely God ; toil and toil
from dawn to dusk that toil and toil might be repeated.
. . . The list unending. These things—why were they ?
And here the difference. Not as you and I and the
hundreds other in the young revolt did he question
these things or their like. No hatred and rebellion
moved him. Only the aching wonder, the fantastic
disbelief. . . . Life was not so, could not be so. It was
some trick, some play of shadows, some foolish dream
from which he and the world would presently awake.
And northwards and eastwards throughout those
cumulating years clamoured the great, unmeaning guns
of the European War. Under their clamour two of his
brothers vanished to Athens and the army. The third
betook himself off to the other side of the island as a
fisherman. Was left Elia alone on the little farm with
the dour, greying man who drank the more now and
seldom spoke a word to the son he hated.
Came an autumn with the guns a dying clamour and
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
i37
Elia seventeen years of age. Constantinides papakes
had developed rheumatism and might not move, and
in the week of the great Island fair it was Elia who
loaded the year’s produce into the clumsy waggon and
with that waggon journeyed miles away, to the seaboard
town of Vathy. He had been there but once before,
and that at the age of eight, and in the evening of the
first day of the fair he wandered the streets like a traveller
astounded from the planet Mars. . . .
She beckoned to him from a doorway in a side-street,
and he stopped and stared at her, at her youth, the eyes
unabashed, the painted lips. He knew nothing of
women, had hardly ever seen a girl of his own age.
The most innocent, perhaps, of any in that city, he
looked at her, and then, at sight of that smile, I think his
dark boy’s face lighted and lighted with the friendliness
that was his. He went towards her and she took his
hands and suddenly he found himself trembling on the
verge of speech and wonder unquestioning.
IV
In the dawn he awoke, in the very first of the light,
and the silence that wrapped all Vathy seemed a threaten¬
ing thing in that foetid room. There was splash of early
sun through the grimed window that overlooked the
sea. Slowly, unbelievingly, he turned his eyes from the
room to one who slept beside him. . . .
In sick remembrance he crept out of bed, somehow
crossed the room, seized the window-catch and flung it
open. The sea-air smote his face like a blow. With
i38
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
that current of wind came sudden giddiness, the gripping
at his heart. He gasped, stood swaying and blinking;
gripped the window-ledge. . . .
The unclean room with its peeling walls and gaudy
eikon had vanished. Out from a great embrasure that
was not a window but a wide sweep of loggia battled in
stone he looked upon the sunrise and the sea. Behind
arched a great room with painted ceiling and the flutter
of white draperies around a bed that swung in the
morning air. And beside him, unheeding his nearness,
standing together in the morning swordfall of sunlight,
was the boy of the Asian hill and one other.
The boy of the Asian hill—but a boy no longer.
Straight and golden and splendid in the morning of
manhood he stood, the sea-breeze in his hair, his arm
about his companion. And then, as Elia watched, the
unknown companion turned half-round in that embrace,
glancing up with drowsy eyes into the face of him who
held her. And at sight of her and that look on her face,
at that white radiance of unshielded loveliness and
drowsy tenderness, a moan quivered from the lips of
Elia. He sank to his knees : the picture wavered and
blurred before his eyes. Yet, for a stayed moment, was
one detail vivid—he who had been the boy of the Asian
hill swinging round till he stood plain-seen. . . .
And then Elia laid his face in his hands and wept,
there, in the foetid room of the harlot, with the sea-air
blowing upon him.
For it was his own face he had looked upon.
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
139
v
He went home from Vathy, a boy still living the
memory of a dream. But the shadows came swift across
it. Within a fortnight of his return the conscript officers
came down from Smyrna upon the village, read the long
and puzzling proclamation and marched away Elia and a
score of others for training to fight the Turks.
All over Greece that year swept the wave of jingo
patriotism. Greece was to grow an empire—again ! to
hold again in its length and breadth the ancient coast
which the dreamy lonians had colonised. In the great
camp on Chios it was an exultant and singing conscript
army of which Elia found himself part—Elia with the
friendly, questioning eyes and puzzled brow.
For there were things of that life that wrung his soul
with the pain of their beauty : reveille shrilling down
each clean, sweet morning, the song and laughter and
the beat of many feet upon the march, the stark,
dark hours of sentry-go. These things that lived
though past and dead, shining things. But there were
others.
I think they waked in him his first anger—the
guns, the bayonets, all the clownish apparatus of mass-
murder. Insanities impossible, yet insanities insistent,
the hideous nightmare shadows that darkened sunlight
from march and camp. They could not be, they were
but the horrific imaginings. And yet 
But neither disentanglement of impressions nor
rebellion was he ever to achieve on Chios. For within
six weeks he and the thousands of other conscripts,
i4o THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
long lines of the half-trained columns with shining new
English guns, had landed at Smyrna and were marching
up through Asia Minor to that battle-line that beckoned
and thundered in the east beyond Manissa.
And as they marched ever nearer, and the rattling of
great windows quivered in that remote sky, Elia was
to tell me how the singing presently died. Then the
happening strange enough. For he found that it was he
himself who restarted the singing, and the others who
followed his voice. A strange white happiness came
on him in the midst of that aching horror of surmise
that held all the column.
‘ You see,’ he was to tell me, ‘ I knew it could not be
real. Life could not be as mad as that. There was some¬
thing other than death and mutilation to which we were
marching. There was something splendid behind those
hills.’
And then came down the rains.
Through miles of warm downpour they marched.
But they were never to reach the expected battle-line.
For that afternoon Kemal Pasha smote the flimsy Greek
lines as with a great fist, and the columns of reinforce¬
ments found themselves like bewildered ships breasting
the westward-pouring tides of rout. They halted and
flung up hasty entrenchments throughout the night,
and in the dawn the Anatolians attacked.
He was never to remember that night or its happenings.
Not even of shadow-land was it. But later he was to be
told of it, and the reason of the decoration pinned on his
tunic. For they told him that he sang throughout each
wave of attack, fought with mad fury, took over a sector
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
141
of line when all the officers were dead or deserted, and
held that sector with a few hundred amazed and stimu¬
lated men till they were in danger of being surrounded.
And a madness came on his men as well. For they too
sang throughout those beating hours of attack and
counter-attack, and singing, led by Elia, marched off
through the dusk of next day, an undefeated rearguard.
The Greek army poured towards the sea and Smyrna,
and fighting and retreating behind came Elia and his
company. Communications were lost, and but for the
hasty confirmation of Elia as their commander they had
no instructions. Late the second afternoon, the Turks
close behind, they marched into Smyrna—Smyrna
expectant of massacre and looting, with streets blocked
by terrified crowds pressing down to the ships and safety.
Here and there a fugitive stopped to scream taunts and
execrations at the staggering, blood-weary company
that Elia led.
And then, in that black hour, weak for loss of sleep,
swaying forward under pressure of a will that was not
his own, there happened again to the Samian boy—he
was little more—that thing which he had twice known
since childhood—the gripping sensation about his
heart, the beating of blood in his ears. He reeled but
did not fall; instead, found himself marching on, his
feet passing and repassing without his volition. The
blood-pressure eased from his ears and now there
shrilled and shrilled in them music stirring as a trumpet
heard at night.
No Smyrna street he trod. Instead, was the glassy way,
half-shadowed in sunset, half the strange blaze of light.
142
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
The way thronged and cheering it was, and down the
opening lane of that throng—men and women, flower-
crowned and cheering, golden and kind and glorious—
he was marching. Behind, amidst that voiced exultation,
came on his company—explorers from the outer wastes
of the universe, an expedition returned from the deeds
that men would sing for ever. And beside Elia marched
one whom he knew, one whom he had seen as boy and
youth, one who turned calm, searching eyes to left and
right.
Then, a glimpsed moment, Elia saw for whom he
searched. She stood a little apart, sweet and fair, serene
on her lips the little smile. And there happened in that
visioned wonder the wonderful thing. For across the
ways, not on the glorious being who marched beside
Elia, but on him, himself, fell her eyes, and in their depths
he saw leap swift pity and compassion. . . .
The picture of a moment, all this. His little company
saw Elia’s hand go to his eyes, saw him half halt and turn
back. He was in Smyrna, in the raining darkness.
Behind, on some hill, raved the nearing guns of the
Anatolians.
VI
They took him to Athens, and the story of his fight
in the rear of the retreating army—a story of heroism
in those dark weeks of shame and black defeat—thrilled
through all Greece. He was decorated, confirmed archegos
in the army, discreetly and hastily taught to read and write
—and given the training of new gangs of recruits from
the Peloponnesus.
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
143
These things happened to him without his consent
and barely with his understanding. He found himself
in a new life that included the possession of a man¬
servant and the obligation to drink much wine and seek
amorous adventure. With smiling, puzzled friendliness
he took those gifts in his hands and looked at them.
. . . To train men to kill each other for no need or reason,
to drink when he did not thirst, to seek love of women
as alternate narcotic and stimulant. ... It was the idle
fantasy, and from it the young and popular Captain
Constantinides turned with an impatient sigh to the
upbuilding of that strange, dreaming faith evolved in a
night in Smyrna.
Somewhere, somewhere if he searched, awaited him
his moira, his fortune; somewhere was explanation to
shadow and sun-dream. Somewhere, in the world of
reality, friend and lover, awaited kore loukophotos, the
maid of the dusk. . . .
With that staggering simplicity that was of his soul-
stuff he did the simple and obvious thing. He deserted—
though he never paused to think of it as desertion. He
dismissed his servants, laid aside his uniform, and
clad himself in some other clothes he had bought. Then
he went down to the Piraeus, walked aboard a ship,
and asked for work. By some chance the ship, about to
sail, lacked its full complement of crew, and he was
engaged at once.
He knew nothing of the ship’s destination. Friendly,
obedient, with that still, dark face and the stare of
questioning eyes, he set about learning the tasks of a
common sailor. It was the unseaworthy cargo-boat he
144
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
had boarded, and as it lurched southwards across the
Mediterranean an unwonted contentment came on him.
His search had begun.
He left the boat at Alexandria in the same uncon¬
sidered indifference in which he had boarded it. He
came into Egypt, alien, unafraid, unthinking, still that
wondering peasant boy of the Asian hill. In the railway
station he bought a ticket, found a train leaving for
Cairo, climbed into it, and by the end of the journey
looked out and saw the Pyramids marching up against
the reddened desert of evening.
VII
All that night he wandered Cairo, turning south at
Bab el Hadid, down Clot Bey, and so, going eastward,
till he came to the Khalig. Through the hours, till
after one o’clock in the morning, he stood under an
archway and watched the throngs go by. Some night
of festa it had been, and faces innumerable lifted and
sank continuously from darkness into the glare of the
lamps—faces he searched in a wondering wistfulness.
Then, crossing a deserted Khalig, he set out again on
his nameless search. Down through dark lanes towards
the Suk el Nahassin he must have wandered in those
still hours, under lighted balconies and shuttered
windows, later in the ghostly radiance of flowering
stars, seen far up, as from the bottom of a canyon.
Drifts of singing and drowsy voices came to him,
belated travellers, the fewer and fewer with the wearing
of the night, slipped passed him in that silvered darkness.
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
i45
Once he stood a long while and listened to the baying
of dogs in one of the khans—an eerie crying of desolation
that made him shiver, though he knew not why. And
once he heard a lost child weeping, and sought it through
a maze of alleys, till he lost himself and emerged a
long time afterwards to see the stars paling over
Citadel.
In the silence of our Cairene false dawn he turned back
towards the Khalig. Long lines of donkeys were passing
through it to the early marts. An occasional native,
wrapped and hooded, for the morning was chill, hastened
by. Elia sat down under the archway, waiting for the
day. High up above his head waved already the tentative
banners of the sunlight, but the Khalig itself was still in
shadow.
Perhaps he slept then, for he started to knowledge
of the warmth of day and the sound of approaching
footsteps. He raised his head and looked out, the
sun blinding his eyes a moment. Then he leapt to his
feet.
For the footsteps were those of that girl who had
looked her pity at him across the faery streets of Sunland
Smyrna.
She, and no other. Down the Khalig she came, the
sun a radiance about her head, unveiled, ungarbed,
herself the morning, dreams in her eyes. Lightly she
came, unconscious that look of his that was a prayer.
And then in a moment he had cleared the archway
shadow and stood in front of her. The Khalig flickered
to his gaze, he closed his eyes, reached out and seized
her hands. . . .
K
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
146
There was a startled ejaculation, a tugging, a whimper
of fear. He opened his eyes—and looked down on the
frightened face of the harlot of Vathy.
VIII
He had found his fortune. Only then, I think, did he
see for an instant, and for the first time, his dreams and
puzzlements as but the idle stupidities—awoke to the
world that men called sanity and looked about him—
the impossible, fantastic world that made of his love a
woman of the streets.
They were married within a week at the Greek
Consulate—the frightened, haggard-faced woman and
the Samian boy with the dark, puzzled eyes which she
too thought ‘ fey.’
* But you do not understand,’ she had protested
tearfully. ‘ I am—I am ’
Dazed, aching of heart, he had yet kissed her, with
wonder for her tears and the face marred by things
unspeakable. ‘ You are Kalo whom I love,’ he said,
with a sick amazement at his own words.
Late that night, when they sat alone together, she said
a wonderful thing that yet seemed to stab him to the
heart.
‘ I saw you once again after that morning in Vathy.
In Smyrna, before I came to Egypt. It was the night
the Turks took the city.’
He turned towards her, a lost child, weariness in his
face. ‘ Oh, I am tired.’
And then, at sight of the pity and compassion dawn
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
I47
in her eyes, he stared a moment and knelt weeping
beside her.
IX
With their little store of money they rented a flat of
three rooms in a narrow alley-way off the Khalig. Then
Elia set to the desperate search for work. He laboured
as a road-sweeper, as a water-carrier, finally for a little
while as an extra waiter at the cafe of Simon.
So it was he came into my life the brief while, in the
brief moments in the night-lighted Khalig to stand
beside me and tell me, because of the bond of friendliness
and trust that a chance word had forged, this story of his
fairy hauntings.
Lost, fantastically tragic, perhaps I could have helped
him, perhaps friended him. But to me, who stand aside
and listen and look, he was then only a voice, a tale,
another colour in our city many-coloured. Intrigued,
insincere, I remember that when he had finished I
evolved, for my own amusement, and in the glow self-
commendatory, an explanation airy and poetic.
‘ Perhaps they are of the real world, those your Sun-
Ghosts ’—Ehantasmata toi helioi he had called them—
‘ and you and I and the little Kalo but the vain imaginings,
the dark, sad dreams of the People of the Sun. . . .*
And then I stopped. For he had turned his eyes on
me and behind their puzzled friendliness I had seen that
which shamed me, the glib romantic, to silence.
148
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
x
So I knew him, and he was gone, finding at length
the more permanent work in a Greek printer’s. Long
hours of work they were, from which each night he
would return to Kalo Constantinides and the little flat.
And what doubts of himself and his own persistent
disbelief, what stilled puzzlements each day brought
to his eyes—how shall we know ?
Yet that his impossible simplicity suffered no change.
He rescued from the street and the tormenting of a
gang of urchins a half-crazed negro who had once been
a cook. Him he installed as servant in the tiny flat, and
was repaid by Salih ibn Muslih with the adoration and
the jealous worship—the jealousy that extended even to
Kalo.
But Kalo was happy. Always to her I think Elia
remained the wonderful, inexplicable lover, so that even
when he brought home the crazy negro she protested
with but the half-heart and indifference. Life, life that
had been the long nightmare since she fled from
starvation to the painted houses of Vathy, of Smyrna,
of Cairo—it blossomed now its scented hours, a flower
transplanted.
And Elia ? Even when he held her in his arms did
the look of puzzlement go from his eyes ? He who
knew neither fear nor regret—did her fear of the old
negro seem to him a thing unreal ? Her little human
frailties of temper and desire—were these to him that
shadowing of the sun ?
I do not know, only look back across the years and
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
149
see them there, in those little rooms in that little street,
amongst the neighbours Syrian and Greek, inquisitive
and friendly; Kalo by the open window, her hand to
her eyes, awaiting her Samian boy come up the street
each evening. . . .
That the picture, and for background the twisted
body and crazed mutterings of the negro, ibn Muslih.
XI
Then the happening horrific, of which were never the
full details known. Late afternoon a woman who lived
in the flat below that of Elia and Kalo thought she heard
come from overhead a scream, the sound of scuffling.
She listened, but heard no more, and thought herself
deluded. Then an odd apprehension touched her. She
climbed up to the other flat and knocked at the door.
Thereat was again the stirring, the sound of struggle,
and then scream on scream that was suddenly stayed by
the sound of a blow. . . .
There were men in the building ; they ran and brought
gendarmes, and a great crowd collected. They battered
in the door of the Constantinides flat, and there, amidst
the litter of the struggle, stood in horror till one went
forward and covered that pitiful thing whose singing
they had heard a few hours before.
At that moment a shout arose from the street.
‘ From the back window 1 He escapes from the back
window ! ’
The negro, stained knife in hand, had been seen
descending the fire-escape. He made a crazed gesture
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
150
of defiance and fled up an alley-way of warehouses, the
mob at his heels.
Then, even while those who had broken into the
Constantinides flat stood there in helplessness, they heard
a voice raised in surprise, and turned about. In the
doorway, with friendly, questioning eyes, stood Elia.
They parted and made way for him, and, wondering,
he went forward. . . .
XII
The crowd ran ibn Muslih to earth in a bottle-necked
cul-de-sac. At that neck, worked up into a dervish
rage, he stood and defied them, knife in hand.
Someone flung a stone and the negro reeled under
a shower of missiles which followed that first one.
Three gendarmes ran back for their carbines. And then
the crowd was flung to left and right, and another mad¬
man, Elia Constantinides, with the white face and
blazing eyes, fronted ibn Muslih.
Bleeding, defiant, the negro looked up. Over him
swept the swift change. At sight of Elia he gave a low
wail and covered his face with his hands. The knife
slithered to the ground. Elia crouched like a beast to
spring, and the mob waited with panting breath.
Then the happening inexplicable. Elia was seen to
reel, to grip his head as one in pain, and then walk
forward towards ibn Muslih with outstretched hands.
Behind him they yelled his danger, and at that shout he
wheeled round.
‘ It is only ibn Muslih. My friend, ibn Muslih. . . .*
For a moment amazement held the mob. Then a
ELIA CONSTANTINIDES
151
growl of horror and anger rose. Someone shouted a
foul taunt, a fouler accusation. A stone hurtled through
the air and glanced from Elia’s forehead. But he heeded
it not. Fronting them, there had come on his face a
light unearthly. He flung out a sudden arm and words
incomprehensible as that last cry on the Hill of Crucifixion
rang in the ears of their stayed anger.
‘ Why, it is we—we who are the People of the Sun ! Those
others—look, look, they are hut shadows ! ’
A panting gendarme, newly on the scene, an Egyptian
recruit who knew nothing of the circumstances except
that here was a desperado at bay, knelt down, steadied
his carbine on his knee, and fired. . . . He gave a grunt
of satisfaction.
The mad light went from the eyes of the Greek
desperado. He coughed, looked round with puzzled
gaze, pressed his hand to his chest, and then crumpled
and fell at the feet of the glaring ibn Muslih.
XIII
And that is the tale of Elia Constantinides, whose
name to this day is an abomination and a hateful thing in
the quarters of the Khalig.
But I—I heard of it and wept. What last fantastic
vision did he see when he faced ibn Muslih ? How
transformed, in what strange picture-images did that
last scene rise ? And who are they—what dreams of
life attainable, splendid, unshadowed—those who all
his life haunted him ?
We question and wonder and forget, like men in sleep.
152
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
For not Elia alone, but all men they haunt. Under
many names and through many faiths they pass, immortal,
undying, the shining ghosts we glimpse and remember
in wonder and weeping, as the faces of dead children
are remembered.
VII
COCKCROW
i
EH ? That ? Only the crowing of a Lemnos
rooster 1 From the fowl-run behind this cafe it
comes—the fowl-run of the little Simon.
You had not suspected in him the tastes bucolic ? In
our Cairene evenings I think he wanders out there and
dreams of a farm in Lemnos—he who would die of the
broken heart if he forsook the Khalig’s colours and
call 1 . . .
The challenge absurd in the sunlight—but in the
dawn—how of the haunting it is 1 Haunting, I think,
with memories not our own, the stored race-remem¬
brances innumerable since first the jungle-fowl was
tamed and that challenge of the morning heard in an
Indian hut. What agonies and waitings has it not
ended, what vigils and prayers 1 That drowsy clamour
—surely it is in all memories, vivid and unforgettable,
for at least the one night that would never pass, for at
least the one stretch of dark, still hours !
That morning the many years ago, my friend—think
how it must have shrilled above the hills of Jerusalem 1
ii
If you walk the Shari* Abbassieh to-day you will
see the house of Lucius Ravelston stand shuttered
and dusty in the sunshine, with its little garden
deserted. Last we heard of him, our Ravelston, he was
153
154
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
in Hadramaut, on expedition in search of the sand-cities
of the Shiah. In days when that garden knew him he
would stride to and fro with the hasting guest by his
side, discussing the languages international and the
inhabitability of the moon and the character of Marco
Polo ; of these things he would discuss with the naive
fervour that another devotes to scandal or politics. . . .
The guest would pant beside him for a little, then
give up with a laugh, and sit to watch his host, pipe¬
smoking, trample the flower-beds in the heat of ex¬
position.
More nearly the seven than the six feet in height, a
giant, with the rapt stare of grey eyes under knit brows
and the strange brown hair like silk. He had an athlete’s
body that Phidias would have loved, though of Hellas
the good Aristotle would perhaps have baulked at his
mind.
Indeed, this would have been but reciprocal, for the
good Aristotle he regarded with the utmost detestation.
Giant and genius, he was yet something of a child, and
men dead and dust three thousand years he could love
or detest with as much fervour as though they wrote in
the journals contemporary.
* A snippety surburban mind—the mind of a fossil¬
collecting curate.*
‘ But I have heard of him as the Father of the Sciences,’
I would say, and so bring upon myself recital of Aristo¬
telian fatuities, the while the drowsy duckings would
cease in the native fowl-run beyond the garden, and the
good sun, talked from the sky, went down behind the
Red Hills. . . .
COCKCROir
155
He was the crusader essential, hating all neat, un-
originative minds which look on life with the cold,
conservative calm. Not yet forty years of age, he
had been a surgeon in the Great War, the leader
of a Polar Expedition, the assistant of Knut Hammssen
in that Odyssey through the Gobi Desert. From such
exploits heroic he had settled down in Cairo to study
the scourge of cancer. In laboratory and study they
fight the last crusades.
Research-worker, student, he yet waged the wars
unending in journal and congress and popular press.
Enemies in battalions he loved, though there were
occasions when he would forget the date of a battle,
going into lengthy abstractions as a mystic into a
trance. These were escapes to the super-normal when
some thought would suddenly fructify in his mind
and he would wipe the dust of tragedy and comedy
and friendship from his hands, and retreat to the barred
room and the microscope and the notes and the lamplit
table for days or weeks on end. . . .
My friend, Dr. Adrian the gynaecologist, also knew
him and loved him.
* An anachronism, fifty years behind the times,
Ravelston. In the Huxley-Haeckel tradition. Last of
the warrior-savants. Science has more triumphs and
heroes than ever, but Ravelston’s the last of her cham¬
pions to go out into the arena and defy embattled
Stupidity. Pity. They lent colour to life, the giants.’
‘ They brought fire from heaven, if I remember,’ I
said. ‘ But I do not think he is the last. There will
always be giants.’
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
156
Coming from the house called Daybreak, we were
passing through Abbassieh late in the night, and now
stood looking up at the flare of light from the room
of Ravelston. Adrian laughed.
‘ The Titan, eh ? There was also a vulture in the
story, wasn’t there ? We must warn Lucius ! ’
in
That autumn the giant went to England, to London,
to see to the publication of a book—not the such book
as you might write, my friend, needing no supervision,
but the production marvellous and intricate, with the
diagrams and changing print and the chemic symbols
much strewn to confusion and despair of printer.
Adrian and I made the occasional call at the Abbassieh
house and saw to its ordering. It was a pleasant place,
and we spent hours of ease in the great library, or
drank the good Ravelston’s wine under the lime-trees in
the garden.
Behind he had left, in the rough, the great work on
which he had been engaged since coming to Cairo.
Though only in first draft, Adrian had promised to read
this treatise and contribute to it a preface. He would
groan aloud over caligraphy and contractions, yet read
on in fascination. Once or twice he interviewed
clients of the giant, and of one of those interviews told
me. The man was a Greek, who had suffered from
the internal pain diagnosed by his own doctor as a
cancer tumour. Under treatment of Ravelston he had
been made well and whole again in a month.
COCKCROW
i57
£ A month! Unless it was a mere fluke, colonel,
Ravelston’s in the process of perfecting a treatment for
cancer that’ll wipe it from the face of the earth. . . .
Beyond the dreams of Lister.’
We would smoke and meditate, and discuss the
absent Ravelston. Of his private life we knew
nothing.
‘ He has no private life, no private ambition. He’s
a Republican of your Plato, colonel, a Samurai out of
Wells. . . . Marry ? He’d forget a woman in a fortnight
—unless she developed sarcomata l ’
Ravelston telegraphed the date of his return, and I
found Cairo’s leading gynecologist, with sleeves rolled
up, and the scurry of native servants, flapping the
negligent duster around the library. ‘ “ Prepare the
house,” eh ? Must be bringing a shipload of zoological
specimens.’
It was the afternoon when the boat-train was due from
Alexandria. ‘ It is his jest,’ I said. ‘ Or perhaps he
brings a tourist friend.’
‘ God forbid,’ said Adrian, and then we heard a taxi¬
cab come in the sharia below and the sound of a key
in the door. Then Ravelston’s voice upraised.
* Adrian l Saloney ! . . . Hell, what a dust l ’
We went out and waved to him from the landing.
He stood in the doorway, in the winter sunshine, and
beyond in the street, seemed a fight in progress between
the native porters and the mountains of trunks. These
things, and then 
Simultaneously we saw her. She stood not in the
belt of sunshine, but in the mote-sprayed darkness
i58
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
within the door. I made the bow ineffective and Adrian
the fumblement for the collar of his shirt.
* Pamela—Dr. Adrian and Colonel Anton Saloney.
You people, this is my wife.’
IV
She called him never by his first name, but sometimes
* Ravelston ’ and sometimes ‘ Stealthy Terror *—the
first because it was fashionable so to address a husband,
the second because of some secret jest they shared
together. She ransacked the Abbassieh house from top
to bottom, and had shaken from it such showers of
dust as seemed to warrant the eviction of the Sahara
itself. The roof of one wing was cut away and installed
with special glass that interrupts not the violet ray,
and for this novelty she was the excited child, as indeed
was Ravelston himself.
4 He has sun-bathing on the brain/ said Adrian.
‘ God knows why—unless it’s to admire the pretty
Pamela. . . . Done without it all his life and now he
pretends it’s essential to health, whereas it’s merely a
craze and a fashion.’
‘You do not like Mrs. Ravelston ? ’
‘ I don’t/ he said, with curtness. ‘ He was a Samurai,
and now—Good Lord, look what he’s becoming! ’
And indeed I also, with amazement and pity, watched
the transformation of the giant from research worker
and world enthusiast into lover and follower. He
planned and rode the excursions with her, the while
library and laboratory remained locked and neglected,
COCKCROir
!59
took her to innumerable balls and festas, humoured her
in whims and desires most wayward and foolish. She
declared a passion for the language Russian, and deter¬
mination to learn it, and I was hired to teach such
accent as Ravelston himself possessed not.
She was the pupil impossible—would lie deep in her
chair and yawn, or look from the window and comment
on the passers-by, or remark on my appearance or her
own with startling frankness.
‘ Why don’t you trim that nice brown beard of yours,
colonel ? . . . All right, then. Sorry. Where were
we ? . . . “ Smeyat’cia, posmeyat’cia—to laugh.” . . .
But how can they ? Laughing in Russian must require
a surgical operation. Stealthy Terror would laugh
well in Russian.’ Would drop the book and clasp her
hands about her knees. ‘ Why have you never married,
colonel ? ’
She would smile sleepily because of the sun-bathing,
and stretch like a cat, with the winking of golden eyes.
Beautiful ? But no. She had the nose too short
and the upper lip too long. Yet the charm that is
beyond proportions and measurements—the careless,
insolent mouth that was somehow like the mouth of
Ravelston himself, and eyes very deeply lashed and
wonderful, and the sheen of hair, cut like a boy’s, and
very dark and fine. Beside Ravelston, she looked on
occasion like his son.
She tired very quickly of the Russian, and the lessons
in it ceased. She tired of the sun-bathing, and I think
the first quarrel with Ravelston was over that tiring.
Thereafter she carried it out infrequently, as a boring
160 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
duty. . . . ‘ She would tire of the glories of heaven and
yawn in the faces of the Archangels,’ Adrian would
growl.
Light, irresponsible, blindly selfish, insolently cold
and insolently passionate, she seemed no more fit mate
for Ravelston than a woman of the Warrens. She was
daughter of his publisher, and early on his visit to
London they had made acquaintance. Ravelston I
believed she had married as the new < thrill,’ the new
and unprecedented experience—because of his stature
and his reputation and that otherness of his—the other¬
ness that now, alas, seemed to have vanished. She had
an endless craving for change, for thrill and glitter and
running laughter, for the dance and the perfumes,
the admiration and the adoration. Anything that
savoured of study or the weariness of toil was a horrible
thing. All that was enemy of the good time and the
careless hour was ‘ horrible.’
And yet—I could not dislike her. Perhaps because
of beauty of gesture and attitude, and the ring of her
boy-laughter and that bright scorn she had of things ;
perhaps because once or twice in her I glimpsed a dark
fierceness that might have been her soul, imprisoned
and lost, beneath the shifting play of moods that was
her life.
v
One morning, near five o’clock, coming from an all-
night dance at the Mess Artillery, they overtook Adrian
and myself, and gave us a lift to the house in Abbassieh.
COCKCROW
161
We sat the four of us hunched together in the little car,
and the dawn was in the sky into which we raced.
Pamela looked tired, and as we turned into the garden¬
way of the house I saw that she was asleep. The garden
was dim and scented, and through it the giant carried
her indoors.
And then, suddenly, a cockerel in the native fowl-run
next door flapped and crowed with piercing loudness.
Pamela awoke with a cry of terror, struggled in Ravel-
ston’s arms so that he halted, and then stared from the
one to the other of us in slow realisation. But in her
eyes was still terror.
We laughed at her, and then stood awkward and
embarrassed, for she laid her head against Ravelston’s
shoulder and wept with an intensity in her amazing.
Adrian and I would have gone, but that the giant
motioned to us to follow. In the downstairs room he
switched on the lights, and set Pamela in a chair, and
knelt by her. She stared into his face with the colour
slowly coming back to her own.
And it was then, in that moment of the overstrung,
that she told us.
She had been a child of twelve in the last years of the
War, in the London suburb, in some area unfortunate
traversed again and again by the German air-raiders.
Often was the screaming of sirens and the falling of
bombs, and her child-nerves played on by tt e inexplicable
terrors, her sleep shattered in sudden hutryings to and
fro. . . .
And then came a morning that she might not forget.
There was the usual alarm and she and her brother, a
i6z
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
child of three, were hurried out to hide in a garden-shed,
the safest refuge. The nurse left them there a moment
the while she ran back for clothes, and in that moment,
looking out, Pamela saw the night flash and flash again.
She cried out to the nurse, and then in terror ran after
her in the direction of the house. Half-way across the
garden she heard her brother call her name, and turned,
confused and remembering. In that moment came
catastrophe. She was flung to the ground by the
explosion which wiped out the shed, and the darkness
rained splinters of stone and wood around her. She
picked herself up, bruised and bleeding, and through
the squalling scolding from a near-by chicken-run heard
a cock which crowed unceasingly, unendingly, above the
clamour. . . .
‘ Ravelston, I heard him scream—I know I did—
and I can’t ever forget . . . and that crowing. Oh, I
was a coward, a coward ! I killed him. He had that
lost boy-stare you have when you sit and think. . . .
Oh, beastly coward 1 ’
He laughed at her, the giant. ‘ You could have done
nothing. You’re brave even to remember it. Tired
now. Carry you to bed ? ’
Adrian and I, forgotten, went out into the morning
without the promised refreshments. The laboratory
and all the other windows but for one, far up, shone
dark as dead eyes.
‘ What do you think of her now—and this story ? ’
I said.
‘ Hysteria. Explains a little and doesn’t help a jot.’
We passed out of the range of that lighted window.
COCKCROW 163
‘ Poor Ravelston ! Titan and Pandora—complete with
vulture! *
‘ Eh ? ’ I said, and would have made remarks regarding
the mythology confused, but that he went on :
‘ Um. You didn’t know, of course. There’s cancer
in her family—carcinomata. Hereditary. She doesn’t
know it herself, but Ravelston did when he married
her.’
VI
Here, it seemed to me—I who cannot help finding
story and plot in every life I look on—were elements
enough of drama. Ravelston, with that secret upon him,
with his unsurpassed knowledge of the stages of the
cancer-march, turning in desperation from the rigour
and slowness of patient research to the sun-bathing and
each other of the swift, glib cures ; Pamela, insolent,
selfish, young, looking forward to years of pleasure and
amusement—all that she craved—all unconscious that
the most frightful and agonising of diseases lay like a
beast awaiting her. . . .
But Nature has little stage-sense. She can make of
apparent tragedy the thing ludicrous and meaningless,
of comedy the thing horrifying. So at the house in
Abbas sieh. One morning Pamela complained of un¬
wellness, and the symptoms described to Ravelston.
With fear upon him, he made the no-examination him¬
self, but sent for Adrian. The X-ray apparatus was
brought from the Citadel Hospital, the many photo¬
graphs taken, and Adrian made a searching examination.
164
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Then he went away with the apparatus and in the
evening returned to them.
‘ Mrs. Ravelston has a magnificent constitution.
There is nothing more wrong with her than a passing
ailment.*
* Eh ? * said Ravelston, and leapt from his chair.
Then abruptly he was gone from the room. Adrian
was left alone with Pamela, cigarette-smoking, undis¬
turbed, but sitting considering him, chin in hand.
‘ What was Ravelston fussing about, doctor ? What
did he and you expect ? *
He had never liked her, and it seemed to him then
that the truth might sober her. In a moment he was
telling her of the suspicions and the facts, and in that
moment regretting it.
*. . . Expected Fd develop cancer ? Nice. Married
me knowing it ?—Thought I’d be a convenient subject-
study, I suppose ? I’ll remember that.’
Adrian stared at her in amazed anger. She nodded
to him the insolent dismissal. ‘ That’s all, doctor. You
can send in your bill.’
VII
More and more rapidly with the passing of the weeks,
the lives of these two began to split apart. Ravelston,
relieved, exultant, rid of that immediate personal fear,
turned again to laboratory and desk. He grew again
to the habit of shutting himself up for hours and days
at a stretch, immersed in the matters that to Pamela
were the incomprehensible unpleasantnesses.
COCKCROW'
165
Conscious of his defection from the round of inane
pleasure and sight-seeing, he would on occasion burst
from laboratory or study to the rooms of Pamela, caress
her—and then vanish again in a banging of doors,
leaving, I think, one who sat breathless and with singing
heart. But so only for a moment.
If Adrian might not, I at least would comprehend
something of the startled anger and resentment that
followed his revelation. A freak. . . . A ‘ study.’ . . .
Even with the cooling of first anger—anger that to her
generation is the thing crude and clownish—she forgot
not at all. Indeed, the changed behaviour of Ravelston
was constant reminder. She had expected, I imagine,
that Ravelston would always comport himself as in the
days of the honeymoon, with his work relegated to the
secondary place. She had expected that Prometheus would
continue to bring fire from heaven, but only—in the
phrase of Adrian, who disliked her so—‘ to provide her
with a damn little foot-warmer.’
Instead, there were now the moments, in the chance
meetings and at meal-times, when he stared at her as
though she were a stranger. The ‘ freak ’ had ceased
to be freakish, the ‘ subject ’ had refused to be satisfac¬
torily cancerous, in disobedience to the expectations of
heredity. . . . She had ceased to interest.
So, knowing that she lied, she must have told herself
on occasion, and so, in the mixture of boredom and
pique, and with that urgency to grasp from life all that
it might offer in sensation, she turned to the gaudy glitter
of the European season, to the dancings and the gather-
n gs, the gossipings and philanderings, the motor-
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
166
excursions and the flowering acquaintanceships ; finally,
to the growing amusement and interest in Andreeius
de Bruyn.
VIII
I encountered them one afternoon outside the Con¬
tinental Hotel, where I awaited the client. I had been
dragoman to him a month before and from his car he
nodded to me the mocking salutation.
* Afternoon, St. Peter 1 *
This was his crude jest because of the incident during
that month that would smell none the sweeter for the
telling. There had been keys in the incident, and I had
saved him from the slit throat, and a Muslim woman
from the attentions of one who imagined he was
honouring a ‘ native.’ It was the incident he had done
better to forget.
Before I might reply, she who sat by his side turned
her head, and recognised me, and laughed.
* Hello, colonel! Kak vi pa^hivaiete ? Oh, and—
pocmesyaietc’ie ! ’
To her and the Russian horrible I smiled then, as she
commanded. Perhaps there had been other than an
expression pleased on my face at sight of her with de
Bruyn. She whispered something to him, and they
laughed at me, and the car shot away. . . . De Bruyn !
He was the young American with the much money
and less perception of responsibility to life than possesses
a mayfly. Villains have gone from life as they have
from literature, and perhaps de Bruyn was no more evil
COCKCROW'
167
than was Ravelston, his antitype. Like Pamela, it was
merely that the gross selfishness that is in all of us,
the thing instinctive, had never known repression or
transmutation. Wants and desires were things to be
purchased or cajoled, never to be forgone. In Cairo
he had already organised the orgies and excursions
and fantastic entertainments innumerable. In his hand¬
some face he had eyes which they said could hold and
fascinate any woman. ... To me they were the bright,
shifting eyes of one morally unborn.
That excursion of theirs I witnessed had not been the
first. Alike her insolence and selfishness, and perhaps
also her fearlessness, fascinated de Bruyn. He laid the
cold-blooded siege, without concealment of desire or
intention, as is the fashion of the philanderer modern.
From Pamela Ravelston was at first the amusement, and
then the something else that was still a mocking thing,
that mocked even when at last she found herself in his
arms. . . . Love or hate, Lucius or Andreeius—what did
it matter, so long as boredom was cheated ?
As casually as that, and yet quite irrevocably, she
must have come to her decision and sat down and wrote
the letter which she sent to Ravelston from the Ghezireh
ball.
IX
Early in that morning of her writing, I was walking
home, all of the meditative way from the Kubbah obser¬
vatory. In Abbassieh I saw a light in the room of
Ravelston, and there came on me a sudden resolve. I
i68
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
would acquaint him with the de Bruyn matter, for in
those chill hours it loomed to me as serious.
I went round to the back of the house, through the
garden, and pressed the bell that sounded in his room
alone. Hardly had I ceased but there was the noise of
footsteps, and Ravelston, gigantic, towered in the door¬
way dimness.
‘ Saloney I * He gave a strange laugh. ‘ I thought—
but never mind what I thought. Come in.* He banged
the door behind me and gripped my arm. ‘ Come up
here. I’ve something to show you.*
He led me up the stairs of the back, and then, on the
landing that led to his study, had a new resolve. ‘ Not
here. Further up, first.*
On that other landing he opened a door and switched
on lights and stared round the room. Then laughed
again.
‘ Look, Saloney ! She was here yesterday. Everything
here is hers. There’s not a thing but’s known her touch.
Eh ? And she’s slept in that bed ; I’ve heard her singing
up here, going to bed at midnight. . . . Remember the
way she had of singing—with that little hoarseness ?
And of sitting with clasped knees ? Eh ? ’
He bent down and very gently and deliberately picked
up a chair. And then he went suddenly berserk-mad.
He hurled the chair at the great dressing-glass and
brought it smashing to the floor, and then set about
deliberately wrecking the room. I stood in helplessness
and watched, and when he had finished the place
looked, strewn with torn and trampled draperies, like a
murdered girl. Once I tried to stay him.
COCKCROW
169
‘ But why ? ’
‘ Come away, colonel. Out of it! Unclean, this
place. Come down below and have a drink.’
Below he poured out the whisky and tossed me a
letter. While I read it he walked up and down, his
hands twitching. In face and voice was that flare of
mirth that is the anger of his kind.
‘ Good letter, eh ? “ Not being either a dragoman
or a doctor. I’m tired of Abbassieh ; not being either a
cancerous freak or a beastly disease you’re evidently
tired of me.” Who told her about the cancer ? Never
mind. ... A little adultery for amusement, eh ? Who’s
this de Bruyn ? ’
I told him. ‘ A lover ? A dirty little lover and her
days and nights spent planning dirty little caressings and
kissings . . . while I’ve been working. I’ve been made
fool and cuckold because I could not play—the lap-dog 1
She expected me to give up for her the world, my work,
the things that are me For a little loving and mating ! ’
And suddenly he stopped in front of me and laughed
—the laugh of genuine amusement and relief.
‘ Lord, why didn’t I see ? I’ve been blind as a mole !
Oh, not only to this dirty little intrigue. To fact.
Loving and mating, begetting and desiring—those, or
the life without flambeaux or kindliness, of work un¬
ending, with nothing but the surety that some day the
swamps will be cleared away. . . .’
He was walking to and fro again, but no longer in
anger. Rather was it the exultation.
‘ I know. See it only now. My work’s been going
to pieces. One can’t have both; one must choose.
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
170
Warmth and light and caresses and the safe places—
or loneliness and that vision . .
His eyes were shining now. It was the Ravelston of
the garden-talks, lost and forgotten those many months,
and I thrilled to meeting him again. I stood up and
seized his hand.
‘ You are right. You will press on to the greater work
alone.’
He laughed in ringing confidence, and then dropped
my hand and wheeled to the window like lightning.
Upon the garden lay the dawn. Again shrilled out that
sound that had startled us, and at its repetition he swung
round upon me again, gigantic, with horror on his face.
‘ My God, if she’s scared—alone—with that fool!
. . . What rubbish you’ve been talking, Saloney ! Rub¬
bish 1 There wasn’t a soul to the world till I found
Pam 1 The future’s trust to me. And I neglected and
forgot her. . . . Lost her now, I who could have kept
her mine, could have made her true and clear and fine
as a sword, could have tramped with her desert and
starfield . . . Work ! She was light to my clumsy
groping and I’ve lost her ’
But I had heard another sound through the hushed
morning. I caught his sleeve.
* Listen 1 ’ I said.
x
De Bruyn and Pamela, you must understand, had
planned to arrive at Alexandria, where was de Bruyn’s
yacht, early in the forenoon. They danced till as late
as the three o’clock at the ball on Ghezireh Island
COCKCROW
171
Then Pamela sent off the letter to Ravelston by the
native messenger, and they went out to the car which
had been awaiting them.
De Bruyn came flushed with wine and dancing, and
as he wrapped the rugs about Pamela he was of the over-
affectionate. This she told him, with the usual fearless
insolence, and he sat beside her sulkily, driving out of
Cairo.
But he was the skilled driver, steering with reckless
care, and in the little they were clear even of the grey
mud suburbs and the stars were a splendour above
them. Pamela Ravelston yawned, and sank deep in
rugs, and presently was asleep.
For an hour the great racer fled westwards, along the
Alexandria road. Then de Bruyn suddenly swore,
and the car bumped and shuddered and fell to a crawl.
They were in the midst of a village, shuttered and
sleeping, and the roadway was pitted with uneven holes.
The searchlight rays of the headlamps shook and
made a standstill. For the moment, amongst the narrow
lanes branching from the roadway, the noise of the car
was deafening.
* Curse it. Puncture,’ said de Bruyn. ‘ Stay there,
Pam. No need for you to get down.’
Pamela stirred sleepily and murmured something the
while he got down and fumbled with the lamps. Above
the silent, mud-walled village the sky glimmered
amethyst in the false dawn.
And then from a mud-hut near at hand a child began
to cry, and shrill and clear, awakened by the noise of
the car, misled by the false light in the sky, a cock crew
I72
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
and others throughout the village took up the call till de
Bruyn lifted a dawn-grayed face, and laughed and swore.
‘ Those infernal - birds ! They would waken the
dead. Eh ?J
And as he stared In amazement at one who sat and
wept there in the flickering light, and then sprang to
vivid life, and swore at him and made the unreasonable
demand, he did not know that that clamour about them
had indeed awakened the dead.
XI
c What ? ’ said Ravelston.
But I was looking out of the window as the great car
of de Bruyn halted in front of the house, its noise
deafening. Out of it leapt someone in the whirl of
dance-draperies, someone whose key slotted urgently in
the street-door, who came up the stairs with flying feet.
‘ Ravelston. . . . Old Stealthy Terror. . . . I’ve come
back. . . .’ White-faced, but the scared and shivering
repentant not at all, she stood in front of him. Not
the fear or safety brought her back, but remembrance
of that lover with the lost-boy stare. * Oh, I’ve been
such a fool I Dirty and a coward. . . . My dear, I
forgot! ’
‘ We both forgot,’ he said, and took her in his arms—
those arms in which perhaps she is sleeping to-night in
some desert of the Hadramaut.
But I turned away and went down to the street. As
I opened the door, de Bruyn, starting up his car, glanced
at me with a wry, white smile.
COCKCROW
i73
c Morning, St. Peter/
And then I had the sudden sense of a moment
dramatic, of the story told and retold the many times,
in many ways.
‘ Poor Judas/ I said.
VIII
VERNAL
i
NOON and April and eighty-four in the shade !
Who would dream it, here in the Khalig-el-
Masri, that the Spring is in our northern lands, and the
wind and the rain ? . . . Grey clouds and shadows and
the whoop-whoop-whoop of birds in mist and the
calling of lost sheep. God mine, how to-day the Volga
must be crying through the willows ! There are boat¬
men singing there, and the dance of the waters, and all
the earth coming so green. . . .
And nowhere such foolish ache of heart as mine in
Cairo !
How does it stir us so, here where Spring is a day and
a night, more fugitive than a dream ? No mere season,
surely, but the mood universal that comes every year
to cry of the things undone and unachieved. ... Eh ?
Oh, the lips unkissed and the poems unwritten and the
mountains unsealed and the sins unforgiven and the
hearts unfrozen. . . . We stir from the dreamless sleep of
the day-to-day and wake and stare—even here in Cairo
where the Spring is as a girl who passes with hasting
feet and urgent eyes. ... As once I saw her
pass.
Beat on the table for the little Simon, my friend, and
I—God mine, if only I may forget my Volga and the
willows !—will tell you the story that for me still haunts
each Cairene Spring.
i74
VERNAL
i75
11
In the beginning was God, and He created James
Freeman. And James Freeman served Him all the days
of his life. . . .
This is not the blasphemy. It is paraphrase on the
wording quaint of that English Bible wherein I sought
to master style in the Gymnasium of Kazan. So of
himself always I think believed James Freeman. Long
before we met here in Polychromata, and watched the
little drama unfold to that evening in Spring, was he
assured of the standing with his God. Since childhood
had that standing been certain below his feet.
Of your English sects I know but little, and that
from the Dickens and Trollope and the casual mention
and the tale without footnotes—as told me it was by
Norla and Adrian, and ultimately James Freeman him¬
self. But it seems he was born of parents who early
designed him as priest, and themselves held by the faith
of some church that conforms not to your national
belief. This in the English provincial town where was
smoke and glare of furnaces night and day to furnish
the so-ready similes for the hell of the conforming
wicked.
When I met him he was tall and thick-browed, with
white hair and stooping shoulders and a rasp of voice.
He had the face that seemed to me as the face of a lion—
if one might think of a lion that had forsaken meat for
other food—perhaps because the meat had disagreed
with him. . . .
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
176
But this is the description unfair. He was of type
outside my comprehension and love—surely the priest-
type that goes fast from the world. Since the age of
twenty he had preached and believed the ancient, cruel
, god of sacrifice and supplication and the bitter codes.
By the age of twenty-five he had had the church of his
own, and in the glare of those furnaces, himself already
twisted and bitter and white-earnest, preached salvation
and damnation in name of his God.
And then, in that twenty-fifth year, he had loved and
desired and married.
How comes love to such as those ? I think it moved
and shook him, and perhaps he was the lion he had
forgone, and there were the nights of stars and the scents
of the veldt when the world and its sins fell from him,
and he and his mate were alone and splendid under
splendid skies. . . . Surely, surely. And then 
I think he came out of the love ecstasy suddenly—
looked at himself, and through the strange, distorting
mirrors of his beliefs saw himself one unclean and lustful,
a sinner in the jargon of his creed. Perhaps in a night
his restraints and taboos came back on him again. And
with them must have come that harshness of demeanour
and expression bred of his own repressions and tortured
inhibitions. . . . To one who had known him only as
lover he became the cold and affrighting fanatic.
She must have lived in the hell he was incapable of
imagining, spite his furnaces and sin-creed. Of her
kind there have been the pitiful many. They have
gone uncomplaining and unrecorded to the dead : but
for their slow fate was not Mary Freeman.
VERNAL
i77
I never knew her, and to me she is but a name. But
I think of her as one awakened to wonder and desire,
and then starved. For nearly six years she endured that
life—or had it ceased to be endurance till there came
reawakening and the call of the stars again ? They
had one child, the girl of five, Norla, and perhaps that
tie had held her. They lived in your London by then,
in some suburb where was church of their sect.
And suddenly, without note or notification, she was
gone. The mystery was not a mystery for long. Near
at hand had lived the political, a Russian, an artist, and
he was gone also.
It was Spring, in March, and Freeman met her leaving
by the gate of his house, and singing the little song.
He spoke to her and she said strange words, not looking
at him. ‘ I am going out to seek the Spring.’
He turned and looked after her, I think, in the moment
of astonishment, and watched her out of sight. Nor
did she ever return.
in
She wrote him from the South of France, asking that
she might be divorced and so marry the Russian. Again,
at end of a year, she wrote, the pitiful letter saying that
the Russian was dead. To neither letter was a reply
sent by James Freeman. He brought his sister to rear
his child and barred out into the night that pitiful face
that surely came to haunt him after the second letter.
He became preacher of the savage purity, persecutor
of the poor outcasts of the streets. Throughout the
War he preached a God of Battles tied to the gun-
M
i7B
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
carriages, and in the after-War ecstasy of self-flagellation
your London took him to its heart. He addressed the
great demonstrations, organised the violent crusades.
From denouncing sins of the age in the little, unknown
church he was invited as preacher in your cathedrals
and made the divine doctor and given the great church.
But he was already an old man. The bitterness had
overflowed from his heart to his body. There came on
him the chronic rheumatism and he was ordered to the
sun and the South of France by the so-assiduous doctors.
But to go to the South of France he refused with the
surprising outbreak of violence. He handed over the
great London church to a substitute, and came to Egypt,
to Helwan, and later to Cairo.
With him he brought his daughter Norla.
iv
I may never think of the Spring but I remember
Norla Freeman ; I may never read in your little gazettes
of the modern women who lack the seemly dullness and
virtues but I think of this English girl. For she was
refutation of all the printed spite of us of the superseded
generation. Cold and stark and vivid. . . . And yet the
Spring!
My friend, the Dr. Adrian, took me to the Pension
Avallaire and made the introductions between us. She
sat in the garden, in a dream, when we came upon her.
She had that red hair known to the old painters and it
was the sudden flame of colour against the Pension
greenery.
VERNAL
i79
‘ Miss Freeman, this is Colonel Anton Saloney, of
the Russian White Army and the Republic of Plato.’
This is the good Adrian’s jest, because I am un¬
married and hold belief in men yet upbuilding the
ultimate wise state.
‘ I am from Utopia myself.’ She was tall and slender,
standing so, red-crowned, with serene purity of laughter
in opal eyes. She sighed. ‘ Dr. Adrian will have
explained to you. My father is an invalid and can’t
take me round Cairo. I—’ she considered the garden
‘—sketch. My father insists that someone go with me,
and Dr. Adrian suggested you.’
She had the aloofness that puzzled me, but that later
I was to know so well. Defence it was she had erected
—she who found sunsets of more interest than souls—
against that world of meaningless enthusiasm and
denunciation and hysteria in which she had been reared.
‘ I shall be honoured,’I said, ‘ ifyou think me suitable.’
Then was the sudden smile again and the peep of
friendliness.
‘ I like you. Will you come and talk to my father ? ’
I followed her to where Dr. Freeman sat on the
balcony of his room, with below it the garden of Esbeki-
yeh and the sunshine and the changing colours of our
Cairo. He peered at me from beneath the heavy brows.
He did not offer to shake hands. I was only the drago¬
man.
She turned to leave us, then bent over her father,
adjusting the cushions, and in that so-simple action I
had a sudden glimpse of vivid strength and certitude
of character, the reality like the current below the
i8o THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
surface-serene river. Dr. Freeman looked after her
and then spoke in the pulpit voice.
‘ Dr. Adrian tells me you are reliable, which is not the
case with natives. Are you a gentleman ? *
I made him the bow. ‘ My ancestors have cut throats
for nine centuries.’
He crouched in his chair, the old priest with twinging
bones, humourless and cold, considering me. ‘ You
will be required to select the places fit for Miss Freeman
to visit. I do not wish her to see the filthy and unclean
sights of Cairo. Understand ? Nor to make chance
acquaintances amongst strangers or your friends. You
will remember that you are my employee and hers.’
I, the ex-Professor of English Literature, have with¬
stood much of this, my friend, and also have built my
defence. I take refuge in the irrelevant conjecture and
fantasy. . . . That daughter of his—surely I had seen
her many times before ?
Out in the garden of the Pension she waved me au
revoir. And suddenly I remembered.
One might see her face in the hundred prints and
pictures. For so, the girl unawakened, the Lady of
Serenity, is portrayed on the ikons the Sitt Miriam, the
Virgin Mary of the Coptic Church.
v
You must bear that picture of her, my friend : early
dawn in the northland Spring. Never the bird-song or
the morning wind or the flying clouds yet had she
known; she did not dream that a soul may flame
splendid as never a sunrise.
VERNAL
181
Between us came very quickly the friendship. For
was I not of the Republic of Plato and a dragoman to
the boot ? Not that she made consideration of these
things. Cairo was hers, and all its sights and colours
and sounds, and the funny Russian to make an occasional
jest and order the taxi and row the boat and see to the
provided lunch.
* But you have . . . talent,’ I said, that first morning I
took her to the Gamaliyeh bazaar, and was allowed to
look in her book of sketches. They were the pencillings
and the charcoal work, the tentative touchings and
limnings, and they caught my breath. Yet I had been
to say something else before I looked closer. She knew
it and the smile peeped from her eyes.
* But not “ genius,” Colonel Saloney ? ’
* Some day that will come.*
She meditated a subject, eager and young and alien
and wonderful against that brownness and flame of
savage colour, where the traders come with spices
from the Red Sea lands and Arabia, and the camels
droop in long rows, and the air is sick with the smell
of attar of roses. Then : ‘ If it doesn’t come now, it
never will. . . . That woman there, with the yellow skin
and the jade ear-rings I Do you think she would allow
me ? ’
I looked and saw a woman of the painted streets. ‘ I
think a camelier would be better.*
So one was found and posed and sketched, and she
forgot the woman. Then we were threading the bazaars
to the next view of interest, the next face that caught
attention, the next vivid glimpse of blue mosque against
182
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
burnished sky, those lines and traceries that nowhere
as in Cairo stand and threaten and then faint and crumble
in the yellow haze of sun.
In the next days I took her to the Khan Khalil, to the
restaurant in the Muski, to Old Cairo and the sleeping
walls of Citadel. At Citadel it was, while she sat and
sketched and I smoked my pipe, that she uncovered for
me the little history-chapter of that life that seemed to
run with such swift serenity : the battle with her father
before she could take the drawing lessons, before she
could attend the colleges and lectures. They had
fought this battle to an end, and she had won.
I took her to my Pyramids one morning, when they
stood against the dawn, lonely, and with mournful
beauty, impressive not at all, but infinitely sad. I took
her to the Museum one afternoon, and watched her
stand amidst the bright flight of pigeons like one out
of Plato or an old Greek myth. One afternoon I rowed
her out from the bank of Dubara, down past el Roda,
to a place in the afternoon sunlight where were the
long reeds standing sentinel, and the water of crystal
clarity, and presently the sunset amber upon all Cairo.
‘ It is as though the world were listening,’ she said,
and listened herself, like a child. And then, very far
and remote in that silence, as though we were in the
valley of the Avalon, came on the Nile a nameless under¬
murmur.
‘ What is it, Colonel Anton ? ’
‘ Cairo,’ I said. ‘ Life.’
We turned downstream, past the island, to the right
bank, where the lines of houses amidst the water-lanes
VERNAL
183
lifted in broken serration red against the sunset. I
rowed the boat to the bank, to the shed of the Greek
who leased it—a cousin of the little Simon, and also of
the incredible surname Papadrapoulnakophitos—and
in a little we were walking up from the water-front
through a street that had seemed silent enough three
hours before.
But it was silent no longer, and I suddenly understood,
and hurried the English girl who would have loitered.
Faces everywhere, seeming to have no bodies : faces
in doorways, grey faces in windows, faces in apathetic
groupings from which came the apathetic calling and
twitter. . . .
Women’s faces—there were only women, women of
all ages and surely all nations—painted faces with dead
eyes, and in all that street not a stir or breath of air, but
only the high, unreal voices and the dead laughter that
comes from far back in the throat.
‘ Colonel Anton—all these women—we must come
here again. What is this place ? ’
I looked at her and saw the answer to her own
question dawn in horror in her eyes. I said nothing
and in silence we passed up through that street of shame.
VI
The last day of my engagement by the Dr. Freeman
Norla and I and the sketch-book spent far by the Bab-el-
Futtuh. We returned early to the Muski, to have tea
together as the parting feast, and in the old arabiyeh
would have passed down the street to a restaurant we
184
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
had before used when opposite a new cafe we heard the
sound of a violin. Thereat Norla stopped the arabiyeh
and turned to me with eager eyes.
‘ That music. Colonel Anton—can we go there ? ’
‘ But of course,’ I said, though with secret doubts.
Yet it was the last day and there could come little
harm. . . .
So presently we were seated at a little table, in the
packed restaurant, with the honey-cakes and Norla
pouring tea, and the stout Egyptian women of the freed
harems sitting near us, and the little Jew-men of the
blue serge and yellow boots. Here and there was the
Greek and once I saw an American. The band at the
far end played with raggedness.
‘ I hope that violinist plays again,’ said Norla, and
hardly had she spoken but the tanking of the piano
ceased and the violinist stood up in the little hush.
I recognised him at once, and me also he recognised
and smiled at, with his eyes straying to her who sat
beside me. Then he began to play. As often, he was
now making the improvisations, the little tunes that
presently faded and altered, the ripple and the cadence
and the strum. ... He flung his gifts in our faces with the
same carelessness that he flung himself in the face of
life.
Alexandr Sergeyvich, who called himself Utro—of
the Morning. Thirty years of age, ex-aristo, revolution¬
ist, anarchist. He had shed the name older in Russia
even than mine, had at the age of eighteen written a
successful opera, had in the civil war hoisted the Black
Flag of Anarchy and held a country the size of your
VERNAL
185
Scotland against all comers—White, Green and Red—
for the full three months. Then he had passed to the
Sovyeti, to Lunacharsky and the Department of Educa¬
tion and Culture, and the planning of a gigantic Palace
of Music and the writing of a revolutionary song-cycle.
But his anarchism was of the soul, and there was no
discipline that might tame him. Within two years he
was making his way from Russia while the Cheka
watched the ports for his arrest. He and his violin had
thenceafter wandered most of south Europe before he
came to Cairo and greeted me one day in the Muski. . . .
He had once been a student of mine in the English
lectures at far Kazan.
Black of hair and eyes, with the brown face and the
long, swift smile, and tall and slender. . . . Alexandr of
the Morning, dreamer of dreams, born out of his due
time. . . .
I awoke from reverie and was suddenly conscious
of one who sat beside me, stirred and transformed. I
had glimpse of white face and rapt eyes, and then
followed her look. Alexandr Sergeyvich, his eyes fixed
on our table in a look that shocked me to realisation,
was playing as never before I had heard him
piay.
He was playing my Volga and its willows and the
shouting waters in the sun. Life in the morning he was
playing, life running swift and sweet, and its call ringing
and ringing like far laughter. He was playing that life
that never was but always may be, love young and eternal
and with ecstasy unquenched, love with shining feet
and unbraided hair. . . .
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
186
He had finished and stood beside us. He had come
threading the tables without hesitation or doubt.
c Miss Freeman,’ I said, ‘ this is M. Utro.’
She looked up at him. Dawning in the opal eyes was
that which I had never seen before. They made none of
the conventional greetings, but looked at each other in
white wonder.
‘ It was wonderful,’ she whispered. ‘ I never knew
life could be like that.’
He spoke in a half-whisper also. ‘ Nor did I,’ he
said.
VII
In the week’s time, while I was tramping the Ghizeh
sands or helping the stout lady tourist to surmount the
steps of Kheops’ Pyramid, Alexandr Sergeyvich, a little
worried over the proprieties—he, the leader of the Black
Bands !—was kissing the hands of his Norla in the
garden of the Pension Avallaire.
‘ If you will take me to your father, I will ask of him
the permission.’
‘ Oh, my dear ! . . .’ And then gravity. For they had
met three times already, and after the third meeting he
had written to her. ‘ That letter of yours—about all
the happenings since you were a boy, and—and other
women. . . . What is the past to me ? I am not an
auditor.*
‘ You are divine,’ he said, very humbly. And then,
with his shattering earnestness : ‘ When will you marry
me?’
VERNAL 187
* Whenever you will. But there’s my father—he’s
an invalid still.... And I love him also.’
He had been a gentleman before he was an anarchist.
Which of them was it that kissed her hands then ?
* I shall write to your father and explain every
thing.’
And the next day this he did. He was a Russian of
the Revolution, you will remember. He told Dr. Free¬
man of his love for Norla and his desire to marry her,
he told of whom he was, of his life, his sins, his poverty.
He wrote of those things with the starkness and sim¬
plicity of a Gladkov—that simplicity that leaves even
the liberal of the older generation shocked and agape;
he wrote with that devastating earnestness that was of
his soul-fibre, and made no decorous attempts to
gloss. . . .
To Dr. Freeman, the preacher of the purity crusades
in your London, it must have seemed as though he had
received a letter from an evil fiend. He read it at break¬
fast, in the private room, and Norla was startled at the
pallor on his face. He tried to get up, and made the
unsuccessful attempts, with the rheumatism twinging
his bones.
‘ This Russian anarchist and seducer ’—he glared
across the table with the cruel eyes—‘ how long have
you known him ? *
She herself was to tell me of this conversation, and the
little lie she told then to shield me. ‘ A week. I met
him by chance when I was separated from Colonel
Saloney.’
He raved at her. ‘ You will not see him again, do
i88
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
you hear ? Whatever the loose blood you inherit from
your mother. I’ll see that it’s held in check.’
Once she would have kept a serene silence. But it
was a new Norla whom Alexandr Sergeyvich was
evoking.
* I will see him when I choose.’
He choked, with empurpling face. He made another
effort to rise, then sank back with a groan. Their eyes
met. In the moment, contrite, she was kneeling beside
him.
‘ Daddy, Daddy—I didn’t mean that. . . . Let me
help.’
And this he suffered her. I think he believed he had
won, and that night he wrote to Alexandr Sergeyvich
the letter which I will not quote. There is an obscenity
of suspicion which goes with the dark old sacrifice-
cults.
But while he wrote Norla also was writing. She had
sat a long while in the self-struggle, remembering that
half-promise given to her father. But the old standards
and the old allegiances—they were fading from her like
the garments of gossamer.
Across in the Esbekiyeh Gardens was a dance and
the scraping of violins. A night in mid-March it was,
with the Cairene scents and the Cairene lights. But
in the air a premonition of something else that brought
to her heart the sharp, sweet ache.
Far away, through miles and miles of your English
lanes, the Spring was burgeoning that night.
VERNAL
189
VIII
At two o’clock next day, in response to the letter she
had sent me, I was at the Pension Avallaire, and in the
quarter of an hour, with Dr. Freeman’s consent, we were
driving to the Nile in a taxi.
She had found it urgent to be rowed down to el Roda
again, to make the final reed-sketches.
‘ We will go to the other place for a boat,’ I said,
with troubled remembrance of that street that led to the
wharf of Simon’s cousin.
She shook her head. * I wrote reserving a boat—
to the Papadrapoulnakophitos man.’ She twinkled the
opal eyes. e His name covered three lines on the
envelope.’ But she was grave. ‘ Colonel, I want to
tell you . . .’
And so of the whole business I was told. I sat in
stunned silence, and also a little horror, for am I not
of my generation ? Utro, the Black Anarchist—and
this English girl!
‘ What are you to do ? ’ I asked. We were on the
Nile by then, and I was rowing up-river. She shaded
her eyes with her hand, looking into the heat-haze by
left bank.
She did not answer my question. Suddenly were the
little flags of excitement waving in her cheeks. ‘ Turn
in by that jetty, please.’
Unthinking, I drew up by a line of green timbers.
In a moment someone was in the boat, and it rocking
under his weight. While I stared at Alexandr Sergey-
vich bend to the swift kiss of the English girl I made
190 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
realisation of a story-plot in which I figured as the
false clue.
IX
‘ This is unfair to me, Alexandr Sergeyvich/ I said.
I had rowed them up to the place of reeds, and they
sat opposite me in that still place where once Norla
had listened to the call of Cairo. It was she who
answered.
‘ There is nothing unfair. Colonel Anton. For you
didn’t know. You can tell my father as soon as
we go back. By then Sashka and I will have
decided.’
‘ Sashka ? ’ How had she come to that name already ?
And then I saw on his face, as he looked at her, that
which stilled for ever some of the doubts that had
been on me.
‘ We’ll marry,’ he said, * if you can love such fool as
I. I’ll work myself to a shadow for you. And I know
we will win.’
She trailed her hand in the water, not looking at him,
but across at the sun above Moqattam. ‘ And your
anarchism and your dreams and your faith in freedom—
all these you’ll give up ? ’
He set his face and looked at her not either. ‘ All
these.’
She turned to him very swiftly. * You’ll give up
nothing for me. My dear, do you think I don’t love
you for your dreams as well ? You’ll put them in
music that’ll shake the world yet—and I’ll paint them
in pictures that’ll light it for ever! . . , Remember that
VERNAL
191
thing you played in the Muski Cafe ? We’ll live like
that, you and I, and never grow old ! *
* Listen ! ’ I said.
They turned their faces towards me in surprise.
And then, far away, from some hidden cote, it echoed
down the river again—that calling that Solomon heard
these three thousand years ago in the hills of Palestine
and set for ever in words undying.
A rainbow sprang and vanished against the shores
of el Roda. Trailingly went by a thin curtain of rain.
Half-hidden behind the hills was already the disc of
the sun.
I turned the boat and we drifted down the Nile
between the tinted shores. Never-ceasing in that
sunset silence was the calling of doves. Norla and
Sashka had ceased to whisper, and sat hand in hand.
And then Norla spoke in the serene voice that yet
held a golden tremor.
‘ Colonel Anton, will you go back to the Pension
Avallaire and tell my father not to worry ? I am going
with Sashka.’
I stared in stupefaction. * But you cannot have the
consulate marriage for many days. . . .’
Over Bulaq hung already the evening star. Already
were the ghosts of shadows. And through them,
answer to me, Norla Freeman’s laughter, very low
and tender.
And then, in helplessness, I understood. They
had passed beyond the hold and restraint of me or
anyone. The world and wonder was theirs to-night. . . .
The jetty. I pulled in, and in a moment we were on
192
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
shore, walking up through that street where once I
had hurried Norla. Towards the river was coming an
arabiyeh, and we drew aside to let it pass.
But it did not pass. There came a sudden order in
English, a groan of pain, and Dr. Freeman was in the
street beside us.
x
The false clue, you understand, had not misled him.
From the first he had doubted Norla’s story of the
sudden necessity of the reed-sketch, and with the
passing of the day his doubts had become certainty.
After we had gone from the Pension Avallaire he
had driven to Sashka’s address, and, finding the
Russian so-abominable neither there nor at his cafe,
directed his arabiyeh to the boat-shed of Simon’s
cousin. They had had difficulty in finding the street
of approach, and the anger of his passenger had but
seemed to increase the stupidity of the driver.
Of these things we learnt afterwards, but at the
moment we stood and stared at him in that twilight
street—I, at least, in the consternation. He stood a
moment in silence, leaning on the heavy stick, glaring
from one to the other of us, with for background the
loitering, weary-faced women crowding in doorway
and at window.
‘So you have been for the “final sketch”—you
and the Russian “ gentleman ? ” And who is this ? ’
Norla was white-faced, but she spoke in a voice
as quiet as his. ‘ This is Alexandr Utro, whom I am
going to marry.’
VERNAL
193
f Another Russian “ gentleman ” ? ’ He glared at
her like the beast and then made the foul sneer, standing
there with quivering hand upon his stick.
‘ M’sieu’ ’
Sashka with smouldering eyes confronting him.
And then Dr. Freeman gave evidence of that passion
that seethed in him. He lifted his stick and struck
with it, blindly, and like a savage. . . .
For a moment was a foolish scrimmage in the
street strangely hushed. Then I was holding Dr.
Freeman’s wrist the while he raved at us and in the
eyes of Sashka glowed murder.
£ My God, my God 1 ’
I thought it a cry of pain and released his wrist.
He was staring up the street, and we followed his
gaze. Even the eyes in the dim faces that backgrounded
him turned to follow it. And in the street, though
Dr. Freeman was shivering as one in an ague, was
nothing.
I caught his arm to support him. Some current
seemed to shiver through me. And then I saw.
Down the street, emerged from a middle house,
was coming a woman, fair and young and with red-
coiled hair. With noiseless feet she came, looking
neither to the left nor right, but ahead, with shining
eyes, and for the wonderful moment I could smell
the fragrance of the primrose pinned at her throat.
With hasting feet, clad in the trailing robes, she went
by, down to the shadows and the glow of the Nile,
and as she passed I heard on her lips the murmur of a
little song. . . .
N
i94
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
c Mary ! ’
We lifted Dr. Freeman into the arabiyeh, and then
Norla was shaking my shoulder.
* What was he looking at ? . . . Colonel Anton, you’re
dazed also. What did he see come down the street ? ’
I looked, as one coming out of sleep, at the dimming
Nile, at Sashka, at Norla, at the crowding faces.
‘ I think it was the Spring,’ I said.
XI
I shall not tell you of the talk I had the next evening
with an old priest very broken and frightened, nor
of the little gathering a fortnight later at the Presby¬
terian Church, where Alexandr Sergeyvich Utro was
married by the father of the bride to a Norla who bore
a great bunch of English primroses, and stood with
shining eyes, there, surely at the Gate of Spring. . . .
But within twelve hours of that happening in the
street of shame I had gone back there, making en¬
quiries at the middle house on the right side of the
street. For a little they would give me no answer,
those women with the dead eyes, and I was turning
away, when one in the doorway leaned and whispered
to me.
* Yes, there was one who died in this house yesterday.
In the evening, at sunset.’ There came the high, toneless
laughter from far back in the throat. ‘ An English¬
woman. We called her the Sitt Miriam.’
IX
EAST IS WEST
i
SEE to the dip and play of them above Heliopolis !
They are as birds, despite the good Mogara. . . .
Fighting machines, I think.
Incongruous over Cairo—those the aeroplanes ?
They outrage the atmosphere Eastern ? But why ?
Was not Daedalus of the East—of Crete and Crete
prehellenic at that ? Was it into La Manche so-admired
that the first of the aeronaut martyrs fell ? . . . Yours the
geography unreliable, my friend. The Icarian Sea lies
not in Western Europe !
East is East and West is West—the heresy pitiful,
the concept pre-Copernican. Those fighting birds
of steel: they were made in your England—and
are numbered with symbols evolved in the East
two thousand years ago ; your aeronauts—they
bear on their tunics the winged crests of ancient
Egypt!
For East is West and West is East; they merge K
and flow and are the compass-points of a dream. And
the little jingo men who walk the world, lifting here
the banner Nordic and there the flag Mongolian—in
the white hands that raise the banner is the blood of
cannibals pre-Aryan, the banner itself is a-flutter with
symbols obscene first painted in the jungle-towns of
Cambodia; the little Jap is a White, a mongrel Ainu,
and salutes on his flag the design first graved on the
ancient stones of Cuzco ! . . .
i95
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
196
Then of race or culture-barriers—I would recognise
none ? God mine, I can recognise nothing else!
Like Simon Mogara, like all of us, my life is fenced
about with tribe-taboos, my ears deafened with the
whining rhymes of cultures troglodyte ! Like Simon—
11
But I will tell you of Mogara the while we sit and
watch the aeroplanes. And the haughty tourists that
pass us by this dusty Abbassieh roadway will think us
tramps or Europeans gone native !
Mogara. It is almost four years ago since I first
met him, the one evening in January. I had gone to
live in Heliopolis that I might be near the clients of the
hotels, and that day had spent the many and wearying
hours indoors, in the Cairo Museum, explaining to a
party indifferent and irreverent the unauthentic history
of King Oonas. Returned at sunset, I set out to walk
across the sands towards Helmieh, so that I might
meet the evening wind.
I remember that evening very well. There was a
thin ghostplay of lightning on the horizon and presently
a little wind stirring to whorling puffs the tops of the
sand-hillocks. I had stopped to light my pipe in a
miniature nullah and from that climbed out, and so came
abruptly on Mogara, a silhouette.
‘ Good evening/ I said, in uncertainty.
He also spoke in the accent un-English. ‘ Good
evening/ He wheeled slowly on his heels till almost
he faced me. Then: ‘ Would you mind stepping
EAST IS WEST
I97
aside—or falling flat ? The wind’s just coming behind
you and I’m going to launch her.’
I stepped aside in the hurriedness and some be¬
wilderment. A little film of mist-powder came drifting
over the tundra. Mogara raised his arms and flung
a glittering bird into the air.
For a moment it swayed perilously, as if about to
fall. Then came a little click and sputter, and with the
flapping of great wings the fowl amazing soared up¬
wards. So, for perhaps a hundred yards, it soared, in
a long curve towards Cairo. Then, unaccountably—
for the wings beat quickly as ever—it began to fall,
but backwards, and towards us, like a boomerang.
Mogara ran forward and I followed him. The bird
slipped down into his arms the moment I came to his
side.
* This bird,’ I said, * it is ’
He turned on me a face deep-scowling in thought,
and with a little start I realised that he was no European.
It was a face of the heavy and even bronze, with thin
nose, straight brows and lips, and with the startling
disfigurement of two long-healed scars stamped darkly
from right eye to ear. For a little we looked at each
other, and then he smiled slowly.
‘ It is, God willing, an ornithopter.’
in
I grew to know him well and made occasional visits
to his hut in Zeitoun. It was little more than a hut,
being the American bungalow set in a little garden.
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
198
One half of it he used as workshop and study, the other
he slept in and therein cooked the much of eggs and
rice, being inexpert in the preparations of foods more
ambitious.
* Flying ? There has been no flying yet. Aeroplanes
are not flying machines. They’re structures of cambered
planes juggling with artificially-created currents of air.
The aeroplane is a mistake—no true forerunner of the
flying-machine. Like the pterodactyl, it’s only a
tentative air experiment, destined to die childless. . . .’
‘ And this,’ I would say, pointing to the bird-winged
model, with its little petrol engine and gleam of alumin¬
ium, boat-shaped body, ‘ this ornithopter—presently
it will fly ? ’
He would scowl and laugh at that, then jump to his
feet and stride to the window and watch a flight of
desert-making birds. ‘ Damn it, colonel, it flies already.
You’ve seen it. Only—’ he would peer upwards
unfriendlily at the dots that were birds—‘ it doesn’t
keep flying. There’s something ’
There was something, some law of flight still in¬
soluble, which brought his models to ground after
every first hundred yards or so, albeit their wings still
beat. Model after model he had tried out. In itself
a tremendous achievement, he had solved the initial
difficulty of the ornithopter—the building of wings
strong, yet flexible, capable of the under-sweep and
the poising blow, capable of lifting the machine into
air. But in the air it refused to stop.
He would expound these things to me, the child in
matters aeronautic, with great logic and clarity, and in the
EAST IS WEST
199
swing of exposition would a strange thing occur. His
voice would lose its mechanic staccato and acquire an
alien lilt and rhythm. Once, in the midst of such
converse, he pulled himself up and laughed.
‘ Did you notice that—the half-caste sing-song ?
Funny. And quite ineradicable.’
He had a genuine, impersonal amusement in these
traits betrayed by his own personality. But it was the
same half-sardonic, half-impatient amusement which
personalities ever stirred in him. He had none of the
half-breed’s resentments or enthusiastic championings—
* perhaps because I’m a quarter-breed. The snarling
of the bleached and the coloured go over my head.
People don’t count. Aeronautics is my job.’
He was of the lesser breeds intermingled enough.
His grandfather, a Goanese half-caste, had settled down
in Jaffa after wanderings dim and inexplicable. There,
as an orange merchant, he had flourished, acquired a
Cretan wife, and, in the course of time and nature, a
son. This son, exported to France for education,
married, and returned to Jaffa after several years with a
Parisian lady who took life as a jest and the circles
orange-growing by storm. . . . Such Mogara family
history and social advancement till the appearance of
the little Simon.
His appearance seemed to his father the event retro¬
gressive. The Parisian lady, true to character, found
him an oddity amusing. They had expected a child
who would show no trace of the Goanese grandfather.
Instead, they found themselves parents to an atavistic
little infant who might have been a Hindu undiluted^
200
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
As soon as he was old enough his father, in some
disgust, exiled him to school and university in Lyons,
where colour is little bar and they of the skins dark-
pigmented accounted of God’s creatures.
He was twenty-nine years of age that evening I
encountered him on the Helmieh sands. In that interval
from the Jaffa days he had become the French citizen,
had during the War served in a French air regiment
and acquired a high Legion decoration, had succeeded
to and sold the business orange-exporting on the death
of his father and mother, had travelled to America 
Of those American days I heard only in the dis¬
jointed, sardonic outline. Early after the War, dis¬
satisfied with aeroplanes, he had set about experimenting
with helicopter models, and, abandoning that second
stage, with flexible gliders and winged kites. He might
have remained in France to this day but for the lack of
readily-procurable apparatus in that country immediately
after its exhausting triumph. The experimenter’s needs
drove him to America to work and study.
There he found himself, to his own amusement,
treated as servant and inferior. Even from other
experimenters and aeronauts was the occasional jibe
at the * nigger birdman.’ Settled in the new town built
on the aircraft trade, he went out one night and found
the streets in excitement and turmoil. The usual story
had spread of the negro and white woman. Presently
was the negro, also as usual, dragged out of jail by the
crowd and lynched. Ensued a kind of anti-colour
pogrom. . . .
Mogara brought out of that turmoil a scarred face
EAST IS WEST
201
and a week in hospital. A citizen of France, apologies
were made through stiff consular representations and
an indemnity offered. ... I can see the light of amuse¬
ment flicker on that brooding brown face as he lay in
hospital and heard of the indemnity.
For he was as completely indifferent to revenge as to
reconciliation. Mankind I think he envisaged largely
as straying packs of parti-coloured puppies, baying
unaccountably at the moon and indulging in dog-
squabbles equally unaccountable. Amidst all this
canine pride and uproar his the ‘ job ’ to find a corner
obscure and pacific where he could build an ornithopter
that flew. . . .
I remembei: making the interjection.
‘ But for whom, then, do you work—for whom add
to the sum of knowledge ? If such is humanity, why
seek to build this flying machine ? ’
‘ For my own private pride, I suppose. . . . To visit
the moon and see what all the howling’s about.’ He
shrugged. ‘ How should I know ? . . . Anyhow, I
decided against returning even to France, and came to
Egypt instead, where there are other browny men in
charge. Being the shade they are I calculated they’d
probably neither hinder nor mutilate me nor look
askance at my feet.’
* Your feet ? ’
He grinned, the scars creasing in dark serrations on
his cheek. ‘ Yes. You see, I have the half-caste’s
passion for yellow boots.’
So, with the jest indifferent, to switch to other matters.
I remember he told me these things at his garden
202
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
entrance on the Zeitoun road one evening, the while
we smoked the parting pipe. When he had ceased
speaking there was a little clatter and cloud of white dust
far up the road towards Cairo, and I watched it idly.
They were the man and girl on horseback, and as
they cantered near I drew the breath of admiration.
The young man, of the thirty-forties, with the soldier’s
shoulders, the cold, narrow face with clean-cut features,
the cold stare of blue eyes. But the girl—like her
companion English, like him result of that fineness of
breeding and the much nursery-scrubbing that has
made the English aristocrat. And the something—as
so often in the feminine of that type, and never in the
masculine—it had brought to flower in her : beauty
indefinable as the grace of a lily. Very young, bare¬
headed with the shock of the tidily-untidy hair, slim
and upright and with easy hands she rode, head a little
thrown back. As she went by her eyes passed over us
in the momentary scrutiny, distant, indifferent, impersonal
—and bored.
So they passed into the evening, and I, who love
types and so seldom find them, had a sting of gratifica¬
tion. These the English, the Aryans ultra-bred, dominant,
blood-proud, apart. How apart from all the lesser
breeds, they of the pigmentation, ‘ without the Law ! ’
I glanced at Mogara in the little shame for my own
thoughts. And then I saw that he had scarcely noted
their passing. He was staring up into the sky at the
inevitable flight of sunset-winging birds.
EAST IS WEST
203
IV
All next day he worked on a new modification of the
keel of his model, and about five of the afternoon went
out across the ranges beyond Helmieh to test it anew.
For a little, near the original mound where I had found
him, perhaps, he stood awaiting the coming of the
wind. Deep in thought and the calculation of mathe¬
matical minutke he saw the sand-heaps at length begin
to puff, and, setting a dial, launched the bird-machine
into the air. It beat upwards with stiffer motion than
formerly. A clatter of stones behind him drew his
scowling attention. He glanced over his shoulder.
Not a dozen feet away a bare-headed girl sat on horse¬
back, her eyes fixed on the flight of the ornithopter.
So only for the moment he noted, then his attention
also went back to the model. It flew perhaps two yards
further than usual, then commenced its usual boomerang
descent.
He swore, ran forward and caught it, and heard
behind him an amazed intake of breath. The girl had
dismounted, and as he turned with the bird machine in
his arms her eyes were very bright with excitement.
* Oh . . . sorry if I’m spying. But that was wonder¬
ful! ’
‘ It was rotten,’ he said, neither graciously nor un¬
graciously, but with complete indifference to either her
apologies or applause. Undiscouraged, she came
nearer, her horse following with downbent, snuffling
head.
‘ But why ? It’s an ornithopter, and it flew. Real
204
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
flying, not just aeroplane gliding. . . . And my brother
argues we’ll never have ornithopters—never anything
more than a lop-sided helicopter or so. Wish he could
have seen that 1 It wasn’t a secret test, was it ? ’
He had been aware of a slight surprise at meeting
someone who knew the difference between an ornithopter
and a helicopter. Now, still with absent-minded scowl,
but half-heeding her presence, he answered the question.
‘ No. Why should it be ? ’
‘ I thought all experimenters did these things secretly
and then pestered Governments.’ This with flippancy,
but then the return to excitement. * I say 1 Most
thrilling thing I’ve seen in this boring country—most
thrilling thing I’ve ever seen, I think. . . . Do you know
the old Frost ornithopter in the London Science ? Is
yours on the same principle ? ’
‘ If you’ve seen the Frost—’ He was launched more
successfully than ever had been his model. He set the
bird-machine on the ground, demonstrating its build
and principal departures from the Frost model. He
brought out a pencil and scrap of paper and dashed off
lines of the calculations dizzying and algebraic.
The girl remained undizzied. Still holding the bridle
she knelt down in the interest, and the horse extended
over her shoulder the inquisitive head. . . . They must
have made an amusing grouping there on the sands.
She had flown many times in aeroplanes, had the
English Aero Club’s pilot certificate, had, like himself,
the obsession that the aeroplane was traitor to aviation
and that Romance which had lured men to the conquest
of the skies since the days of Cretan Daedalus.
EAST IS WEST
205
‘ It wasn’t for the sake of a world of super-engined
kites that Icarus and Egremont and Lilienthal died. But
real flying. . . . And you won’t sell your model to any
Government, or make it a war machine ? ’
* Good Lord, no.’
‘ Good man 1 *
He saw a hand stretched out towards him, and stared
at it. His thoughts came hurtling down from rarefied
heights like an aeroplane disabled. He found himself
kneeling side by side not with a pleasant voice and a
disembodied enthusiasm, but an English girl. . . .
That stare and silence of his drew her eyes. So, for a
little, they looked at each other in mutual wonder : the
girl, white and gold, radiant and aloof even in excite¬
ment ; Mogara, lithe and slight, with the slightness
un-European, the dark, scarred face, the scowl of thin-
pencilled brows. . . . He saw the girl’s eyes widen, and
at that, with a sardonic little laugh, he was on his
feet.
‘ Yes, I’m a native. But you’re quite safe.’
And then, dimly, indifferently, he realised that he had
made a mistake. The girl’s eyes looked through him
as she too rose to her feet.
He had ceased to exist.
V
At nine o’clock that evening passing down the Sharia
Kamil, my eyes fell on the small car unmistakable. It
was a yellow runabout, the property of my friend
Adrian, and it stood in front of a little open-air caf6
2o6
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
with many tables. And at one of those tables, deep
in the usual self-game with dominoes, sat Adrian
himself.
This is to him relief and narcotic in one, this game
played with great seriousness. To me recurred the won¬
der whimsical: Is he ever victor—and over whom ?
. . . He looked up and saw me and swept aside the
pieces.
‘ Hello, colonel. Haven’t seen you for ages. Sit
down and gossip. How’s Heliopolis ? ’
‘ It is the dry place,’ I said, and at that he ordered me
wine. Then :
‘ Seen anything of the Melforts there ? Cousins of
mine—air-people, newly come from Malta ? ’
‘ I did not know you possessed cousins,’ I said.
He grinned and yawned, having passed the toilsome
day.
‘ Knowledge that was never kept from me, unfortu¬
nately. I was forced to punch the aristocratic Melfort
nose quite early in my career.’ He was reminiscent.
‘ And was getting as good as I gave till Joyce, in a pina¬
fore and a white wrath, separated us with a shower of
stones and pelted us impartially. . . . Murderous little
pacifist.’
He expounded the brief and irreverent family history
the while I drank the wine. These Melforts were remote
cousins only : the grandmother of Adrian had been
sister of the grandfather of Reginald and Joyce Melfort.
‘ But we come from the same county town, you see,
and there’s been a kind of family friendship—^patronising
on both sides—kept going for three generations. The
EAST IS WEST
207
Adrians have been the medical and impoverished branch ;
they’ve assisted new Melforts into the world and signed
their certificates of departure for the last seventy years
or so. Know more of Melfort history than the Melforts
themselves, who’ve only passed on the high lights to
their descendants.’ He chuckled as at some secret jest.
c Grandfather Melfort went out to Jamaica, raised rum
and a great deal of money, and returned to perpetuate a
military and gentlemanly stock. Put his son into the
army, and grandson Reginald followed in his father’s
footsteps. ... It was he whose nose I punched.
‘ Not a bad chap really, I suppose. Only—he never
had a chance. Born in India and reared on the usual
pap. A Nordic snub-man with highly-scrubbed virtues
and a disposition to pronounce what as hwaw. Trans¬
ferred to the Air Force during the War and is a squadron
leader or something now. Has taken the latest wonder
of science and made of it a means for forming fours
in the air and inspecting engines to see if they’re properly
shaved. . . . That kind.’
He broke off, as in conversation he so often did, to
refute his own exaggerations. c No. That’s damned
unfair. A very good airman, I believe. Straight as a
die, efficient, proud of the service, an excellent example
of the breeding of an aristocrat in three generations.
. . . Let’s be unfair. Impartiality’s too much of a strain.
He has less imagination than a wombat, and the colour,
caste and class prejudices of a taboo-ridden Brahmin.
In his secret soul he believes the Anglo-Saxon sahib
evolved from a special type of ape which always cleaned
its teeth in the morning and even in the early Miocene
208
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
wore badges of rank on its fur. . . . I’ve been invited to
dinner in ten days’ time and if Reginald and I don’t
quarrel and bandy authorities and sneers, it’ll be the
first occasion since the nose-punching episode. Joyce’ll
better stand by with an armful of stones.’
* She is the sister ? *
‘ Occasionally. When she remembers. Keeps house
nominally for Reginald: keeps him on tenterhooks in
reality. Modern and unmodern. A romantic’s idealisa¬
tion of English womanhood in appearance—she’d
delight your eyes, Saloney—and in mind a Gypsy
adventurer. Flies aeroplanes and innumerable outrageous
opinions, waxes hot over all kinds of unexpected things
and cold over everything which her appearance warrants.
... By the seven gates of Egypt—Hi 1 ’
He leapt from his chair with beaming face and a
startling shout, and seized the arm of a passer-by—the
man bareheaded, absorbed, chest-clasping the large
and ungainly parcel. Thus assaulted, the stranger
dropped the parcel—which split, grocery-disgorging—
and turned scowlingly upon Adrian. Almost im¬
mediately vanished the scowl.
* God, the doctor of Chaumont! ’
‘ Air-ambulance 30Q ! ’
They fell to the hand-shaking, the enquiries innumer¬
able, the laughter of men who had shared a war-episode
unforgettable. Adrian turned to make introductions,
but I forestalled him.
* I am acquainted,’ I said, ‘ with M. Mogara.’
EAST IS WEST
209
VI
For four days after his meeting with the unknown
girl on the sands, and with the little Adrian and myself
in the Sharia Kamil, Mogara kept to his workshop,
fitting a new keel to his ornithopter. On the fourth
evening he tramped out beyond Helmieh again to put
his modification to test. As usual he walked in the study
brown, and so almost dashed his head against horse
and rider—both of whom had been regarding his
approach for over a mile.
It was the girl, and she surveyed him insolently.
‘ What is your name, Mr.—Native ? ’
He was in a good humour, expecting better results
from his model. He twinkled at her sardonically.
‘ Mogara—memsahib. . . . And my grandfather was a
Goanese/
She flushed angrily. ‘ He may have been a Chinese
albino for all I care. You are very concerned with your
own family history, M. Mogara. Hasn’t it ever struck
you that it may be boring to others ? Or your assump¬
tion the other evening of the role of the dark and
dangerous male—wasn’t it rather cowardly ? ’
He was sardonically undisturbed. ‘ No doubt I’m
both a bore and a coward. Meantime my job’s not
psycho-analysis but amateur aeronautics.’
‘ Of course it is ! And since the tests aren’t secret
why mayn’t I come and watch them ? Why have you
kept away from the trial-ground these last three evenings ?
Can’t you see that I want to learn, that it’s your ornithop¬
ter I’m interested in, not you, you ’
210
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
He stared at her. It was the one appeal which could
have touched him. On his face, dark and scarred, she
saw come something like wonder. Followed the slow
smile. Then:
£ “ Blithering ass ” are the words you want. . . . I’m
sorry.’ He held out a tentative hand. £ If ’
Her fingers touched his. They regarded each other
gravely for a moment, laughed together; then Joyce
Melfort dismounted, sat down, clasped her hands about
her knees, and watched. . . .
You must figure her so, evening after evening. For
the meetings went on. Almost every evening she rode
across the sands to find Mogara, with some new modifica¬
tion imposed upon his model, waiting for the sunset
wind.
And presently, in between times of the test-flying and
calculations abstruse, they would find themselves deep
in talk—talk that ranged away from aeronautics and
back to it and away again. She found his mind the
encyclopaedia of sheer fact, the mind of the scientist, a
little warped, almost passionless but for that the desire
and pursuit of knowledge; hers was to him revelation
of how knowledge may be transmuted to idealism and
hope and purpose. . . .
Except a sardonic scepticism for all enthusiasms
nationalist and religious he had the no-philosophy of
life. She made him see all human existence in the terms
of high Adventure—the adventure scarce begun, the
struggle from the slime to the stars. Per ardua ad astra.
Every scrap of new knowledge was equipment for that
Adventure ; every man who fought the beast in himself
EAST IS WEST
211
and others, who kept honest ledgers and an open
mind, who knew the ache of wonder and a desire
beyond fulfilment—he fought in the spear-head of the
Adventure. . . .
And Mogara, his model half-forgotten, would brood
and listen till he too glimpsed faith and belief in that
Republic in the skies which lies beyond our shadowed
uncertainties, which sometimes seems but a generation
away.
Sometimes, as they talked, they would lift their heads
and see the wheel and glitter of Squadron-Leader
Melfort’s aeroplanes practising dusk landings at Heli¬
opolis.
VII
‘ A nigger chappie with a bee in his bonnet and one
of those helicopter-thingummys. He’s been at it for
months, they say, practising out on the sands beyond
Helmieh. Saw him myself last night when I went up
to do a spot of night flying.’
Joyce Melfort came riding against the sunset of the
tenth day since her first encounter with Mogara.
Fragments from the chatter at her brother’s table the
previous evening rode with her, like buzzing gnats.
. . . She had been coldly angry, then wondering and
amused. Now, with an amazement, she found herself
angry again.
From far across the sands Mogara waved to her,
absent-mindedly. As she rode towards him the buzzing
of an aeroplane engine grew loud overhead. She
glanced upwards, saw one of the machines of her
212
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
brother’s squadron dip towards her and Mogara as though
they were a bombing target, and then rise and wheel
back towards Heliopolis.
e Now that that anachronism’s gone ’
She reined in, dismounted, and stood watching in
silence. Mogara clicked out the wings of the much-
tried model, set revolving the little dial and pointer in
its heart, and then launched the contrivance into the
air.
He did not stop to watch its progress, but turned
round towards her with the now not infrequent smile.
‘ “ Hope springs eternal—” ’ he patted the neck of her
nuzzling mount. ‘—If you’re not bored with the
performance by now, I think your horse must be. . . .
Eh?’
She had caught his arm in a grip that was painful.
‘Quick! Look!’
Mogara wheeled round and stared skywards, stared
at a flapping-winged model which neither failed nor
descended, which rose and rose with steady purr of
miniature engine and then began to wLeel overhead in
great circles. . . .
Its inventor gulped, swore inadequately, and then
found Joyce Melfort’s hands gripping his, shaking
them up and down.
‘ Why, you’ve won, you’ve won ! ’ She glanced up
for reassurance and then executed a little dance. ‘ My
dear man, can’t you realise it ? Waken up ! Aren’t
you glad ? . . .’
Her voice died away. There came in her eyes the
terror and expectation. Unaccountably in his arms,
EAST IS WEST
213
she saw his scarred face bent dark-flushed above her.
So, a moment she would remember for ever, and then,
kissed by him, there awoke in her something like a
dream forgotten. . . . That—then they were apart,
and she had slashed him across the face with her riding
whip.
He staggered a little under her blow, and then, in a
queer silence, not looking at her, brought out a handker¬
chief, and dabbed at the blood-pringling weal which
flushed angrily on his unscarred cheek. He lowered
the scrap of linen, looking at it in a kind of wonder,
and at that Joyce Melfort’s stricken remorse found
voice.
‘ Oh, I’m sorry. ... I was a beast. But you
shouldn’t ’
He smiled at her, without a hint of mockery, with
dull eyes. He was very quiet—dazedly quiet.
‘ I know I shouldn’t.’ That was the only possible
reply. He turned away uncertainly, fumbling with the
handkerchief. ‘ And now you’d better go.’
He expected to hear the sound of her footsteps
going towards the horse. Instead, there was complete
silence. He glanced round again. She stood where
he had kissed her, in her eyes a mounting flame of
courage and resolution. She began to speak.
‘ Listen : I’m sorry—because I hit you. Not because
you kissed me. Why shouldn’t you ? ’ Her voice
quivered a little, but her eyes were very brave. ‘ I—I
wanted you to.’
They stared at each other. Overhead, absurdly, and
in circles drawing gradually earthwards, wheeled the
214 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
unheeded ornithopter model. Mogara shook his
head. . . .
She found herself listening to an impossible renuncia¬
tion from an impossible lover, the while the darkness
came flowing across the sands.
*. . . You’re splendid to have said that. But to¬
morrow—and the next day—it’ll sound impossible.
To you it sounds half-impossible even now. . . . English
—and I’m a mongrel. Your people ’ He seemed to
forget what he had intended to say. His voice trailed
off. He shrugged, and held out his hand, and was
oddly shy, and stammered for the first time since she
had known him. ‘ Thanks for you—for it.’ Her limp
fingers touched his. They smiled at each other strainedly.
£ This isn’t anything, you know. We aren’t anything.
And there’s still your Adventure. For both of us.
Always there’s the Adventure. . . .’
She found herself mounted and riding towards
Heliopolis. A hundred yards away she looked back
and saw Mogara snatch a magic bird out of the darkness,
like a boy playing with a dream.
VIII
And less than a dream was it presently to seem to him.
In the Zeitoun hut he sat and stared at the ornithopter
model. Successful. He had won. Successful.
He went to a mirror and saw the ghostly reflection
of his own face, scarred on both cheeks. ... So it had
actually happened.
He began, mechanically, to prepare a meal. What
EAST IS WEST
215
was it he had said ? The Adventure : still the Adven¬
ture. . . . Aeronautics not enough now. Something to
follow and believe in. She had believed in it. . . .
He heard the galloping horse stop at his garden-gate ;
heard hasting footsteps come up to the open door of
the hut. For a moment was a figure dim against the
night dimness, and then Joyce Melfort was in the
room.
They stood facing each other a moment, and he saw
her breast rise and fall, as might one who had run a
race.
* M. Mogara—did you or did you not kiss me out
there ? ’
He nodded whitely. Thereat she gave a sigh, and
suddenly collapsed, limply, happily, into a chair.
* Then that’s all right. Because you’ll have to marry
me now, in spite of my deplorable ancestors. Where
can I throw my hat ? ’ She jumped up in expostulation.
* My dear, whoever told you that was the way to cook
a sausage ? ’
She knelt over the sputtering oil-stove, and, so
kneeling, wheeled round and laughed up at him. ‘ Poor
brother Reginald ! . . .’ She stopped to make mirthful
appraisement of her finger-nails. She was incoherently
light-hearted. ‘ Knew as soon as I got home that he
knew. That was his machine that came bombing us
this afternoon. He’d heard about us—came down to
spy, my dear. . . . Was waiting for me, he and Adrian—
they’d been quarrelling—and oh! what does it matter
what he said ? I felt too sick to notice much till Adrian
broke in with a kind of shout. “ Who ? Simon Mogara ? ”
2l6
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Stared from one to other of us and then laughed and
laughed, and then grew white and furious. “Nigger?
Why, damn your impudence—! ” and it all came out,
and so did I, and made for the stables, leaving Reggie
like a ghost and Adrian shouting wishes to you. . . .
What an evening 1 Who’d have guessed it ? Who
ever ? And now *
His queer, frozen silence made her glance up. In a
moment she was beside him. ‘ Why, why—Simon ! . . .’
IX
It was some time before either of them stirred from
that position wherein she had told her eager secret
amazing. Smell of burning sausage roused Joyce. She
broke away and danced to the oil-stove, and Mogara,
released from necessity to hold her in his arms, sank
down into the chair she had vacated and stared at his
yellow boots as though they were the footwear un¬
believable. . . .
An hour later, on parting under the stars at the
garden-gate, he heard her gay answer to his question
come out of the dimness : ‘ Why, soon as ever, my
dear 1 ’ Dimly from her saddle she bent towards him
to give him the ghostly kiss. Then had a whimsical
thought and laughed a grave little laugh.
‘ But our children—whatever’ll they be citizens of ? ’
Her hand, warm and assured, in his, he stood and
looked up at her, and beyond her at the stars, at the
years he saw with their difficulties and disillusionments
and perhaps the bitter shames for her to face. But in
EAST IS ITEST
2I7
his voice she heard only tenderness as he answered with
the jest that was more than jest, that would cry its
promise through all their lives.
‘ Why—the Republic in the skies ! ’
x
For East is West and West is East and the little
fascistic German blesses as the Aryan symbol exclusive
the swastika they worship in the Mountains of the Moon.
... Eh ? You see, the good Adrian, until provoked
beyond endurance, had held it as a dark and mirthful
secret that the Melfort grandmother, wealth-bringing,
had been a ‘ white mulatto ’ of Jamaica.
X
GIFT OF THE RIVER
i
KEITH LANDWARD seen in Athens ? And you
have heard of Landward ? Read of him in the
Egyptian Gazette ? . . . The story scandalous, I make
no doubt.
An abduction charge initiated by the Greek Institu¬
tion ? And with hastiness dropped, though it was
sufficient to bring about ostracism of Landward and
his unwed victim—if one may ostracise those who
walk unaware of both laws and law-givers !
To Landward I think a marriage ceremony would
have seemed a gross sacrilege. . . .
Eh ? But how ? . . . Let me tease you for moral,
my friend, you who are young, the realist declared—
though where was ever yet realist who dipped pen in
the inks of reality ? I, Anton Saloney, the much and
foolishly over-read, have met him never !
Love—is desire, possession—satiety. Are not these
the axioms realist ?
Yet Heloise walks a garden still, and to-night—
who knows the agony of Abelard under these stars ?
Who knows the face of Paolo in the Khalig throngs ?
Yet I have seen him pass. I have seen in a Nileward
window the light set by one who waits and weeps
Leander—dust and legend these three thousand years 1
Polychromata—the City of Many Colours. But
there is one colour that abides and changes not. Gift
of the River is our Cairo, and what gifts but the miracu-
218
GIFT OF THE RIVER
219
lous does the Nile bring ? Who may say, knowing
Keith Landward and his tale, knowing romance and
miracle for the children of faith and necessity, that
even Hero waits in vain ?
11
And his tale fantastic that I have pieced together—
it begins as indeed no tale should begin, when Joan
Landward died in the Nile house beyond Bulaq Bridge.
She had spent a bare five months in Cairo, brought
here for health, and for portrait you must make imagining
of one with dark hair and grey eyes and the white
cheeks stained with bright blood-ovals. As though
painted on the pallor of her skin were those ovals.
Keith Landward, the husband, brought her here in
late November, and I took them the explorations of the
bazaars. She had in these explorations much delight.
Life she found continually a wonder and delight. . . .
Laughing, she would cough and stop, and the bright
blood-ovals flame in her cheeks, and Landward’s eyes
leap to her in startled fear. It was, you understand,
hers the lung-wasting that had brought them to Egypt.
‘ Insane climate. Treacherous,’ he would storm,
with that startled look still in his eyes. ‘ Dr. Adrian
says so. We’ll go back to Majorca.’
‘ Not yet. Not until the Spring. I’m in love with
Colonel Saloney’s Cairo—and the Nile. So’s Steadfast.
Bark yes, Steadfast. Do it in Esperanto ! ’
She had a dog, the little solemn, thick-coated beast,
called Steadfast, and to him she had taught the many
220
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
little solemn tricks. In the narrow, high-walled garden
of their house, with the water-steps leading down to the
River, she would prevail on Steadfast to make the
ludicrous evolutions for my delectation, and on her
never did the exquisite funniness of those pall. Land¬
ward, laughing and scowling, would shake her shoulders.
‘ Stop it, Joan ! You’ll exhaust yourself.’
‘ Sorry, but it’s Steadfast to blame.’ Seated, she
would lean back against Landward’s hands and look
up into his face with just such solemnity of tenderness
as was in the eyes of the dog looking up at her. So
sitting, she would reach her arms round his neck, her
fingers twisting in his hair in the mock-cruel caress,
and be very still.
‘ Listen to the River ! ’
She loved the Nile, and I think listened much to
it in that garden the while she worked and translated
with Landward. He was a linguist, the master of
many tongues—never have I known anyone master of
so many—and language-study was his life-work. It
was his the dream to build up the scientific international
language—not one of the easy elisions and evasions,
but a tongue founded on the broad evolutions of human
speech, a flexible, synthetic World-Speech that would
presently be taught the earth over. . . .
He was a Scotsman of the far Western Islands, of
that Celtic fringe that is now denied by your historians.
Dark as Joan herself, quick and emotional and subtle,
he worked not ploddingly, but in the sudden flares of
inspiration and enthusiasm. But that men turn now
from romantic dreamings as from childhood’s toys,
GIFT OF THE RIVER
221
he might have been poet or painter of the twilight
melancholy. The poet, I think, for words, the power
and beauty and terror of words, could move him as
stars or music another. His Joan and his World-
Speech—these his two loves, grown inextricably one.
£ There won’t be a frontier or a fort in Europe fifty
years after we’ve finished,’ he would declaim, and
she would look at him with shining eyes. Swift her¬
self in the learning of languages, this dream of the
World-Speech had grown as vivid for her as for Land¬
ward.
But presently he was in difficulties. The framework
of the World-Speech was already planned, but how to
garb it in living flesh ?
* Accent—intonation—some common denominator of
word-rhythm and music. . . . Damn it, Joan, it’s an
impasse. Take another twenty years of work. . . .
Oh, curse all fools since the Tower of Babel 1 ’
And he got up, tramping to and fro in one of his
sudden rages. Then her silence, the fact that she did
not laugh at him as usual, brought his gaze to her. She
sat very still, with eyes closed.
‘Joan/’
Fear for her haunted his life, though he hid it even
from himself, except at such moments. She roused and
looked up at him.
* What ? . . . Oh Keith, my dear, don’t look like
that 1 I’m ever so well. Only lazy. . . . And this accent-
business won’t take twenty years : nor twenty months.
You’ll find it long before then—I’ll find it myself I .. .’
Her arms round his neck, the solemnity in her
222
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
eyes as he bent over her. ‘ Lazy this afternoon, my
dear. And the sound of the River ’
That night, lying wakeful in the darkness over this
matter of the World-Speech accent, he heard Joan
cough and turn restlessly and the sound of her hand
come out to seek him. . . . He sat up in panic and turned
on the lights, for the hand had ceased to seek and the
noise of the River below had suddenly grown to the
noise of a torrent.
in
That shining room in the crematorium of A1 Fostat—
always shall I remember the smell of the mimosa wreaths
that blinded the white coffin, and the still, dark face of
Landward, and that strange burial-service of your
Church, at once so beautiful and grotesque. . . . Then
Adrian and I, with uneasiness for what might happen
if we left him, drove back with Keith Landward to the
house above the Nile.
He went with us in silence, but suddenly, in the
garden of the house, at sight of the solemn little dog.
Steadfast, padding to and fro, burst into one of the
rages that with him were temperamental.
‘ That infernal dog—can’t have it here. Interrupt
my work. . . . Must go on with my work. Do you
hear ? . . . Take it away, Saloney. Eh ? Anywhere
you like. What the devil does it matter to me ? Never
want to see it again.’ He raised his voice. ‘ Ibrahim!
That fool Ibrahim—why hasn’t he set my table out
here ? Does he think this is a national fete ? ’
He darted into the house, there was presently the
GIFT OF THE RIVER
223
sound of cursing and commotion, and he appeared again,
driving the scared and laden Ibrahim Garas, his Egyptian
servant.
‘ Down there. In the usual place. And take away
that other chair—that chair, you fool! . . . Anything
you two want ? Eh ? Oh yes. Good-bye.’
IV
The little dog trotted beside us, making the heart¬
breaking whine, and to me he was a worry, for Land¬
ward in such mood might order him to be drowned.
Adrian had no place to keep him, nor had I.
Then I remembered my friends, the Freligraths,
and that they perhaps could help. After parting with
Adrian I took the electric train out to Kubbah, and at
the domed house of the Freligraths waited in a down¬
stairs room for her who had been Flore Gellion to
descend from the immersements astronomical.
‘ Anton, my friend ! Ages since you came to see me.
And who is this ? ’
The little beast, Steadfast, whined up at her with
pricked ears, and then drooped his head again. I made
explanations.
'Quelle honte! But of course he may stay here.’
She knelt and encircled him in her arms. ‘ It is but
right, since your mistress is with the stars, is she not ?
. . . Stay to tea, my colonel. I’ve delayed for Friedrich,
but cannot wait longer. Ribaddi, in Rome, and I are
doing the Venus transit together, just after sunset.’
Already was that sunset near and I bidding farewell,
224
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
when we heard the car of Friedrich Freligrath, the Nile
engineer, coming from Cairo. He came in haste and
we waited for him.
‘ Am I very late, Flore ? Hello, colonel! . . . Gods,
what’s this ? A doormat ? ’
He made the embrace of Flore, and the little beast.
Steadfast, growled at him, but without spirit. Still
standing, Friedrich drank tea.
‘ Going, colonel ? If you’ll wait a minute I’ll drive
you back. I’ve to go into Cairo again, Flore—there
has been an accident a little way up-river. That was
what delayed me. One of our launches ran into a
crowded Greek pleasure-boat and spilled half the
passengers into the Nile.’
v
Keith Landward sat in his garden and listened to the
sound of the River.
That first agony of desolation—the awakening agony
of a wound realised which had led to the violent scene
in the presence of Adrian and myself—had passed.
He sat now and looked down the future, the corridors
of the days and nights he would tramp alone, without
hope or heroism, vision or God. These things he had
left behind in A1 Fostat with the ashes of Joan.
He closed his eyes, and the dull ache passed from
these to his heart. Agony had done its utmost, and
now was merely tiredness unutterable with him; that,
and the sound of the River.
And suddenly, listening there, a verse of your Swin-
GIFT OF THE RIVER
225
burne’s, that he had not read or thought of for many
years, came into his mind.
From too much love of living,
From hope and fear set free.
We thank with brief thanksgiving
Whatever gods may be.
That no life lives forever,
That dead men rise up never,
That even the weariest river
Winds somewhere safe to sea.
c Even the weariest river. . . .’ He looked round
about him in slow amazement. The ache passed from
his mind. Why had he not thought of that before ?
He thrust aside the pages that had once spelt vision
and achievement but seemed now petrification of the
idle and inane chatter. Very calmly and deliberately
he walked up the garden and into the house. His
revolver required cleaning, and he took it out to the
balcony of carved mushrabiyeh work that overhung
the Nile, and sat there smoking and cleaning with the
River below him.
Both fear and agony had fallen from him. It was
a very lovely evening. Waiting for the sunset, the
River was the hushed blue expectancy, except where a
launch that went by against the further shore clove the
water in a furrow of gold.
‘ That is lovely,’ he said to himself.
His senses were sharp and vivid as never before.
He finished loading the revolver and laid it aside, and
sat, head in hands, thinking of all the beautiful things
he had ever known. Sunsets and sunrises and ripple of
226
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
water; music heard at night; a naked bather in a
Majorca cove; Joan; her laughter; singing; the
beauty of words. . . .
Below him and the balcony was a continual
whisper.
‘ The River. . . . How she loved it! Tired. It
called her.’
He raised his head. The sunset was raining darkness
over Cairo. Below him the River flushed and paled
and dimmed. He picked up the revolver and twirled
its barrel, set the hammer—and dropped it clattering
to his feet.
In the lower rooms Ibrahim had switched on the
electric lights, and their radiance was flung upon the
Nile. But it was beyond that radiance, the thing he
had seen. He closed his eyes in unbelief, opened them
again, and then 
Out of the darkness it swirled into the light, going
seawards, rising and falling on the slow current, a
thing white and unmistakable.
It was the body of a woman.
VI
From Adrian, met on his rounds the next day, I
heard of the happening at the Landward house.
‘ Keith saw her from his balcony, ran downstairs,
jumped in, and pulled her ashore. . . . Must have cost
him a vile expenditure of temper ! A girl of seventeen
or eighteen, unconscious, but alive. She had banged
herself somehow. Hair clotted with blood at the base
GIFT OF THE RIVER zz7
of the skull. . . . Another casualty of that pleasure-boat
accident. ’
* Of it I have heard,’ I said. e She has been identified ? ’
‘ Not yet, though that won’t be any difficulty. I’ve
supplied descriptions to the Police, the Greek consulate,
and the Nile people. Greek quite certainly. Spoke a
few words of it this morning, and apparently doesn’t
know any other language. . . . Some dialect of the
Islands, Landward says, and very pure. . . . Yes, said
that 1 Thank the Lord, in one way, the poor girl was
nearly drowned. Her intrusion has jolted Landward
into one of those towering rages of his—and I was
afraid of something else.’
‘ She has told her name ? *
‘ Not yet. The pure Greek stream is—or was this
morning—only a tricklet. Too exhausted to do any¬
thing but sleep. Probably been reclaimed and taken
away by now.’ He mused a little. ‘ Something wrong
with her eyes, I think. Eh ? Oh, white and gold—
like a Greek out of Wilde. Or a korS of the vases.’
VII
But neither that day nor the next came anyone to
identify Landward’s salvage. The captain of the
pleasure-boat, interviewed, swore that all the people
flung overboard in the River accident had been rescued
by himself or the launch. He was a man shifty and
untrustworthy, and frightened that he might earn a
reputation for the reckless handling of his boat.
‘ Obviously a liar,’ said Adrian. ‘ Don’t suppose
228
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
he had the least idea how many passengers were on his
precious boat. It was a three hours’ jaunt up and
down the River.’
‘ There are no relatives—the police have no in¬
formation ? ’
‘ No, that’s the devil of it. The girl must have been
friendless. Meanwhile Landward’s going about like
a roaring multi-lingual lion. Went up to the Greek
consulate yesterday and kicked up Hades. Swears his
work’s interrupted and disorganised. . . . Hope it’s
only his work. I went out on that balcony this morn¬
ing, looking for him, and found this lying on the
floor.’
He displayed the revolver, of which, and other
things, I was afterwards to hear from Landward himself
the full tale.
‘ And that’s not the worst of it. I thought there
was something funny about her eyes. That blow on
the head’s responsible, of course. . . . She doesn’t
remember any of the happenings before the accident.
Doesn’t remember even her own name. Pass in time,
naturally. Amnesia never lasts.’
vm
To Keith Landward he made presently a suggestion.
‘ There is, of course, a Greek Institution for the
destitute. She can be handed over to that.’
‘ Eh ? Pauper’s home ? No, she can stay here till
she’s better; if she wants to.’
And with this ungracious and unreasonable invita-
GIFT OF THE RIVER
229
tion—for she was as yet unable fully to understand
the situation—the nameless Greek girl stayed on at the
Nile house. Adrian has a sardonic wit. That day,
when he decided the girl should be taken out of doors,
he called Landward from the book-strewn balcony
to which the latter had retreated on hearing the garden
was about to be invaded.
‘ She’ll have to be carried to the garden. As you
carried her up you may as well take her down. She
might object to Ibrahim.’
‘ He swore, but went up the stairs to her room and
knocked at the door,’ Adrian was to relate to me. ‘ I
was climbing up from below and heard and saw most of
the comic incident. I know a little Greek. She called
out “ Who is it ? ” and Landward replied “ It is I ”—
a statement possible in Greek, but just as idiotic as in
English. Her voice came back—surprised and amused,
I thought—“ Oh, come in. I am almost ready.” In
he went ... to come striding out again in an instant,
banging the door. You see, the Egyptian women-
servants had taken up some clothes a minute or two
before, and Landward, going in, found his protegee
in quite an unnecessary state of negligee.’
‘ It was an accident.’
‘ Oh, innocent enough, I imagine ; but a bit surprising,
seeing she tucks herself up to the chin even when
speaking to her medical adviser. Anyhow, she wasn’t
in the least embarrassed when he did carry her down.
Doesn’t seem in the least aware of the upset to the
Landward regime. She’s the confidence of an infant,
or ’ He shrugged.
23°
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
‘Eh?’
‘ Quite. A friendless Greek girl in Cairo—starvation
and worse send scores south from Smyrna and the
Archipelago each winter. This memory-obscuring
may be a fairy-tale. One never knows. ... If it is, she
must envisage the situation as one of heaven-sent
opportunity. Poor thing ! ’
IX
Next day I called at the Nile house—I who had
not been there since the funeral of Joan Landward—
and in the garden saw a sight unexpected. Under the
great green umbrella Keith Landward sat with table
and books. In a chair beside him, much-wrapped and
with the yellow-gold flame of hair, was a girl. Land-
ward’s face was lighted and eager with excitement,
and he was alternately listening and writing with rapidity.
At sound of the door closing they looked round and
Landward, with no appearance of cordiality, made the
brusque introduction.
I know a little of the ancient speech—which is to
the modern Romaic as Virgil to the twitterings of
the little d’Annunzio—and that it seemed to me would
have been the fitting speech for her. And then I had a
surprise. For, though with accent and quantities
unfamiliar, it was verily almost in the ancient tongue
that she spoke.
‘ You see, I have no name.’
I cannot hope to convey to you the ring and beauty
of those words she spoke. I stood and stared at her
GIFT OF THE RIVER
231
with the mists of strange questioning and wonder
rising in my mind. Somewhere, somewhere 
And then I knew. A figure on a vase I had once seen,
made when the world was young, in the dawn of
Europe. Even to line of nose and forehead so beloved
by Athenian craftsmen she was that figure. I groped
for name and memory, and, unembarrassed under my
rude stare, she smiled with slow-widening eyes.
Eyes like sunflowers. And suddenly I heard myself
speak.
‘ I think it should be Kora,’ I said, with the utter
conviction that in a moment was gone, leaving me
foolish and self-wondering. The wonderful eyes budded
a question, but Landward broke in with impatience.
‘ Eh ? What’s that ? Kora ? It’ll do as well as
any other, won’t it ? Must have a name. . . . And now
we’ll get on—if you’ll excuse us, Saloney.’
x
With enthusiasm Landward set to the teaching of
English to his River-salvage, though for other reasons
his interest had first awakened in her. They had both
accepted my christening, and neither was embarrassed
by the fact that as yet she possessed no surname.
One afternoon I collided with the hurrying and
book-laden figure in Esbekiyeh. It was Landward,
happy, with the face of a boy.
. Intonation—that was the root difficulty of the
World-Speech. But I believe I’ve fixed it in phonetics
at last. Kora has just the requisite tone and accent.
232
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
. . . Natural enough. Greek is the oldest and purest
of the Aryan dialects, and in whatever out-of-the-way
spot of the Archipelago she or her people originated
the spoken tongue must remain amazingly archaic.’
‘ The mind-obscuring—the amnesia—it is going ? ’
I asked.
‘ Eh ? No, I don’t think so.’ He shrugged aside
this triviality. ‘ I haven’t asked. I’ve been too busy.’
He had accepted her as an accent and intonation,
not as an individual. Compilation of the World-Speech
again obscured his every horizon. Kora could now
walk to and from the garden unaided. She still went
clad in the absurd Egyptian clothes. Unless questioned,
she never spoke to Landward in his long spells of work,
but would sit under the green umbrella, head to one
side, apparently lost in day-dreams.
And then, a thing disturbing to the contentment of
toil and achievement, he was conscious in himself of a
vague uneasiness, of vague, unworded questions when¬
ever he raised his head and met those sunflower eyes
fixed upon him. Drugged with work, living betwixt
sleep and wakefulness, as he knew himself—what
when he awoke ?
XI
And then into their garden came an official from the
Greek Institution.
He was the young-old man, the American-cultured
Greek, and was shown to Landward, under the
green umbrella, at the moment when the latter sat
alone.
GIFT OF THE RIVER
233
‘ You are the Mister Landward ? ’ he asked in the
American English.
‘ I am/ snapped the linguist, in Romaic, and for
a moment this seemed to disconcert the young-old
man. . . . But he made a quick recovery. He was
directed to enquire into the conditions under which a
young Greek girl was living in the house. The cir¬
cumstances of her rescue were well known to the
Institution. But there had been rumours. Was or
was not this girl living with him as his mistress ?
Landward had listened in the daze, and now sat
staring his dazement. The young-old man became
confidential and made the greasy smile. . . . The girl
was, no doubt, a stray from some unlicensed house,
and there need be no difficulty. Between friends.
Providing she was not being forcibly detained. And
even then, if it was certain there would be no scandal—?
Landward had looked beyond him. The American-
Greek turned round. The girl was coming down the
garden towards them.
If he had had any hesitations with Landward, he
had none with Kora, presuming her to be what Adrian
had suspected. She stared at him with wondering
eyes as he made the easy greeting in Romaic, and then,
pulling out his notebook, put the coarse questions.
But at even the first of these the rapidly-fraying
temper of Landward, until then held marvellously in
one, snapped. Like most of those who toil for the
ultimate brotherhood of all men, he was one with the
intense prejudices and dislikes; amongst these, his
hatred of nasal Americanisms. Questions apart, the
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
234
Greek’s accent had already undone him, and for Land¬
ward to seize him abruptly and urgently, rush him to
the garden-gate, tear that open, and kick out into the
dust and the street the young-old convert to trans¬
atlantic acumen and intonation was the work of a
moment. ... He returned to find a wondering Kora
awaiting him.
‘ You are very hot.’ She considered him gravely,
brought out the scrap of handkerchief, and, with an
air absorbed, dabbed his forehead. Then :
‘ But what did he mean ? How does it concern
him ? Of course we live together. Though at night—? ’
She shook her head, puzzled, her eyes raised to him.
Then the puzzlement slowly faded and remote amongst
the cornflowers came hurrying strange lights. . . .
Landward turned his head away.
‘ There are such men,’ he said, lamely, avoiding
her eyes, shamed by that white innocence.
He went away on pretended business, but returned
to the garden that evening, tramping to and fro for
hours. The evil chatter of the Helleno-American should
have stirred him to disgust alone, but now, in an agony
of self-hatred and remorse, he shuddered away from
the thoughts suddenly uncovered in his mind. . . . My
God, and Joan—Joan who had taken the light from
the world—she had not been dead two weeks. . . .
In the bright moonlight of his room, long after the
rest of the house was quiet, he undressed, trying not to
hear that haunting song of the River below his
window.
Somewhere, out of the swift, strange dream, near
GIFT OF THE RIVER
*35
to dawn, he awoke, and as realisation came to him it
seemed that the noise of the River below grew to the
sound of a torrent.
In his arms, very fast asleep as a child might sleep,
one arm around his neck, a shoulder white to the
moon-dazzle, lay the girl Kora.
XII
That morning I awoke to the free and lazy day. I
had no clients. At the Freligrath house the week
before had occurred that happening eternally miraculous,
and I went out to the Kubbah house to make the call.
Flore Freligrath, the very young and modern mother,
I discovered hard at work in her study, with Thibaut
August asleep in a portable cot and the dog, Steadfast,
outstretched in boredom upon the floor. At sight of
me he leapt up with a whine.
After I had admired the sleeper, doubtlessly miraculous
but hardly of himself admirable, I found the solemn
little dog attempting to follow me from the room.
‘ I am afraid Thibaut August and I bore him/ said
Flore. ‘ He has never displayed those tricks of which
you spoke.’
* He is the lover steadfast/ I said, and patted him,
and took my leave. But I did not return to Cairo ;
instead, tramped to the hut of Mogara, and there
remained a little while, and then struck across the roads
and so presently the dusty Cairene streets to the house
of Landward on Nile bank.
I did not go through the house, for the garden-gate
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
236
hung loose, and by it I went in, half-expecting to see
under the green umbrella the heads dark and golden
bent in collaboration over the typescripts of the World-
Speech.
But Keith Landward sat alone, and as I crossed the
garden to him he raised a livid face. I stopped. It
was the face of a man horrified and self-tortured. He
spoke in a whisper, as though I had been standing
there for hours.
‘ Saloney, how is it a Greek drab from the River can
have the face of a saint ? ’
‘ I do not—’ I began, and then understood at once,
glancing to the house and then back at his face.
Adrian had been right.
Beyond the garden gate was the sudden snuffling
and low whine. We both looked round. In the opening,
padding into view, was the little dog Steadfast.
He had followed me from the Kubbah observatory,
you understand. I did not care to look at Landward.
And then we heard another sound and looked towards
the house.
Down the path was coming the girl Kora, and at
sight of her Landward sprang to his feet and flamed
red and swore aloud.
‘ By God, but flat I won’t stand I ’
XIII
She had been rummaging in the room of his dead
wife and wore the red frock, absurd and yet becoming
to her white Greek beauty, in which I had last seen clad
GIFT OF THE RIVER
237
the dark slenderness of Joan Landward. She halted
in front of us, pleased and unembarrassed and smiled
at us with the sunflower eyes, and spread the short
skirts for our inspection.
‘ Like my frock ? ’
Landward swallowed, made to answer, and in that
moment something hurtled past us like an animated
ball from a catapault.
It was the little dog Steadfast. He had suddenly gone
mad, was barking and sobbing in a delirium of joy.
Again and again he leapt to lick the hands of the girl,
then spun round in dizzying circles, then rolled in
abasement at her feet. She looked down at him in the
lighted wonder.
‘ It is the frock—’ I began, and then stopped.
The little beast had reared himself up, in the cul¬
minating pride of performance, and at that her delighted
laughter rang clear.
‘ Look, look, the fairy dance ! ’
XIV
In two strides he was beside her, his face ashen, the
face of one whose sanity toppled, his eyes ablaze.
* “ The fairy dance ”—where did you hear that,
where ? *
She stared up at him, lips quivering, eyes suddenly
clouded and frightened. In their depths struggled
effort at that memory neither of them was ever again
to seek. She put her hand to her head and stammered
in the little broken English.
238
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
‘ I . . . Oh, once . . . Steadfast ... I do not know.’
Then fear and questioning went from her eyes.
Compassion came there. In a moment she was in his
arms.
4 Keitb ... Oh ! Keith, my dear, don't look like that! '
xv
Somehow I was out of that garden ; I have forgotten
how I went; they did not hear me go. In his arms,
her fingers twining in his hair in the caress. . . . My
friend, I am no realist. I fled : such coward as he who
looked on Kora in Eleusis.
t
XI
IT IS WRITTEN
i
FIRST sunset after Ramadan ! Our Cairo is painting
herself in the red to-night—that is the phrase,
is it not ? . . . Hark to the drumming with which the
little Muslim celebrates the reprieve of his stomach!
Eh ? The religion vigorous—Islam ? It is a withered
tree that creaks and falls ; this shouting and show is
but the last wind in its branches. Nor falls it alone.
In all the Forest of Faith is a rending and overthrow.
The specialised creed and the specialised god—what
plants amazing and monstrous they will seem to the
future generations who excavate in the strata car¬
boniferous I
Yet they pass not alone, I think. The Disciples
Twelve, the priests and worshippers—in their company
passes even the Thirteenth Disciple—the infidel who
feared and doubted and disbelieved. Doubt and de¬
voutness, faith and fear—they pass in a drift of twigs
and leaves on that slow wind that beats through the
dying Forest. And in their place ?
How should I know ? Perhaps there comes the era
of God Himself, creedless and testamentless, without
priest or shrine, triumphant slowly amidst the darkness
—as once Godfrey Steyn glimpsed him in the eyes and
speech of an unbeliever.
ii
Steyn 1 It was an evening in May when I first met
him. I had passed through the dusty drooping of trees
239
240
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
in the garden Esbekiyeh when on the side-walk, near
to the little cafe, I was hailed by name. I turned and
saw my friend, the Dr. Adrian, seated at a little table,
intent on the game of dominoes. But it was not the
usual self-game he played. He had an opponent.
‘ Oh, colonel. Fve been waiting for you to pass.
Knew you’d come this way sooner or later. Here’s
someone who wants to know you. Mr. Steyn : Colonel
Saloney.’
I made the bow and at that Adrian’s companion
also rose and bowed, and smiled with an absent friendli¬
ness. He had the hair too long and the face too pale,
and for a little I thought him one of Adrian’s patients.
His face I seemed to know and made the rude and
puzzled consideration of it. This he endured without
embarrassment. And indeed I may have stared not so
long as I thought before I remembered his prototype.
He had such face as one sees in the portraits of your
Shelley—comely and kindly and the face of youth, yet
not weak at all.
He might have been thirty years of age. He had the
soft brown hair like silk, and eyes that were also a
shade of brown. His voice in conversation was the
voice very clear and accentless—this perhaps because
he was a trained elocutionist, and sought to conceal
the fact.
‘ Won’t you sit down, Colonel Saloney ? And have
a drink ? ’
I murmured thanks. Adrian, sweeping the dominoes-
game to himself, grinned. * Mr. Steyn is a parson,
colonel, so you’ll have to forgive him his lemonade.’
IT IS WRITTEN
241
The brown eyes twinkled. ‘ My constitution, not
my profession, you’ll have to forgive, you know.
I’ve no objection to wine—except being forced to
drink it. Makes me sick. . . . Colonel, Dr. Adrian
has been telling me about you. Oh, lots to your credit I
Have you any important engagements during the
next few weeks ? ’
I was a little disappointed and bored. ... So he
was a tourist and wished me to show him Cairo and
expound the Sphinx and crawl the pyramid-tunnels in
his company. ‘ None of importance.’
He cupped the lean, pale face in a brown hand.
‘ That’s good, if I may say so. Because I want you to
act as my guide and general assistant on an archaeological
expedition to the Wadi Faregh.’
Faregh ? ’ I shook my head. ‘ That is the bare
stretch of the hills fifty miles west of the Pyramids ?
But I know nothing of it. And I am no archaeologist,
whatever the good Adr.an may have been saying. . . .
Faregh ? But surely there are no remains there ? ’
Adrian glanced up the sardonic moment from his
game, but said nothing. Godfrey Steyn sipped the
sickly lemonade and turned on me again his charming
smile.
‘ Doesn’t matter though you aren’t an archeologist.
I’m not, either. Nor though you’ve never been to
Wadi Faregh. I want someone who knows the country
and people generally, and can organise a small expedition
for me. I’m going out to Faregh to look for the tomb
of one Polyorthes, a Hellenised Egyptian who was
buried there seventeen hundred years ago.’
242
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
I was a little intrigued. e A tomb of importance ?
There were but bare burials, seldom with either mum¬
mification or inscription, so late as that. And even of
such tombs in the Wadi Faregh I have never heard.’
He was silent for a little, looking out into the street.
His face changed from the face of the polite and gracious
youth to that of the fanatic, the enthusiast. He spoke
with a quietness of voice that stilled me.
‘ I have almost certain evidence that this Polyorthes
was buried in Faregh, and that buried with him is a
document, a Lost Testament, in the handwriting of
our Saviour Himself.’
in
This he actually believed. The while Adrian, sardonic
and indifferent, immersed himself in the game of
dominoes, and I, a little uncomfortable, drank of the
wine he had ordered me, this priest with the face Shelleyan
proceeded to relate the story that was in reality thirteen
years’ autobiography.
I may summarise it for you with brevity, though
indeed was the original brief enough. Too brief in
places so that I had difficulty in comprehending the
chemic structure of a personality at once fantastically
medieval and pleasantly modern.
For both these things was Steyn, he who had landed
at Basrah as the clergyman-missionary in March of
1914. Twenty years of age, newly out from England,
the mystic that was the essential part of him a little
overlaid by the muscular Christian of the theological
college, he had stood on the hotel verandah that first
IT IS WRITTEN
243
afternoon and watched the mirage-sway of the jungle-
walls across the Shatt-el-Arab. Within twenty months
there came rolling up against those walls another
mirage, and he stood and stared at it aghast. . . .
The boy Shelley in a world of Anarchs, he saw evil and
cruelty, crowned and robed and acclaimed in an incense
of blood, stalk the Mesopotamian days and nights.
As an Army clergyman he went through the campaigns
of sunglare and horror, fighting not Turks, but some¬
thing greater than these—belief in that dark Conscious¬
ness now unleashed and triumphant across all the
world. Belief in it would make of him a cheat and
impostor; disbelief—to deny the evidence of his
senses. . . .
That mind medieval of his is outside your compre¬
hension—as once so completely outside Gillyflower
Arnold’s. But I think he endured an agony Gethsemane-
like. God—the all-powerful, the all-good, the creator
—a super-ape bending in amusement over the foetid
scum that writhed and fought on this rotting mud-ball
that was his creation. . . .
He was but one of many in those years startled to
some such horrific vision. And, like many, he refused
that vision. Somewhere was explanation, somewhere
recoverable that faith in goodness which was more
necessary to his existence than sunlight or food. Mean¬
time, work.
It was the after-war years by then, and he fled from
his own thoughts into relief-work amidst the refugees
and refuse scattered in the Anatolian hinterlands—
the straying tribes war-uprooted, the starving thousands
244 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
who drifted over mountains and deserts without country
or home or mandatory power to own them : Chaldeans,
Armenians, unprosperous Jews, Nestorians.
And amongst these latter it was, in 1925, that he made
that discovery which was to lead him to Egypt and the
Wadi Faregh.
He had been sick with fever, and was nursed by
monks, some half-dozen of whom still inhabited the
portion of a ruined Nestorian monastery in the moun¬
tains beyond Lake Van. Once had it been a great
monastery-citadel, the sanctuary of Asiatic Christians ;
now, ruined by centuries of war and earthquake, it
remained half-forgotten by the world beyond the
encircling mountains. Towards the end of his con¬
valescence Steyn had proof of the local earthquake
force when throughout a night the ground heaved
under his bed and the ancient buildings creaked and
groaned.
Next morning, assisting the monks in rebuilding the
living-quarters damaged in the tremor, he came on
the centuries-lost library of the monastery, and, amidst
its earthquake-uncovered scrolls, of which he was
made temporary curator, the writings of a fifth-century
monk, one Nicolaos of Corinth.
Those writings formed the beginning of the monastery
record, diversified with moralisings and rebuttals of
heresy. Steyn spent many curious hours deciphering
the monkish Greek and trying to reach at meanings in
fears and formulae long dead—even to him. And then,
somewhere near the end of the entries in the hand of
Nicolaos, he came on these words:
IT IS WRITTEN
M5
‘ But of those who have corrupted our faith with the teachings
of the heathen Mani, it is told that Poljorthes, the Egyptian,
he who lived within the life-time of his own false prophet,
bore with him for many years a writing which the Manichaeans
believed to be in the hand of Christ Himself. And this
document they told, in their heretical blasphemy, revealed
teachings other than those recorded by the Fathers—teachings
which would yet be made known to men in an age when the
world was ripe to receive them. But Polyorthes, the Christian
Manichaean, disappeared, and was heard of no more, neither
he nor the false testament.'
IV
To you or me this might have seemed but the curious
reference to an ancient fiction. But it lighted the life of
Godfrey Steyn as might the personal revelation. He
abandoned all his work—there were a score of American
missions to tend to his refugees by then—and set out
to search for other records regarding Polyorthes, the
ancient Egyptian with the Greek name that was perhaps
the nickname, him who had been the Christian Mani¬
chaean.
His researches led him to Trebizond, to the lines of
ancient monasteries fringing the south Black Sea, to Merv,
into Sovyet Russia, where the Tovarishii, with much
courtesy and irreverence, believing him to be an atheistic
historian, made free of every ecclesiastical document in
their possession. And in eighteen months, pieced
together from a score of sources, he had the full record
of the fate of Egyptian Polyorthes. The Manichaean
had died in his native land, in a solitary house in the
246
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Egyptian hills : undoubtedly the Wadi Faregh. To¬
gether with c an heretical script ’ he had been buried
in a secret tomb by two negro slaves who subsequently
disappeared. . . .
‘ And that is why I have come to Egypt. If archaeo¬
logical remains are unknown in the Wadi Faregh, so
much the better. It’ll never have attracted grave-
robbers. For I believe that lost script to be the Last
Testament of Christ Himself.’
Before that fantastic faith I might have known my
objections trivial. ‘ But even if the tomb exists—Surely
there is no mention anywhere else of Christ Himself
having written anything ? I know nothing of your
Christian Mysteries, but is not the complete doctrine
revealed in the New Testament—complete and final,
as miraculously made known to the Council of Nicaea ? ’
He laughed aloud, the pleasant modern who could
so suddenly replace the medieval mystic. ‘ For one
who knows nothing of the “ Mysteries,” colonel, you’re
too ingenuous 1 . . His eyes shone Shelleyan again.
‘ Nicaea and the New Testament final ? They’ve left
unexplained that which God’s Messenger came to
explain and justify—the conscious cruelty and darkness
which rules the universe, against which the forces of
light and pity fight so feebly. If God be God, how do
these things persist ? ’
I am no theologian. I made the bewildered shrug.
‘ Perhaps they are character-tests in the purpose
inscrutable. Perhaps resultant on the workings of
impersonal natural forces.’
4 And my agony and despair of those years—my
IT IS WRITTEN
247
groping after that God without whom sanity is im¬
possible ? What impersonal natural force is that resultant
on ? . . . Character-tests ? Purposes moulding us ?
These ancient lies ! Three million lie and rot in France
and what meaning had their tortured deaths ? To
what betterment did agony mould each individual of
them ? *
To that I had no answer. It was the thing outside
my mental range. But there began to stir in me a
wondering imagining.
‘ An authentic message from Christ Himself! That
would be wonderful 1 ’
I had hardly known I spoke aloud till I saw their
faces, Steyn’s and Adrian’s, turned on me. Then Steyn
held out his hand.
£ And you will come with me to Faregh ? ’
‘ I will come,’ I said.
v
Within a week, fifty miles away from Cairo, we
were setting up our encampment on the lower spurs
of the Wadi Faregh. I had engaged five labourers—
one to act as cook—for our little expedition and had
obtained from the Ministry of the Interior the permits
necessary and a good map of the Ordnance Survey.
So equipped, we had journeyed out to those hills to seek
the tomb of the lost Egyptian.
Above, and curving away into the west, stretched
the limestone ridges, rowelled here and there by the
sudden nullahs which we were to explore. They were
cloaked in a thin growth of bush and desert-grass that
248
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
June. South of our encampment an ancient well still
yielded water—perhaps it had yielded water to Poly-
orthes and his slaves seventeen hundred years before.
Crowning the western foothills, hill-climbing a
little, was the thin row of date palms, and the second
evening of our arrival Steyn and I sat at the door of
our tent and watched those palms stencil their unquiet
shapes against the coming of the sunset.
So sitting, Steyn began to quote from that Ave of
Rossetti’s—lines very beautiful in that stillness and
flowing light under the hand of darkness :
‘ Mind’st thou not (when June’s heavy breath
Warmed the long days in Nazareth,)
That eve thou didst go forth to give
Thy flowers some drink that they might live
One faint night more amid the sands ?
Far off the trees were as pale wands
Against the fervid sky ’
They moved me strangely, those words, and that
picture of the Virgin, in some such setting as the night-
threatened Faregh, going forth to revelation of her
miraculous destiny. Moved me as beauty may always
move me. For I have been too much the romantic
to be ever the conscientious Not-Knower. I am not
more remote from the Old Believer than I am from
the English or German agnostic—him who sees all
anthropomorphism as merely the ridiculous garbing
of idealism in an extra-terrestrial brain and heart and
lips and lungs gigantic.
To believe that a human maid once bore into the
IT IS IVRITTEN
249
world an incarnation of the Consciousness which set
the Galaxy in the sky and may hear the undersong of
life in the world within the electron ! To believe such
thing, to have proof of it! A message from that strange
prophet, human or divine, who still for all of us stands
a figure sky-whelming at the gateway of all spiritual
endeavour that has meaning. . . .
The darkness came striding from the desert over the
shoulder of the Wadi. Steyn had finished his quotation.
He leant forward and shaded his eyes, and I followed
his gaze. Betwixt two palms, far off, minute, something
moved.
‘ What is it ? ’
And so into our encampment strolled Gillyflower
Arnold, geologist, atheist, and lawn tennis champion.
VI
‘ I’m a stray female,’ she said, ‘ but you needn’t bother
to light a lantern for me. My camp ? Over there,
half a mile beyond that hog-back. I’m prospecting for
oil—Government commission.’
Thus, succinctly, our visitor, the while I offered her
a camp-stool and Steyn bent to the lighting of a lantern.
Beyond, at a little distance, was the singing of our
labourers about their fire, and now it was almost
complete darkness.
‘ You are of an expedition ? ’ I said.
She sat down, removed from her face the tortoise¬
shell glasses, and rubbed her eyes. Her voice had the
faint accent, but to me easily recognisable—I who have
250
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
assisted at the pyramidal priming and mal-education
archaeological of so much transatlantic femininity. ‘ I
aw the expedition—or at least, I lead it. Myself, an
Egyptian surveyor, and three servants.’
I made noises of apology, and at these Steyn and
the girl chuckled together, and at that moment the
lantern flared up.
She was indeed but the merest girl, no middle-aged
and mosquito-salted explorer, as her voice had seemed
to warrant. In the dusty breeches, puttees and boots
she sat; but her shirt was dusty not at all and very
unmasculine, the fine silk shirt. Bare-headed, her hair
in lamplight and sunlight alike had that blue raven¬
wing sheen I had met only once before in Egypt—such
hair as possessed the little madame who once lived at
Daybreak House. But her eyebrows were almost fair,
very fine brows, of one line of tinting, like the brows
of a Japanese.
She had a face thin and humorous, redeemed from
severity by the girlish curve of chin, even as it was
denied beauty by the spectacles American and absurd.
She sat cross-legged, cigarette-smoking, and nodded
an easy acknowledgment of our introductions. She
talked about herself and her work without apologies,
because her work seemed to her the most important
thing on earth.
A mineralogist, she was already apparently of such
note as to be sent out to Egypt by an important American
company to consult the Government with regard to
exploring and mapping the putative oil-centres in the
Bahaira. To such good effect had she carried out
IT IS WRITTEN
251
those consultations that the Cairene Government had
fitted out an expedition for her and sent her to the
Wadi Faregh for preliminary investigations.
‘ Of course, oil shouldn’t be a matter for exploitation
by any single company. Or any single Government.
But what’s one to do, seeing we’re such fools we haven’t
got a world board of control yet ? . . . And my people
are the sanest and cleanest of the lot. Great work, you
know. The world’s fuel is growing scarcer every year.’
She laughed. ‘ So in depressed moments I dramatise
the business and prefigure myself fighting silence and
primordial darkness, the last Ice Age and the extinction
of the human species ! ... You people—archaeologists ?
I’m afraid you’ll find the Wadi disappointing.’
It was Steyn who answered her. He gave a little laugh
and looked away from us, out into the night, which was
moonless but with the soft splendour of starshine.
‘ Archaeologists ? No. We also have come to fight
the Darkness.’
VII
Each evening of the days that followed it became
the custom for Gillyflower Arnold to visit our camp
or we hers. The latter was the more common occurrence,
for the leader of the oil expedition had brought net and
rackets into the desert and nightly, up to the time of
our arrival, had insisted on impressing her stout surveyor
as partner for the mystic gambollings of tennis. Except
in the infrequently-ordered doubles, he now escaped
these objectionable activities, as I did, and we and the
massed camps would sit and watch Gillyflower and
2J2
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Godfrey Steyn executing the manoeuvres agile and
enthusiastic. Steyn was discovered as a player extra¬
ordinarily good ; and, occasionally beaten. Gillyflower
would stand and marvel at him.
It was as though she had discovered a Stone Age
shaman making miraculous breaks on a billiards table.
Palaeolithic indeed was the cultured period in which
she placed him. 4 Medieval ? My dear man, you’re
pre-Adamic. This worship of light and fear of darkness
—it’s the mumbo-jumbo of the carrion caves. Saints
and ministers 1 And in the twentieth century, too ! ’
‘ Even in the twentieth century—when a young
woman comes five thousand miles to dig in the earth
for weapons to fight that same Darkness ! Do you think
it’s any the less real because you call it Cosmic Chance
or something equally nebulous ? ’
‘ My dear shaman ! You’re not in the pits of Nean¬
derthal now ! Why personify the thing ? What good
has belief in gods ever done ? Isn’t our job in this age
plain enough—to bring order and decency into human
life for the first time and bring adventure back ? *
I left them, both flushed and arguing but good-
tempered, and walked away into the starlight to smoke
a pipe alone on a Faregh brow, with below me the
murmur of their young voices. And beyond the hills
and sands—Cairo—Egypt—the world that had known
so many creeds and faiths, where the young have sat
and talked and debated through the million evenings,
loving and hating and questioning the gods who shine
and pass. . . .
But indeed, when I had gone up to my hill-brow
IT IS WTLITTEN
253
and pipe, there had fallen the quieter spell on them—
these two with the philosophies apparently irreconcilable.
You imagine Steyn sitting there, facing her, talking,
with for background the dusking desert, and Gillyflower
Arnold bending on both the finely-pencilled brows. . . .
He did not argue then : merely told her of the world
and life as he had seen it, the necessity of a guiding
Consciousness to account for his own consciousness.
... And then the blood and agony of the rotting migrant-
treks in the Anatolian hinterlands, the butchery and
cruelty of the War, evil exultant under the shams of
plenty and peace, evil that crawls in the shape of vile
and loathsome disease and unmeaning suffering and
torture through all life. . . . Darkness. Everywhere
the hand of a Consciousness, surely—but a Conscious¬
ness that, without explanation, was surely vile.
‘ You are fair and wise and brave and eager,’ he said,
‘ and do you think that is equipment enough to believe
in the triumph of the Adventure which you see all life
to be ? A natural law might kill or crush you—but
what of the Darkness that may maim and torture you
horribly, that may wipe the cleanest and most selfless
of your work from all record as a slate is wiped clean,
that may even vilify the fairest things of your memory
till that memory disgusts the world ? . . . For all those
things have been.’
‘ I never thought of it that way,’ she confessed.
And then : ‘ Oh, but I won’t believe it 1 It’s only a
horrible dream. . . . Even if it were true, how would
the finding of this lost script help ? ’
* Don’t you see—Christ, the Messenger, the Captain
254
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
of the Adventure—He knew what He came to lead
men against. He must have known why Darkness, the
stark denial of God’s Godhead, so prevailed. . . .
The script—it must be explanation and plan of campaign
in one, the Lost Message of the Christ! ’
She sat and looked at him with scornful, troubled
eyes. Reared in a dogma of unbelief as stern and
uncompromising as any Calvinist’s creed, she felt her
no-faith crumbling and dissolving even as the world
of the ancient materialist has crumbled and dissolved
into the unchartable atom-swirl of the modern physicist.
. . . Words and symbols and dreams—and yet—and
yet 
‘ Christ—the Great Captain. ... Of course it’s only
dramatisation—hero-personification of the Adventure’s
essence. But splendid enough, Steyn! Thrilling to
think we may have had a Leader, Someone who saw
the beginning and the end 1 ’
He looked at her, glad—and a little startled, I think.
For perhaps his world was also blurring and losing
outline a little. That heroic explorer-spirit in which
she saw life and the universe—it blew now and then as
a sharp, keen wind amidst the cloudy veils of his mysti¬
cism. And in its blowing he would glimpse with a strange
amaze and fear a Christ he had never dreamt. . . .
VIII
There was no oil in the Wadi Faregh.
So Gillyflower informed me, one dusty noon we
IT IS WRITTEN 255
met, each accompanied by a labourer, in a nullah of the
Wadi.
‘ I’m packing up in a day or so and reporting back
to Cairo. There isn’t a drop in the whole range.’
‘ Nor a god-script either, I fear.’
She laughed and then frowned. £ I haven’t seen a
trace of anything that looked like a tomb. How’s
Mr. Steyn ? ’
‘ He is in bed with the touch of fever,’ I said. And
added : * He takes this failure to heart.’
We looked at each other in some helplessness, for
somehow he had grown the mutual charge. With
the passing of day on day of fruitless excavation and
exploration, the strain on him had begun to show.
His face thinned, and the charming smile and boyish
laughter were less frequent. At first Gillyflower
Arnold and her tennis-games had had the power to
bring him out of his trances of brooding, as had her
laughter and irreverence and American exuberance.
But of late he had shown the disposition to avoid her
encampment, or, when there, to avoid anything but the
talk most trivial. . . .
He had fallen in love with her, as was almost in¬
evitable. But there was the something more than belief
in the hopelessness of his love that made him avoid
her presence. And that thing it seemed to me was
fear—fear that after all he had followed only an ancient
fiction, that no script had ever existed, that his very
vision of life was false. He had outlived and out¬
faced his belief in the divinity of that consciousness
which ruled the universe, but either to outface the scorn
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
256
and pity of Gillyflower Arnold or to go forth into the
stark deserts of atheism were the thoughts from which
he shuddered away.
Yet I did not care to think what would happen when
the oil expedition had left the Wadi.
And then next day Gillyflower Arnold discovered the
tomb of Polyorthes.
IX
She became visible at half-past two in the afternoon,
on the brow of the hill, waving, an excited silhouette.
She cupped her hands and called, c Bring your people
and pick-axes. I’ve discovered a passage that looks like
a tomb-entrance. . . .’
Yet when we reached the ridge beside her she regarded
Steyn doubtfully. ‘ You can’t come like that.’
He was newly up from his bed, the fever still upon
him, staggering, white-faced. He laughed.
‘ Do you think anything can hurt me now ? ’
She stared at him, seemed about to say something,
changed her mind, shrugged, and turned and led the
way.
On the extreme western edge of the Wadi a precipice-
shelf that faced the desert; at the foot of it still standing
the gleaming apparatus of the oil-boring; three feet
away, the rock-covering crumbled aside by the drum
of the apparatus, the partially-uncovered mouth of a
brick-walled passage. . . .
At half-past three Godfrey Steyn and I, having had
cleared from the entrance the fallen rubble of rock,
pushed a lantern in front of us and crawled into the
passage.
IT IS WRITTEN
257
x
We crept sweating in the foul air, but the passag’
was of the shortest. Within eighten feet of the entrancee
it emerged upon a rock-hewn chamber, plain and un¬
decorated, dry and cool. Set in the midst of that chamber
was a rock kist—a great stone box on which rested the
unhinged lid of stone.
We seized that lid, and, panting, lifted it aside. Then
I held up the lantern.
A mummy-coffin of the simplest: for a moment the
wood still smelt fresh. Upon it inscriptions in the
Persian and the Greek, the latter of which I read and
remembered, and will always remember:
‘ Poljorthes, the traveller> son of Thi-Hetep : I, who
pass to the darkness, jet have seen the light of Ormu^d: /,
whom the Prophet Mani blessed at Ctesiphon in the names of
the Christ and the Buddha : To any who in after years follow
a tale and rumour and find these bones, let them seek that
which is written even in the darkness of Ahriman.’
Within the coffin : An unmummified body which
fell to flaking shreds and brown bones even as we
looked at it. Under the head of that body a roll of what
might have been either parchment or papyrus—a roll
that crumbled like an ash and rose in the little puff of
dust. . . .
XI
She came across to our encampment at sunset, went
into Steyn’s tent, and emerged from it a moment later.
258 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
‘ Steyn—where is he ? ’
He had fainted outside the rock-tomb where we had
left the Manichaean Polyorthes and his unread script.
We had had him'carried to the camp, and then Gilly¬
flower Arnold had gone back to the precipice-shelf
to see to the resealing of the tomb.
Now I stared at her in surprise. ‘ He was there
but the short time ago. Tossing in fever. I looked
in.’
‘ He’s gone.’
I went to his tent, pulled aside the flap, and looked in.
Then I had the sudden thought. I began to search.
Gillyflower Arnold stood in the doorway and I heard
her quick breathing.
‘ Anything missing ? ’
I turned and nodded. She clenched her hands.
‘ Not ? ’
We stood outside and looked at the familiar fall of
the Wadi evening. It was very silent and very desolate.
Suddenly Gillyflower Arnold began to speak in a quick,
high voice.
‘ Darkness. . . . Perhaps he was right after all, colonel;
perhaps there’s something. . . . Oh, it’s a lie, it’s a lie,
anyway. Cowardly even if true. . . .’ She laughed a
little hysterically, then shook my shoulder. ‘ What
are we standing here for ? We should be searching.
We must find him.’
I do not know how long we searched amidst those
reddened hill-slopes and sudden valleys. It seemed
that we called and clambered and stumbled for hours,
though it may have been only a few minutes. Once
IT IS WRITTEN
259
Gillyflower Arnold stopped and laughed and looked
at me queerly.
‘ “ Seek in the darkness of Ahriman—” wasn’t
that the phrase . . . ? ’ She became rigid. ‘ There.
Look.’
He sat bowed of shoulders like the Rodin Thinker,
his face in shadow, the night almost upon him. He
moved his hands, and in those hands something glinted
and flashed red as with blood.
XII
‘ Wait 1 ’
The other searcher was gone from my side. Steyn
half-started to his feet, and in that moment the revolver
was snatched from his hand and sent hurtling down the
hill-slope. Dazed, he faced in the half-darkness a
raging accuser.
‘ Coward ! You beastly coward ! Christ—the Cap¬
tain—do you think He came in triumph or that He
won ? Do you think He lost because He seemed to
lose, do you think He’s lost now because a mouldy script
has crumbled to dust ? Had He no terrors of the Dark¬
ness to face, foes to out-fight, that He might leave
select campaign instructions to you ? . . . You coward !
Deserter 1 ’
He was motionless. She made a despairing gesture.
The passion in her voice was very near to tears.
* Steyn—listen 1 Can’t you see, don’t you understand ?
It is God who fights to reclaim the world! What
does it matter the fable we accept or reject ? Perhaps
z6o THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
the old stories are all wrong, perhaps it was God, not
Satan, who was overthrown in the beginning of time.
. . . Wonderful to think—Christ—you—I—we’re the
champions of the dethroned God / . . . That lost script—it’s
written wherever there’s pity and courage in the world.
.. . Oh, my dear, help me . . .’
He seemed like a man emerging from a trance. He
stared at her, then reached out and caught the hands
extended to him.
‘ Why, I’ve been blind I . . . Gillyflower! . . .’
XII
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN
i
WHAT is k ? A camel-train with bersim, I think.
. . . Unpleasant ? He smells not sweetly, the
camel. . . . You have startled the driver; he thought
us jinni^ perhaps !
That tinkling ? You did not notice it as they passed ?
It requires distance for effect. To have your heart
rise in your throat you must hear it ring across dusk
miles of desert—or as Oliver Gault once heard it beyond
the fairy mountains of Mesheen.
Sit here in this doorstep and rest, my friend. Young
men should dream their loves at night, not wander the
streets of Cairo with a middle-aged and prosy Russi m !
Even though it is your last Egyptian night, and to¬
morrow await you sea and ship and weeks wherein your
Cairene days and I will fade to the merest names—and
even those of uncertain orthography !
. . . Very soon the morning now. See that greyness
above the roofs ? In an hour we will go down
past ’Abbas Pasha and stir the little Simon to
provide a last Greek breakfast in the Khalig. Mean¬
time—
Eh ? Gault ? Mesheen ? I had forgotten both till
that camel went by. In the self-defence I have for¬
gotten. . . . Weeks now since I went out to that desert-
house of his—coward and fool that I am !
But I will go again: this very morning I will go I
Somehow I will find the courage. . . . Oh, dreamer of
261
zGz
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
dreams, fantastic fool though I am—who knows, who
knows ?
. . . Bear with me a little, my friend. A camel’s bell—
that it should stir one so ! Yet perhaps this very night
in Abu Zabal another heard it go by—one who may
find forgetfulness never, unless—unless 
ii
And for beginnings of all this strange haunting of
three lives is to go back across a year and eight hundred
miles of desert to the last outpost of the company
Trans-Saharan Transport. A stifling night of February,
far beyond Kufra, in the regions where the oases
ceased and the raiding Tuareg of Air and Tibesti
came but seldom. And in his tent, on the edge of the
encampment, Oliver Gault, the sick and fevered sur¬
veyor, hating his work, his companions, his life.
‘ Mosquitoes crawling battalions deep on my face,
and my stomach rotten with fever. I was at the last
stage: I’d have broken down before morning. Next
tent that infernal Caprotti was jerking out a tune on a
sand-clogged gramophone—the needle seemed to be
playing round and round on my brain-tracks. Air
thick as soup, and yet cold. . . . And that greasy blaze
of stars ! ’
So to me he was to describe that place, in the uncouth
jargon that is the modern English colloquial—the
speech-debasement from which is yet smitten the
occasional vivid phrase. . . .
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN 263
The year before that I had known him in Cairo.
Slight, quick, restless, with the strange flare of light in
pale eyes, the mouth unevenly cut, and a face tanned
almost negro-black : Oliver Gault. He was then in
negotiation with Trans-Saharan Transport for the post
of desert surveyor. This was the new American company
proposing, after the planning of routes and roads, to
run the constant caravans of caterpillar automobiles
throughout Sahara, linking in trade and travel Cairo
to Air, Algiers to Timbuctoo. . . . The project florid
and magnificent, and one that had fired the quick
imagination of Gault, though he would speak of it in
the humour as twisted as his mouth.
‘ In a year we’ll have the Tuareg talking through his
nose, dancing to jazz and uplift, and holding Monkey-
ville trials. . . . Nothing can withstand the progress of
nasalisation.’
Young though he was, he had already reputation
as Saharan explorer and geologist. With Hassanein
Bey he shared credit for first traversement of the stony
deserts—though this credit he would claim for himself,
and jeer the Bey from the field. . . . Not a gentleman,
you understand, either in birth or outlook. But I
think the gentleman passes from the world. Up in his
place rise the Gaults, cruel and crude, restless of outlook,
tenacious of purpose, without honour and without
faith—yet stirred by the gleam occasional of a vision
and a new selflessness that no knighthood of the world
has ever known. . . .
But that new vision is still but a mirage-picture in the
dusk. From Gault that evening he was to describe
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
264
it was more remote than belief in the articles thirty-nine
of your Church. He was a man frantic with fatigue
and disgust, his nerves frayed to twisted rags by months
of self-overwork and discomfort and monotony.
£ I think I’d have gone mad in a minute—I was
reaching for my Webley to go out and settle the hash of
either Caprotti or his gramophone when I heard our
sentry shouting a challenge, and an angel of God,
disguised as a Sudanese and smelling like a cholera
epidemic, came clumping into the camp on a camel.
All the way from Kufra. He’d brought the mail-bag—
three letters. ... I opened the single personal one,
read it, and gave a croak. Like an overcome bull-frog.
. . . And then I was laughing and crying, in hysterics,
the pages slipping and falling from my heat-rawed
hands and being picked up and being lost again. . . .’
The father whom he had hated—the war profitmaker
in England whom he had regarded always with the
savage contempt, even before the days of their final
quarrel, whose life of safety and security his own aching
restlessness and bitter no-content had despised—was
dead.
‘ I found myself chanting an insane sing-song—
“ Saved from hell, saved from hell! ” And then I
grew calmer. Hell—of my own choosing. Whatever
for ? Whatever for ? Why hadn’t I stayed in England
and wallowed in war-profits ? . . . And then I was
scrambling for my boots and weeping and singing
again. Sand and dirt and discomfort, prickly heat and
Baghdad boils and potted meat—finished and done with !
The world waiting there in the east—if I didn’t die
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN 265
first!—the world where I could laze and laze and laze
. . . bathe and bathe and bathe . . . spend and spend and
spend . . . live like a lord . . . sleep like a hog ... go
clad in sin and shining raiment . . . drink of life like a
fly in a tumbler ! . . .
‘ And women—oh, my God, were there still women
with white, white skins, and would any of them be
alive when I got back ?
‘ They must have thought me a raving lunatic, the
roadmen. In an hour I’d chucked my billet, handed
over the road-survey to little Savraut—who did foolish
things and tried to stop me with a revolver, not knowing
that I was a soul reprieved. Then I grabbed the camel,
some food and water, and was on the way to Kufra
before midnight. . . . Reached it in three days. Rode
most of them delirious, I think, with an insane con¬
viction that the world in the east was a mirage that I
must overtake.
‘ A mile from the first oasis the camel gave a ping
like a clockwork toy with the works gone wonk, and
doubled up. I staggered into Kufra just ahead of the
sunset.’
in
Six weeks later, all unconscious of that happening,
in the last days of Spring and the tourist season, I was
preparing for myself a short holiday. Three weeks
on the beach at Mustapha I planned, where none would
question me as to whether the good antiques of Frankfort
were genuine or your Mr. Wells an incarnation of
Akhnaton. ... I had saved a little money, you
z66
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
understand, and was sick of Cairo, the Mediterranean
calling me like a pleasant friend a year neglected.
And then one morning I was handed the letter brought
by a messenger over-night. I opened it, recognised the
handwriting, and read :
‘ Dear Saloney,
Come and talk to me. I learnt the other night
that you were still in Cairo. I myself have been here
a month and a half, but I’m going to Alexandria next
week—thank God ! for I’m very bored.
Any time this afternoon if you can manage it.
Oliver Gault.’
I stared at the notepaper in stupefaction. Oliver
Gault—whom I had believed to be in the Sahara beyond
Siwa—he was in Cairo and staying at Shepheard’s
Hotel!
I had no commissions to carry out, and no engage¬
ments that afternoon. So, in the some curiosity, I
dressed myself in tourist drill and sun-helmet, playing
the little game that I was the English tripper arrived
for the hasty week in Cairo. In a taxi I rode to
Shepheard’s, speaking to the driver in the loud and
inaccurate French, as only an Englishman may speak.
At the entrance, where I had so many times waited for
custom amongst other dragomans, I handed the card
and was shown to the cool lounge to await the coming
of Gault.
He was taking a bath, they told me, in the tone
respectful, as was proper to my bad French and the
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN 267
cut of my drill. It was the room deserted and I leant
back in my seat and closed my eyes and heard the
sound of the little waves come racing up the beach at
Mustapha. . . .
‘ Anton ! ’ In the voice of amazement, the voice
half-choked. ‘ Oh, Anton Kyrilovich ! ’
IV
I opened my eyes at that. As one confronted by a
ghost I sat staring, myself white-faced I think, as she
was. Then I came to my feet and stood at attention
and kissed her hands.
‘ Princess ! ’
She looked round the room the swift moment, then
flung her arms about my neck and kissed me. Then
laughed and wrung my hands, and for a little we stood
breathless. Slowly the colour came back to her face
and to her lips the amused smile—amusement at herself
and me.
‘ Anton 1 I thought you dead or a gay commissar
all these years ! ... In Cairo for nine of them ? And
since we met—oh, I don’t want to remember how
long 1 ’
‘ Twelve years,’ I said, and tried to smile. We
Russians have learnt to smile at much which is un¬
amusing. We sat down and looked at each other, I
and she who had been the Princess Pelagueya Bourrin....
Of those far days in Kazan, when I was still Professor
of English Literature in the Gymnasium and—though
this you may find hard to believe I—without suspicion
268
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
that in twelve years’ time I would be a middle-aged
dragoman sitting on a Cairene doorstep at dawn—of
those there is no need for you to know. She was the
girl of eighteen then, and I, though the mere professor,
had yet my personal dreams, for I came of a family as
old and noble as hers—we could still consider that of
importance, we whom the soldier-groom, Budenni, was
to sweep from South Russia as so many vermin!
So distant in the years from that quiet room at
Shepheard’s. . . .
She was changed unbelievably—and yet hardly at
all!—she whom I had always found strange pleasure in
addressing by the formal title. And of this my princess
—even now I do not know the colour of her hair and
eyes. I think they are both that black that is on occasion
the brown: when the sun comes on them. In un¬
expected lights and moments the sun comes on the
hair and eyes of Pelagueya. . . .
Short-cut hair; in the absurd, short skirts, the
dress of white over-stamped with the whorls of gold ;
with still that clear pallor of brow and cheek that is
Russian, and the smooth out-jut of cheek-bones, and
the long, sweet fall of lips. . . . Unchanged, except
that the sunlight in her eyes brought a different picture :
like Spring sun on a Ural river when the ice lies frozen
beneath.
e Of course you look older, Anton. But handsome
as ever. Oh, Anton Kyrilovich, it’s so long since I saw
a man blush! and with a beard—I hardly knew you a
moment because of that beard.’
The beard was safe topic. ‘ All Russians are bearded
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN z69
—outside Russia. Without it I would not have been
the refugee authentic, nor the guide interesting.*
Of my profession for nine years I told a little. There
came the swift pity and anger in her face.
‘ A dragoman ! How horrible ! If we had known,
we might have helped—at least at first. But they said
you were killed at Perekop. Some other Saloney, of
course. We escaped to France and lived—I will not
tell you how we lived. Then Boris went back to Russia
secretly three years ago, and was arrested and shot.
That broke father’s heart. He died and left hardly a
sou— Poor father !
‘ And then, on that awful strip of coast Oh,
Anton, you escaped much by becoming a dragoman !—
I began two years as companion, teacher, nursery-maid.
Once I loved children. . . . Amongst nouveaux riches,
Brazilians, French bourgeois. . . . Why isn’t there a
revolution in France ? We at least had pleasant manners !
‘ And then this January ’
She had looked one night at the pearl necklace she
had hoarded, and all the pleasant life forgone—the life
of ease and consideration, laughter and gay song and
cultured voices—had cried in her ears to take the mad
risks. She had gone to Paris, had had the orgy of
purchasing pretty clothes. Then south to Marseilles
and so a passage to Egypt.
‘ But why Egypt ? *
‘ They said the bigger and more brilliant Brazilians
came here. I came after them, Anton, to sell myself as
advantageously as possible. . . . I’m glad he’s not a
Brazilian, though.’
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
270
She had looked away whilst she was speaking, but
now she turned her head directly towards me again,
a little spot of blood flaming below each cheekbone,
but with the cool irony still in her eyes.
‘ I’m glad to have seen you again, just once, Anton.
It’s been the final and artistic touch. You see. I’m
leaving Cairo in a week’s time as the mistress of a
millionaire.’
* Pelagueya ! ’ And then, at sight of the laughter still
in her eyes : ‘You are joking.’
The laughter was suddenly gone. ‘ Joking ! Anton,
I’d have sold myself to a Jew from the ghetto—if he’d
had money. Shameless ? You haven’t known those
last two years—condescension and mean rooms and the
life of a servant. The nursery-maid emigre, the pauper
princess ! . . . Rather than face that again I’d go back
to Russia and turn tovarish. But I’m to do neither. And
my millionaire’s not a Jew. Of the canaille, of course,
but rather amusing. . . . Especially now that he hates me.’
‘ Hates you ? ’
She laughed. ‘ It was comic. He explained that of
course he had no romantic love, that I was, in fact, just
something he wanted and could afford. Nevertheless,
he offered marriage. I told him that the price was too
small and that in Russia we Bourrins did not wed with
the gutter. . . . How easy to sting the vanity of those
animals! He’s accepted my counter-proposal, but
every moment I think he swears that I’ll pay to the utter¬
most for that acceptance. . . . The bargaining instinct,
I suppose. We’ve had the terms and endurance of the
association drawn up by a lawyer ! ’
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN 271
,She clasped her hands round her knees, the defiance
leaping in her eyes. ‘ Shocked, Anton ? But me—
Oh, I’m to have the things that haven’t been mine for
years except as desperate luxuries : money and laziness,
leisure ; clean food, clean hands, and long, long bathes ;
books and jewels and pretty clothes. Clothes ! The
loveliness of clothes, Anton ! If I could only take you
upstairs and show you the things I’ve been buying ! ’
I found my voice strange and high-pitched.
‘ And the price ? ’
She suddenly wrung her hands. I thought she was
going to weep.
‘ The price ! What cowards you are—men ! Liars
and cowards and cheats, weak and emotional! Greedy
liars, greedy cheats! ... If I came to share your drago¬
man’s room would I not pay the same price ? ’
I had nothing to say to that, nor looked at her, the
princess who had strayed from a fairy story into the
legend of Gomorrah. And then her hand on mine.
‘ I didn’t mean that. Or I did. Oh, Anton, it’s too
late. If this was 1917 and Kazan and yours wasn’t a
dragoman’s room. . . . All our faiths were futilities, and
before I grow old—oh, my friend, I must live! ’
She withdrew her hand, laughed again a little un¬
steadily, and sought for her cigarette-case. Then she
paused with lighted match, and the amused scorn
flickered on her lips.
‘ The exhibit. Here comes my millionaire.’
I did not look over my shoulder, hearing the footsteps
approach. I sat with a grip on myself, trying to believe
that all our faiths had not been futilities, our codes
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
272
cowardice. And then she spoke, in English, in the
insolent drawl.
4 This is a countryman of mine, Mr. Millionaire.
Mr. Oliver Gault: Colonel Anton Saloney.’
v
I can still hear her gay laugh, a trifle breathless, as
she glanced from one to other of us, and learnt that I
had come to Shepheard’s to meet him.
‘ Then I will leave you,’ and, with the smile to me
and the nod patronising to Gault, she wras gone. I
had stood up, but Gault turned a casual back to her
nod and looked out through the window. He was
clad in the soft and expensive flannels, the clothes well
chosen and seemly, but for one detail. This was a tie
of the vivid red, and, still in the dazement of his revelation
as Pelagueya’s millionaire, I stared at it foolishly.
4 Why do you wear that ? ’
He turned his sun-blackened face and grinned at me,
twistedly. 4 Oh, to show my kinship with Budenni!
. . . Coming upstairs ? ’
And there, upstairs in the gorgeous suite, I sat and
listened to him, with all the time at back of my mind
the thought: This is Pelagueya’s millionaire. But I
made no interruptions or denunciations heroic. . . .
It was a very evil and unkind dream I was dreaming,
and through it all I heard forgetfulness and the Mediter¬
ranean calling on the beaches of Mustapha.
4. . . And only a month since I rode into Kufra,
Saloney. Like a bad nightmare badly remembered.
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAIFN 273
Lord, how the mosquitoes must be mourning my
passing ! ’
‘ How have you passed this six weeks ? 5 I asked.
He grinned and sprawled in a chair. ‘ In bed, largely.
Clad in silk. Look at these socks. . . . God bless my
parental profiteer and his forgiving last testament. . . .
A little man comes and shaves me each morning, and
another finds my braces, and three bring my boots—
one to each boot and one with the laces. They’d fetch
a palanquin and carry me down to lunch, if I asked for it.’
He yawned suddenly and jumped to his feet and swore.
‘ And I’m bored, Saloney—oh, fed to the teeth !
Dances and outings and chatter and opera—Lord,
that opera! I’ve escaped to heaven from hell—St.
Peter himself shook hands with me on arrival: I think
it was St. Peter, though it may have been the manager—
and the harping and the company celestial bore me.
Or is it only Cairo—your Polychromata ? I’d rather
live in a damn dye-factory. . . .’
He prowled to and fro, restlessly. ‘ The peasant in
the palace, the Zulu in Versailles—the unimpressed Zulu.
Is it that, or do we just outgrow these things, along
with wigs and patches and gibbets and powder ? . . .
He stopped and grinned again, his face a satyr’s.
c Anyhow, there’s one thing we don’t outgrow. Still
that.’ He stared at me a sudden curiosity. £ Are you
in love with this Princess Pelagueya, colonel ? ’
How the sea was calling out beyond Pharillon !
‘ Told you of our relations—our prospective relations ?
She has ! . . . And the price ? I’ll see she pays it. By
God, I’ll see to that! ’
s
274 THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
But not even in a dream—I made to rise. ‘ This is
the beastliness.’
He caught my arm. ‘ Oh, sit down, colonel. Beastli¬
ness ? Of course I’m a beast—a starved beast, a beast
hungry for beauty and tenderness. What else is there
to grope after? And I’m to buy it, and in a week.
... To think I might have been still in Sahara ! ’
I could not hate him, even in a dream; they are the
kind beyond hate, those. He sat down and yawned
again, and stretched.
* Sahara . . . the old company. Wonder where they
are, little Savraut and Caprotti and Ba Daghshar and the
rest ? Somewhere north of the Mesheen massif. . . .
Pity that infernal detour was necessary.’
He seemed to await the question. He began to scatter
cigarette ash on the gorgeous carpet in idle illustration.
‘ Mesheen. A mountain block beyond Kufra. Lies
north to south thirty or forty miles. Block in several
senses. Terra incognita and absolutely impassable—a
wilderness of closed gulleys. Every nullah we tried
ended in a cul-de-sac. There’s no pass at all through
the massif and the road’ll have to wheel up north by
a long detour to carry on towards Air. We searched
for days. . . .’
He dropped his cigarette and absent-mindedly ground
it into the floriferous carpet. ‘ Funny thing happened
there. We hadn’t a single camel with us, the range
seemed uninhabited—couldn’t be inhabited. No oases
anywhere near at hand. And yet—one night, at the
other side of the impassable walls, I heard a camel’s
bell.’
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN 275
The ice-flare in his eyes. ‘ Clear and distinct—and
no possible camel-train could be there. Later I heard a
yarn amongst the Arabs of the road-gang that a pass
through the mountains had once existed. . ; . An old
chap told me of it—some crazy legend of a Madhiq el Fiqr,
with guarded entrance, that traversed Mesheen from
east to west.’
‘ Madhiq el Fiqr ? ’ I sought in inadequate English
and Arabic vocabularies of my mind for translation.
‘ The Passage of the Dawn ? ’
* Eh ? . . . That funny Russian twist! Morning Pass
I called it. You’re the better poet.’ There came on his
dark face the sudden strange dreaming look. ‘ The
Corridor of the Morning—the Passage of the Dawn ! ’
He leapt to his feet, and swore. ‘ Gods, almost I
thought myself back there! Waken up, Saloney. A
drink to celebrate my beatification ? ’
VI
Next day I went to Alexandria. Behind, in Shep-
heard’s, the Princess Pelagueya Bourrin, descendant
of boyars, prepared to consummate her bargain with
Oliver Gault.
There was no shame between them, you understand,
no embarrassment and no pretence of affection. Rather
the reverse. They were each conscious of a bright,
sharp enmity. Pelagueya made no concealment of her
scorn, nor Gault of the fact that for that scorn she would
pay dearly. As he had paid.
‘ A heavy price, Mr. Millionaire,’ she had said, when
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
Z-j(i
they came out together from the office of the shocked
and amazed little lawyer in the Sharia el Manakh.
£ It is worth it/ he had answered, looking at her, the
derisive grin for once vanishing from his twisted mouth.
And at that look, so far from love, somehow not lust,
she had shivered a little.
But there is no courage like to that of their generation
—the generation to which the gods are foolishness and
the codes and restraints but maunderings of dull dotards.
They cry for life without veils or reticences, and face it
without veils themselves. In that last week Pelagueya
and Gault evolved a strange friendliness—mocking on
her part, sardonic on his, though they would meet but
seldom, and then as casual acquaintances.
On the Monday they were to go together to Alexan¬
dria, where Gault had already bought a house. But on
the Saturday he came to her with the proposal that this
plan should be altered. There was an old Turkish
castle out in Abu Zabal which he had once seen. An
acquaintance had told him it was lately renovated, and
to let. If the Princess Bourrin was agreeable, they
would go there, instead of Alexandria, for the first
few weeks.
‘ But why ? We’ll be very bored. It’s on the edge of
the desert, isn’t it ? ’
c That’s the chief attraction. I want to get out of a
comfortable bed each morning and make faces at the
Sahara.’
She laughed at that, for once unguardedly. ‘ Yes, I
think I can make the concession.’
He called for her early on the Monday afternoon.
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN 277
bringing the great touring car. Her luggage was loaded
into it, and together they drove out of Cairo. She
lighted a cigarette, and sat watching him for a little,
then made a request. Might she drive ?
c Why not ? 5 he said, and relinquished the wheel to
her. The car ran through the long afternoon into
the Egyptian country. Once he looked at her with
his twisted grin.
‘ Honeymoon.’
Canaille.
It was nearly two hours before he spoke again. ‘ Five
miles now.’
Now they came to a slope where the road zigzagged
ruttily and steeply away beneath them. Little stones
pattered on the wind-screen. Out of a field by the side
of the road a heavy cart, single-poled, wooden-wheeled,
was being drawn by oxen. Two boys in charge stared
up at the nearing car and beat the indifferent beasts.
Their shouts came up the evening.
Gault looked at Pelagueya, saw the puckering of her
brows, the tinge of colour mount to each cheekbone.
He hesitated only a second.
‘ Shall I ? ’
He leant over, slipped his right arm under her left,
put both hands over hers, and grinned at the road. A
wisp of her short hair clouded his eyes an irritable
moment. He felt her fingers strain under the pressure
of his. . . .
It was a difficult moment. The oxen laboured aside,
clumsily, up the steep mud-bank sheered the off-side
wheels of the car. Then, with a breath-catching swerve,
278
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
they were on the road again, with the sunset-reddened
incline sloping away before them.
It was as if that sunset would never die. In front
and behind the road glowed in gold and red. Under
the dim clumps of date-palms fled painted shadows.
Gault’s hands still remained on the wheel and to
Pelagueya it seemed that in a moment she would
weep.
Then she heard him speak, jerkily.
‘ Look here, that contract. . . . You’ll be all right,
but you needn’t We’ll go back to Cairo.’
They glanced at each other, whitely, queerly, strangers
trapped by wonder. The car sped on. Then, the fairy
princess, she turned her face to him.
‘ Do you know you’ve never kissed me ? . . . And
it’s only three miles to Abu Zabal.’
VII
They spent two halcyon and amazing months in the
old Turkish castle, the while the summer waxed. They
talked the sun out of the sky each day and never lost
interest in the talking. They had waited all their lives
to talk to each other.
‘ We’ll buy a yacht and go drowsing through the
Mediterranean. To Greece. To Crete. South through
the Red Sea to India—Java—Sumatra. . . . Wander
together for ever, princess. . . . Was there ever a man so
lucky as I am ? ’
They sat listening that evening to a nightingale that
sang in the cypress grove at the end of the garden. And
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN 279
Gault, listening, was aware that his love had already
changed from a romantic passion to something akin to a
vivid pain.
‘ When are you going to marry me, Pelagueya ?
Sometime ? Why not now ? I’ll make Saloney persuade
you when he comes to-morrow.’
But on the morrow, when I came to kiss the hand of
my lost princess, she would not be persuaded by me
either.
‘ Some time. When we know each other.’
He swore at that. ‘ Don’t you know me by now ?
Every secret of body and soul ? ’
She laughed and kissed him, gaily. ‘ You English
boy 1 ’
But that afternoon Gault was restless, and together
we tramped into the village, leaving Pelagueya sitting
in the shade of the cypress grove. Coming back at
sunset we could still see her there. And suddenly he
was talking to me with a strange passion.
* Lord, Saloney, what fools we are I Wanting even
when we’ve the world in our hands ! Wanting something
we cannot name. . * . Pelagueya—God, she’s wonder
itself, life and love and God to me. And yet—and yet—
sometimes I feel I could sell my soul for the gift of an
hour’s sheer unhappiness I What is it, Saloney, what is
it ? Marriage—the world’s sanction we’ve forgone and
she refuses. ... Is it that ? ’
We were within hearing of Pelagueya by then, and
she waved to us. He knelt beside her and laid his head
in her lap.
‘ On edge to-day, princess—like a fool! Don’t go
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
280
away, Saloney. I shan’t make more love in public than
I can help. Sit down and listen for our nightingale.’
That velvet silence of the Egyptian evening closed in
on us. Suddenly Gault started and cursed, and moved
his head restlessly. Pelagueya put her arms around his
neck, silencing him, and we listened.
From far across the tundra it came, on the Cairo road,
sweet and remote, a faint music growing clearer and
clearer, then fading into the gathering dusk—the tinkling
of a camel’s bell.
VIII
Next morning he came into Cairo with me, and it was
late in the day before he returned to Pelagueya in Abu
Zabal. At the first look at the flame in his eyes she
shivered. But he caught her hands, like a man in
desperation.
‘ Pelagueya, will you come into Cairo and marry me
to-morrow ? ’
She shook her head, smiling with trembling lips.
He laughed queerly, brought something from his
pocket, and tore it into little scraps. Then, looking away
from her, he spoke.
‘ I’ve been into the offices of Trans-Saharan Trans¬
port. They’ve a caravan leaving Solium in four days,
and I’m going with it—paying part of the expenses, on
a special expedition. I’ve been commissioned to make
a detailed investigation of the Mesheen massif.’
‘ I knew,’ she said, and smiled at him, weeping.
£ You knew ? But how ? . . . Have you tired of me,
THE PASSAGE OF THE DAWN 281
then ? . . . I’m a fool. Don’t cry, princess. . . . What
have I done ? ’
‘ Tired of you ? Oh my dear ! . . . Of course you
must go. And I’ll wait for you, and perhaps ’
He was holding her close, the old ice-flame in his
eyes. ‘ You’ll marry me when I come back ? Fairy
and reward ! . . . It’s that infernal mountain range that’s
worried me. Mesheen. I’m to find the pass I know lies
through it—the Passage of the Dawn. Little Savraut
and Caprotti are to be detached to assist. Be back
again inside six months. . . . And then ! ’
IX
Within six months he was dead, killed in a manner
very horrible by a raiding band of the Tuareg of Air,
he and two others of the special expedition which was
exploring the mountain passes of Mesheen.
Pelagueya sent me news of it from the castle at Abu
Zabal to which she had returned after the passing of
the hot season. I went out to her and she greeted me
with the old, kind smile and the easy talk, till we stood
together near that cypress grove. And then, suddenly,
she broke down.
‘ Oh, Anton Kyrilovich! I sent him back there.
Did I do right after all ? I could have married him;
perhaps I could have kept him ’
She wrung her hands, staring across the tundra.
‘ Only—there was something else. Always—haunting
him. And I loved him so. Fie could never hear a camel’s
bell go by but he remembered.’ She turned to me with
282
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
groping hands. ‘ My friend, my friend, what took him
back there ? What was it that I could not give him,
that was not mine to give ? ’
And then she gripped my hand and stood rigid.
‘ Oh, listen ! ’
There are many camel-trains go by Abu Zabal. From
far across the tundra, as once before I had heard it, it
came, sweet and faint, growing clearer and clearer, then
fading till it died remote on the Cairo road.
And suddenly, for the vivid moment, it seemed to
me that I understood that aching restlessness that had
driven Gault to his death in Mesheen, that Pelagueya
herself had shared when she let him go. As in a vision,
I saw again that room at Shepheard’s, the dreaming
look on a dark, still face 
The Passage of the Dawn l All his life he had sought
for it—and who does not share that search ? Some¬
where, he dreamt, beyond the twilights of love and hate,
ease and unease, there was the morning. Somewhere,
beyond the mountain-walls, there was wonder and the
morning.
{And this is the last of the Saloney stories.)
L’ENVOI
TO COLONEL SALONEY
A warm wind from the great steel bridge,
A swift tremendous Nile below.
And Cairo drowsing in the dusk
Reluctant that the day should go,
And close for us another day
Where Simon planned, and Andrei came.
And Kora loved beyond the Gates,
And Connon hymned the Way of Shame 
Saloney dreams beside the Nile :
O dreamer of the camel’s bell!
Shall we not hear your voice again—
We who have known and loved you well ?
Arthur John Hall
Cairo, 1930
283
//- «? 9
