r’ ■ WW"V - '“OiRKKrC"
- '-.-..-.-.’v-"..',"--..'-'" ■ V-‘ KKKHr tivHKK,-.
vSSK^^KKH|&;Di
Jwt h'vww-. -WUcy--
”'•-T.n.n.’yr-'U
HMHHKxgE^otieSO
vQwyCfKHrJ pv>i)
1
NaitiriaiUbrary of Scotland
"B000457492"
KKBIHHHWAfUWvi.
V
STAINED RADIANCE
By the same Author
Hanno, or the Future of Exploration
Polychromata, a story-cycle
STAINED RADIANCE
'Jl Fictionisf s Fre hide
By
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
JARROLDS Publishers (LONDON)
Limited 34 Paternoster Row, E.C.4
. _ . Made and Printed in
he Crainsborough Press, St. Albans.
Great Pritain
Fisher, Knight
Dedication of these Old Foes
with New Faces to the
laughter and pity of one
who has known them in other
guises :
My Wife,
RHEA MITCHELL
Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass.
Stains the white radiance of eternity.
—Shelley
But before the Builders upbuild in Mu
Tollan, the City of the Sun, there shall
be war, and the breaking of altars, and
the rending of hearts.
—Ascribed to Ma-Uinic brother of
Kukulcan, the Maya Buddha, in
Atlantis, c.6oo b.c.
CONTENTS
PAGE
CHAPTER THE FIRST
Wherein Various Unclassifiable Female Char¬
acters, together with a Revolutionist, a Soldier
and a Gentleman, are presented to the Reader,
and some Account given of Heaven and the
Giant Wars ......
CHAPTER THE SECOND
Wherein Divers Folk react to God and Man as
beseems their Natures, and in a Fashion beyond
the Author’s Powers of Precis
CHAPTER THE THIRD
Wherein the Bracing Effects of Military Life
are demonstrated, the Meditations of a Lady in
a Bath recorded with Due Indelicacy, and some
Sympathetic Insight shown into the Difficulties
of compiling the First Novel of an Ironist
CHAPTER THE FOURTH
Wherein, after a Side-glance upon the Doings
of a Poet in an Unnecessarily Conventional
Garret and an Account of how the Salvation of
Man is planned upon the Best Approved
Pattern, the Moonlight is utilized for a Rapid
Series of Snapshots .....
CHAPTER THE FIFTH
Wherein the Monotony of a Bucolic Idyll is
relieved by Various Interesting and Agreeable
Purple Patches . . . .
CHAPTER THE SIXTH
Wherein, whilst devoting Two Subchapters
to the Interests of Philosophy and One to the
Interests of Art, some Discreet, if Indirect,
Propaganda is done on behalf of the Birth
Control Movement
70
9i
114
137
CONTENTS
CHAPTER THE. SEVENTH
Wherein Full and Faithful Accounts, without
Asterisks, are given of a Bridal Night and a
Bye-Election, and, though We weep, the Skies
are not Wet ......
CHAPTER THE EIGHTH
Wherein Success, always a Pleasing
Phenomenon, comes to Andreas van Koupa,
Garland meditates upon the Grand Pyramid,
and Storman is apprised of himself as an
Agent of Mr. Shaw’s Life Force .
CHAPTER THE NINTH
Wherein Christmas Eve, which Some say com¬
memorates Christ and Some Charles Dickens, is
celebrated without Plagiarism
CHAPTER THE TENTH
Wherein a Long-neglected Character repairs a
Long-standing Neglect, and Divers Other
Happenings, of an Import to strain even the
Happy and Able Invention of the Subchapter,
are recorded ....
CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH
Wherein Garland evolves a System of Religion
and renounces the Belief that Life is due to a
Faulty and Accidental Mixing of Chemicals
CHAPTER THE LAST
Wherein the Author avoids the Gloomily
Immoral Ending of the Modern Realist, and
closes with Ihree Separate Accounts of Domestic
Felicity, thus proving himself worthy of his
Literary Heritage and an Upholder of the
National Morale .
STAINED RADIANCE
CHAPTER THE FIRST
Wherein Various Unclassifiable Female Char¬
acters, together with a Revolutionist, a Soldier and a
Gentleman, are presented to the Reader, and some
Account given of Heaven and the Giant Wars.
Subchapter i
MIGGOD,” said Norah Casement, "there’s
Billy !”
She halted in the sunlight of Kensington High
Street. She was twenty-three years of age, her eyes
blue, her hair black. She had a short nose and the
pretty, contemptuous face of a sane, uneasy, cultured
monkey. She loved words like Miggod and Biggod
and Divvle, for they stamped her with Irishy, good-
heartedness and irresponsibility. But behind their
cover she regarded the world scaredly, and with a
greedy pity.
"Which is there ?" demanded Thea Mayven, stop¬
ping beside her without excitement.
She was younger than Norah. She had a little
hollow in her throat. Her eyes were like the sea,
green and grey and a changing spectra of colours.
She had red-brown, winey-tipped hair, cut short in
the modern style and older in fashion than the panel-
sculptures of Palenque. Her ears lacked lobes. She
was the result of five hundred thousand years travail
and bloody endeavour. She jogged Norah impatiently.
15
i6
STAINED RADIANCE
“What ?”
Norah, screened under the awning of a shop-window,
pointed. Looking across the street, Thea saw a short
young man wearing the tie of some appogiatose school.
He hurried. His face was a greasy cleanliness. Absent-
minded, he thumped against an oncoming peram¬
bulator. The woman in charge asked him if he was
a bleeding rhinoceros. He hurried.
Norah breathed on the glass of the shop-window.
“Promised to meet him this afternoon. ’D forgotten
all about it. Is he looking ?“
But the short young man, cleanly, greasy and
intent, had by this time borne his tie far down the
street. He expected to take Norah to a the-dansant
and theatre. Afterwards, perhaps, he would sleep
with her. He was mistaken. Relieved of his nearness,
she uncovered a gold wrist-watch.
“Four o’clock! Divvle take it, Thea ! I’ve to
meet a boy at Charing Cross in half an hour. Why
didn’t you tell me the time ?“
“I’m not a damned clock,” said Thea.
She swore often and readily, with an unconscious
precision and delicacy of accent which shocked and
astounded. Below her burnished kindliness was a
stratum of irritability. It outcropped unreasonably
and unexpectedly, while her eyes still smiled. For
this reason all treated her warily. Young men, members
of the Middle-Class Tennis Union Club, would hitch
their slacks at sight of her and regard her knowingly,
desirously, and with apprehension.
Norah s scaredness flickered her eyelids. She and
another girl shared a flat with Thea.
“Don’t be starchy. There’s a dear. I’ll have to
rush like the very divvle. The boy’ll be waiting for
me. Extra special he is. Bringing him to the flat
for tea.
17
STAINED RADIANCE
^Oh. You’ll have to hurry. Who is he ?’’
Wait till you see. Some boy !”
"What about Billy ?”
Norah was unexpectedly vicious. "He can go to
the divvle. There’s my bus. Shan’t be long."
She scampered across the pavement. The bus
slowed down. She boarded it. The conductor looked
down from the top. Smart filly. He banged the bell,
the bus went on.
Thea Mayven crossed the street and boarded
another. High up, and on the front seat, she rode
day-dreaming through London. The sunlight burned
through her thm frock, and with the changing lights
obscuring and brightening in her eyes she looked
down upon the streets.
Scots, she had never ceased to feel foreign in
London, and intrigued by it. Beyond the city and
the central and south-western districts, she knew
nothing of it. But east in Poplar and Limehouse
were Chinamen and Negroes and forgers. In Soho
were Bolsheviks and Italians. In the west were
wealthy people living in Mr. Frankau’s novels. Some¬
where, in the streets and places she had never yet
had time to visit, lived and flourished Romance.
Believing this, she loved London with the faith of
a pilgrim denied the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem
through the necessity of earning a living by carrying
the luggage of wealthier pilgrims from the railway
station to the hotels. ^
c«n BU T-fi0111!6 ^hen my sulky atheist is a best-
selier, 111 also live m the west," said Thea.
ehind her gaiety, and her occasional irritability
perhaps a projection of it, was the sad romantic
realism of the peasant. In Scotland, on the little farm
where she had been born, she had hated the peasant
hie. in London she remembered it with gladness and
B
l8 STAINED RADIANCE
with tears, a thing of sunrises and rains and evening
scents and the lowing of lone herds across the wine-
red moors. Yearly she went to Scotland for a holiday,
seeking the sunset and peewit’s cry. Then she would
find her days obsessed with talk of cattle disease and
the smells of uncleaned byres and earwigs crawling
down her back when she lay in a field. She would
long for London as her spiritual home and as a haven
of security. She came back from her holiday and her
heritage of the earth, homing to London like a lost
bird.
Then the old songs of the winds and skies of the
grey northland would go whispering through her heart
again. . . .
She led a cramped, happy, disturbed, life. Sex
was a remote, tamed, humorous thing ; occasionally
a disgusting thing, and so to be disregarded. Politics
were remote personalities. She had a vague, indifferent
republicanism, a vague, indifferent contempt of
royalty, and all the peasant’s dislike and distrust of
the working-class. She read much, but guardedly,
gaily, unconvincedly. She looked upon religious
emotion as hysteria, and upon God and His existence
as improbable unpleasantnesses.
She descended from the bus near the “Good Intent”
in Chelsea. She nearly stepped on a beggar-woman
selling matches. Matches, lidy. Pipe-cleaners. She
stared at the woman with her heart contracting
strangely ; always at the sight of such people, her
heart contracted strangely. Oh Christ. A shame.
A damned shame. And with that burning, suffocating
pain in her breast she would walk on, hating for a
little the brightness and indifference and the calm
cruelty of the London streets.
Within five minutes of leaving the bus she was
deep in the heart of old Chelsea. Antique, unclean,
STAINED RADIANCE
19
weather-beaten, ancient houses brooded above deep-
sunken basements. Children played and cried in the
warm stench, spun tops, ran races, quarrelled with
greedy, accusing eyes, teased one another with the
ingenuous cruelty of the young. Once the houses of
prosperous merchants, those long stretches had passed
through an English Bohemian phase of unwashed
underclothes, art-for-art’s-sakeism, and unconnubial
beddings in studios inadequately aerated. Strong
young men in those houses had fried kippers above
paraffin stoves, quoted Swinburne, and derided God.
They had passed. Slumdom had encroached with the
years, growing like a grave, intent cancer, stealing
down towards the River. But here and there some
street still held out, hiring rheumatic charwomen to
scrub doorsteps and polish bellpushes. Typists, man¬
nequins, journalists, sales-letter business-men and
middle-class prostitutes, reading the Daily Mail on
weekdays and going out to Box Hill on Sundays,
dwelt in those streets, with the ancient houses con¬
verted to three- or four-roomed flats. Lying abed in
winter nights they could hear the sound of the rain
on the distant River, and in early mornings would
awake to find its exhalations, like those of a lung-
diseased beast, blinding the streets yellowly and
densely in a soft foam of fog.
Rosemount Avenue was one of those streets. When
Thea turned into it that Saturday afternoon it lay
smitten in a coma by the heavy sun warmth. Its
cliffs of stonework towered like the reaches of a dead,
gaunt face. A dog lay panting in the middle of the
street. It wagged a languid tail at sight of Thea. A
flea. It scratched with hysteric abandon. Thea
passed. It resumed its panting. A gramophone was
playing “Nearer My God to Thee”.
Ascending the steps of No. 41, Thea whistled the
20
STAINED RADIANCE
tune of “Nearer My God to Thee”. Slop. Banisters
nearly red hot. Wonder if Ellen’s in and made tea
yet ? Hope so. I’ll die if I don’t have an unofficial
cup soon. Even though it be a cross. This heat’s
killing. Might be August almost. Sun, moon and
stars divide, upwards I fly. Wish to God I could.
Still all my thoughts shall be. But not in these trousers,
not in these . . . Shower-bath ? No time. Ffuu,
you’re getting puffed and padded, my gel. Latchkey ?
Forgotten it ? Well, I’m— No. Yes—damned.
She had reached a landing. A solitary door fronted
her. Ceasing to search for the latchkey, she pressed
the bell.
Thereat the door opened and a chinless, forehead¬
less, gentlemanly face was obligingly projected. . . .
Overcome, she giggled. . . . What a name !
Subchapter ii
James Storman, the noted Communist who was an
ex-captain of Artillery, came down to the River from
Covent Garden and walked along the Embankment.
The plane trees shook in a little wind. The muddy
waters sparkled. A tramp slept on a bench. The
Communist ex-captain walked with a swinging stride.
He was six feet in height, his complexion sallowly
brown, his eyes a shade of brown, his hair brown.
But his eyes denied the neutrality of their colour.
They were the shining, humorous eyes of a man
fundamentally unhumorous. He had a cleft chin
and a small, closely-clipped moustache. Keen, calm,
a mathematician, he was a mystic and religious, with
Communism his religion. He looked at the world with
the blind, clear eyes of faith.
Presently he ceased to walk, and leaning his arms
STAINED RADIANCE
21
on the stonework above the River, surveyed the dying
capitalist system. Opposite him, in confusion and
multitude, warehouses, wherries, and docks sprawled
down to the water’s edge. Their blue backgrounded
signs jostled everywhere. They uplifted advertise¬
ments to Heaven. They flaunted an obscure,
obscene, vulgar life. They did not look dead. Only
ugly.
“It cannot last,” said Storman.
He had been secretary of the Anarchocommunist
Party for five years. In the days of the General
Strike it had been the spearhead of the movement to
transform sporadic revolt into active revolution.
Storman and other officials had toured the home
counties on motor-cycles at breakneck speeds, killing
chickens, haranguing strikers, pleading for order and
discipline, and leading attacks on tramcars and buses.
Emerging from those May days of 1926 with an
enhanced reputation and a dour eclat, the party had
since devoted its energies to publishing portraits of
the wives of Labour leaders wearing furs and diamonds,
and to seeking affiliation with the Labour Party.
Under Storman the Party membership, consisting
originally of Morrisian Utopians, Kropotkine anar- <
chists, and young men of the middle-classes attracted
to the idea of a forcible revolution with barricades
and machine-guns which said Ha-Ha, had changed
complexion to a considerable extent. Shaken and
disgusted by the tactics of one who planned revolution
as an engineer plans a bridge, the young men of the
middle-classes had deserted en masse, taking the
anarchists with them. For they believed in Individual
Liberty and the Righteous Soul of the Common
People. Strengthened by these desertions, the Party
had acquired a coarse vigour and an uncultured force¬
fulness. It was denounced and freely advertised by
22
STAINED RADIANCE
Socialists, rotary clubs, dissenting churches, Con¬
servative newspapers and the Sultan of Muscat.
“Nothing succeeds like excess,” said Storman.
Now, brown, tall, well-tailored, he stood looking
across the Thames. He had no hat. His hair was
short-cropped and smooth. He looked like the engineer
he had been. The tramp snorted on the bench nearby.
Pigeons, sun-winking, flittering, bright-eyed, circled
down to the pavement and, chireeking, pecked around
the boots of the tramp. In the air hung a strange,
fugitive smell.
“It is the smell of Spring,” said Storman.
And, because he never associated Spring with
England, but with the Nile and the brown lands of
Khartoum, his thoughts went back on that lost
fragrance to a reservoir he had once helped to build
in Sudan. Auricularly, memory of it returned to him
the thin, far chants of the gang-labourers, the beat
of the steam cranes under the blue glassiness, the
pappat of hammers upon the culverts. Immersed in
a steel-smitten retrospect, he was only gradually
aware that the hammertaps of memory were mimicked
by actuality. He was listening to approaching feet
shod in hobnailed boots.
He turned his head. A private in the uniform of
the Air Force had crossed Hungerford Bridge and was
now close at hand, walking towards Victoria. He was
of middle height, his jacket gathered at the waist by
a belt and steel buckle. His calves bulged under the
folds of his puttees. From underneath the black felt
of his hatpeak he glanced at Storman out of a ruddy
sulky,, thick-lipped face. He had questioningly-
assertive eyes. In his hand he swung a small stick
ornamented, with a steel bulb and some obscure
decorations in birds and Latinity. His buttons winked
in the sunlight.
STAINED RADIANCE
23
His eyes and those of Storman met.
The Air Force private half-halted. His eyes, col¬
lected and curious, looked into those of the Communist
captain with an indifferent hostility. Recognizing
each other, they were silent. The airman passed on
with a pappat of heavy boots. Storman looked after
him and suddenly sent his immense laugh booming
down the Embankment.
The tramp awoke, the pigeons rose in a cloud. His
unhumorously humorous eyes a-twinkle Storman
turned again to the River. The tramp swore, subsided,
pillowed a short-cropped chin in his elbow, and slept
again. The pigeons, flittering, strutting, resumed
their pecking.
Suddenly two hands covered Storman’s eyes.
Unalarmed, his thoughts elsewhere, he stood for a
moment half-unaware of his blindness. Then he
raised his hands and clasped two slim wrists.
“It is little Norah Casement,” he said.
Subchapter Hi
The Air Force private was the son of a Unitarian
minister. He had been born near Bulford, in Salisbury
Plain, and from early days had learned the way to
Stonehenge across the windy moors. Stonehenge had
first awakened his nameless curiosity—a damnable,
ceaseless, hopeless curiosity which had wrung him
like a pain throughout his thirty years of life.
His name was John Garland. And this name pleased
him. A name of iron garmented in velvet. Like a
purple note of music . . . John Garland. . . .
Walking the Embankment towards Victoria, he fell
to thinking of his name idly, pleasantly.
‘ ‘Sometime, maybe, I shall be like it. Old and mellow
24
STAINED RADIANCE
and full of the illusion of disillusion. In that undreamt¬
of peace that men call age.”
He grinned. He was very hot. There were no
military policemen about. He loosened the collar of
his tunic. Twenty paces in front of him a car slowed
down.
It was a Daimler. It drew up by the kerb. The
chauffeur descended. Blasted old blood-tub. A fat
woman, in furs, descended. Ere she comes. Nah for
a song and dance.
“What's wrong, Ernest ?”
“Near rear wheel ripped, Muddim. Ave to iack
it off.” J
The fat woman, swaying her stomach, beckoned
Garland. “Help with this wheel, my man, will you ?”
“Go to hell,” said Garland, equably.
He passed on. The chauffeur licked his lips. The
fat woman stared after him, crimson. And Garland
thought :
“Why didn't you ? Angry because she went by
your uniform and assessed you as aitchless and
obliging ?
“Then get out of uniform. Get a job in the City
under some bulbous-nosed go-getter who thinks Wells
should be shot and that Anatole France is a hair
pomade. Lead a pleasant, respectable existence.
Marry. House in Purley. Get the Daily Express every
morning. Turn the cat out nightly. Assure the next-
door-neighbour over the wall that the days are drawing
in. Grow chins and line your soul with suet.
Great God, I'd rather be an airman suckled to salute
the ineffably brainless.”
As ever when he allowed his thoughts to run riot,
he felt pleased and invigorated. He lit a cigarette.'
A stout figure, with musing eyes, he halted and
waited for a bus. It was nearly five o'clock.
STAINED RADIANCE
25
He boarded a green pirate and rode west. Thirty
years of age that day, he was conscious that his out¬
look on life was more appropriate to seventeen. Or
seventy. He believed nothing and everything. He
did not believe in himself. He watched the passing
pageant of life with ironic humour, yet constantly
found himself plunging into that pageant, grabbing a
banner, insisting in joining in the song. And always,
sooner or later, because he was conscious of singing
out of tune, because he saw the ludicrousness of the
banner and his fellow-marchers, he deserted. He
returned to the pavement to stand agaze, speculating
on the processionists, their lives, their indecencies,
their lusts, whether they approved of Mr. Churchill
and artificial silk stockings and believed in God.
Love, life, planets, stars, death, fate, the worm
that dieth not, and words like widdershins and
swastika intrigued him. He was interested in them as
a scientist—with the wish for knowledge and with no
ulterior hope of gain from that knowledge. Some¬
times, as a result, a loneliness and a horror of himself
and his incessant, ruinous curiosity would come upon
him. He would long with a cynical passion for personal
love, quarrelsomeness, children, slippers before the
fire and a belief in the disinterestedness of Reuter's
correspondents.
Goddilmighty, to escape and rest from oneself !
Reddened in the colours of the sunset, the green
bus drove into the west like a chariot of God. Wide
and brown and thronged branched the streets. They
contracted and elongated in the sunset light. Over all
hung the fainting Spring. A newsboy cried in the
gutter of the discovery of a woman’s head in an
ashbin and the search for the murderer. In the
windows of butchers’ shops the dead bodies of animals,
emptied of their intestines, hung pink and bloody
26
STAINED RADIANCE
and legless. Girls, short-skirted, eager-eyed, passed in
and out of multiple stores. They had discarded the
large breasts and broad buttocks of their mothers.
Alert, quick, confident, and owlish, they made pur¬
chases in the Spring sales, paying an increase of 25
per cent on the usual prices. In bookshops, casually
turning the leaves of chance volumes, their eyes grew
gawked and contemptuous at some phrase or fantasy
beyond their understanding. Throwing aside the
book, they would walk out, counting their change
and humming pieces of song about blue birds which
were all day long. Cheered, emancipated, they walked
the streets, or stood in little groups, or applied to
their lips the reddening and men-alluring chemicals
inherited from the courtesans of Sumeria and Thebes.
The sunset brooded redly upon them, then closed and
died in the face of the rushing bus whereon rode
Garland.
He was late. Getting off the bus, he hurried, his
hobnailed boots slipping on the heat-moist paving-
stones. He swung his stick, turned into a doorway,
and climbed three flights of stairs. Down the well
of the staircase came the sound of a piano and a man
singing in a strong voice, with jagged edges. A girl’s
contralto joined in. Garland halted upon the third
landing and listened, for he loved the song. Emitting
blurred sounds in place of the words he had forgotten,
he opened his mouth to a vague, pleasurable humming.
“I must go down to the seas again,
To the lonely sea and the sky.
And all I ask is a tall ship,
And a star to steer her by.
And the wind’s song, and the tiddly um,
And the whatname flying.
And a grey mist on the sea’s face.
And the seagulls crying.”
STAINED RADIANCE
27
And Garland thought :
“This is a lyric of the wanderlust—the wandering
being over and the lust a memory. It is Romance.
It tells nothing of the obscene stinks of a sailing ship,
the bugs which habit the bunks, the sea that seen
through mist looks like bad soup afloat with mildew,
the meat that rises up and walks the decks and makes
mewing noises. It is Romance. It has no connection
with life. It is glorious.”
And standing bulkily upon the landing, he grinned
and rang the bell. Instantly sound of piano and song
ceased. There ensued a hesitant, soundless blur of
no-silence. Then the door swung open.
“Why, John, you’re late.”
And, from the same shadows that had an hour
before projected upon her the Aztec face, Thea Mayven
reached out to kiss John Garland upon the lips.
Subchapter iv
They kissed with a clean, unlengthy deliberation,
touching hands the while. Drawing back his head,
Garland felt, faint and sweetly bitter upon his lips,
the moisture of Thea’s.
“Sorry Tm late. How are you ?”
"All right. Oh, happy returns.”
“Thanks.”
He laid aside his cap and stick. They spoke to
each other in raised, laughing voices. Their natural
manners changed. In the dimness of the little hall
they glanced at each other with wonder and uncer¬
tainty.
In love, they quarrelled continually. Sometimes,
when the ironist was uppermost in Garland, Thea
would grow angry and silent and forget the fun of
28
STAINED RADIANCE
life while he dissected God and marriage and the
ectoplasmic theories of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
Garland’s attitude—his multitude of attitudes—to
life, moved and disturbed her profoundly. In his
jesting she sensed falseness, just as in his bitterness
a tongue-in-cheek insincerity. Knowing him better
than did anyone else, she distrusted him, feared him
not at all, and loved him passionately. Sometimes
she wondered if his romantic poet’s love for her was
merely one of his attitudes, and, so wondering, would
stab him with pinpricks of malice and a tentative
coarseness. Remote in her mind, a thing she hardly
dared uncover, was the knowledge that the asexual
tenderness of his love was a treason to love. The
desire which had given her birth and a woman’s body
cried for lust in love.
A remote cousin of Garland’s was a friend of Thea’s,
and at the home of this cousin, in Chertsey, they had
first met, three years before. Garland, in shabby
civilians, was on a week’s leave from his camp ; Thea
weekended with her friend. It was the blue-hazed
weather of a mellow September.
So they met, and always was Thea to remember
that queer pang of tenderness and wonder that sprung
within her when first she looked in Garland’s eyes.
Remembering it, and believing the first her truer
vision, she could disregard much of her later
impressions.
As for Garland, the romantic was uppermost that
weekend while he rowed Thea upon the River, and the
ironist only a pale shadow a-rock with ghostly mirth.
So they fell in love—love which Garland, according
to his mood or fantasy, either adored and glorified
with a passionate tenderness, or else dissected into its
constituents of animal conceit projected upon animal
desire. Looking at Thea, he would feel a soft
STAINED RADIANCE
29
drowsiness grow about his eyes, feel a strange looseness /
of limb, hear the blood sing in his ears. Or a sudden
tiredness, a longing for the benediction of her hands,
to lay his head in her lap, to kneel by her, unthinking,
in the shadows of a sunset-flooded room, would come
upon him. And the pain of his longing for her he
would taste slowly, lingeringly, with ironical laughter.
“Come into the sitting-room. It’s cold after the
sun’s down. Norah hasn’t arrived yet—she's bringing
a boy to tea. Did you hear us singing ‘Sea Fever' ?”
Speaking, Thea opened the sitting-room door. A
beam of light sprayed into the little hall. Walking it,
Garland entered into a smell of toasting muffins.
|“Hello, old bean.”
•'/‘Many happy returns, Mr. Garland.”
(“By jove, yes. Best of them, old bean.”
It was a room twelve feet by fourteen. It held for
furnishment a sideboard of imitation walnut, a gate-
leg table, a deal bookcase, three arm-chairs and four
armless chairs. The window-curtains were yellow.
The three arm-chair cushions were yellow. The shade
of the electric lamp was orange. This was artistic.
There were five pictures on the walls. Two were
lithographs of infants who appeared to have developed
dropsy, two depicted battle-scenes where elegant men
in tight trousers and calm smiles rescued side-
whiskered comrades from under the obligingly poised
hooves of charging horses. The fifth reproduced in an
uncertain fadedness of colour the Heir of All the
Ages.
The yellow window-curtains flapped in the evening
breeze from the River.
A girl was toasting muffins. She had wished Mr.
Garland many happy returns. Twenty-eight years of
age, her name was Ellen Ledgworth. She was a mil¬
liner. Her hair was fair and fluffy and bobbed, her
STAINED RADIANCE
30
teeth complete and false. Her figure, broad at the hips
so that she walked like a sedate cow, was at the
moment squatted in an arm-chair and a black dress.
Placid, she looked up at Garland hospitably, kindly.
She did not believe in the Old Testament because it
was silly. Strikes were caused by agitators . . .
Though you mightn’t believe in the Old Testament,
there was certainly Something. Socialists, labourers
with patches in the seats of their trousers, and people
who quoted poetry without a placid cough were funny.
Opposite her sat her lover, Edward Snooks. With
retreating chin and forehead, he had been a second-
lieutenant in the Tanks during the War. On leave in
England, he had been snapshotted by press photo¬
graphers as a typical Army officer. Both eyes an
indeterminate grey, he had a slight impressive cast in
one of them, and an unhealed, powdered sore on his
chin. He hated his name, but Thea Mayven loved
it. She would lie abed thinking of it, and gurgling
with delight over it. Snooks ! Oh, lord !
Looking across at him, as she followed Garland
into the sitting-room and their greetings, her eyes
twinkled at thought of his name. Snooks smiled back
at her, fascinatingly, in answer. He appreciated her
slimness. Shouldn’t wonder if she was a warm little
devil. He pulled forward the third arm-chair for
Garland to sit upon.
“Sit down, old bean. Well, how’s the Air Force ?’’
“God knows.’’
Thea had gone to the window and looked out. Her
small head was enflapped by the uneasy curtains.
She gurgled.
“And d'you think it makes Him bitter ?”
Garland laughed and sniffed with a hungry appre¬
ciation the smell of the toasting muffins. He hated the
Air Force. Like ninety per cent of those in the ranks,
STAINED RADIANCE
31
he had enlisted under the compulsion of hunger and
unemployment. His stomach had conscripted him
more surely than any Man Power Act could have
done. He had never forgiven the Service the fact of
its feeding him.
"Sick as a dog, I should think. Let’s do some
toasting, Ellen. You’ll ruin your complexion.”
And, spearing an untoasted muffin upon a fork,
Garland held it out to the red glow of the coals.
Relieved, Ellen panted back into her chair and
watched the muffin. Lighting a cigarette, Snooks
asked questions about the Air Force. He was genuinely
interested in it, especially in the pilots, who were
officers, wearing collars and ties and having batmen
to brush their shoes, rebuking unshaven parades in
cultured tones. He still associated himself with the
Services and talked to Garland with the kindly under¬
standing of an officer appreciating a private’s griev¬
ances. This condescension delighted the cruel ironist
in Garland. He would retreat into his mind with a
chance phrase of Snooks’s and extatize upon it, like
a dog with a bone.
Meantime Thea, leaning out of the window, watched
for the appearance of Norah and her boy, breathed
the night air through small, oval nostrils, and, looking
up at the sky, prophesied good weather for the morrow.
‘‘It must be glorious to live in a camp down in
Surrey in the Spring.”
‘There’s nothing wrong with the location of the
camp, though the camp itself . . . It’s set high on
a hill. I must take you down sometime. Wave-
troughs of grass and trees in tides to the horizon ;
you can hear the nightingales in the woods at early
dawn. . . . Oh, it’s a pleasant place enough.”
‘‘But not for the rankers—eh, John ? The officers
have a decent time, though, I’ll bet. I remember at
STAINED RADIANCE
32
Boulogne in 1915—an Officers’ Rest Camp there. We
used to laze all day with cool drinks. Motor jaunts
in the evening. Back for dinner at seven. Good old
War! . . . And those same lads up in the front
line, Gad, they were splendid.”
And Edward Snooks’s eyes grew bright with emotion,
for he had read Mr. Frankau’s book about Peter
Jackson and modelled his war sentiments upon those
there recorded at such generous length.
Garland nodded and turned the muffin on his fork.
“Yes. Splendid. I’ve seen them sleeping three in one
dugout, with only a single batman to look after them.
Remember one especially in the Spring retreat of
Eighteen. He must have been a Marathon champion,
for he passed me ; and I can sprint myself. He was
crying and naturally very upset, for he’d mislaid his
batman and his sergeant-major and didn’t know what
to do, and the night was coming on. There were
shells churning a quagmire of marsh spanned by a
half-submerged pontoon of duckboard. I caught him
up there and as I started to cross he screamed out an
order to me to get off and let him go first. He grabbed
my leg and tried to hold me. But I was lost
to all sense of discipline. I left him there, still
screaming.”
(How he had screamed ! As a spectator Garland
looked back across the years at that twilight struggle
amidst the mud and the falling shells. From the dim
picture-galleries of his memory he brought forth and
looked again at the streaked face and slobbering
mouth of the man with whom he had struggled for
the right of passage. He’d given a woofing gasp as
Garland’s bayonet was driven into his chest ; he'd
gurgled and fallen and scrabbled in the mud. . . .
Amazingly remote and unimportant. . . . That
shaking bridge in the hellish flare. . . .)
STAINED RADIANCE
33
Snooks threw his cigarette-end in the fire. He had
never been far up the line, having acted as a stores
officer in the Tank Corps. So, from his own experience,
he knew that Garland was lying. He shook his head.
He disregarded the story.
“Oh, there were rotters here and there
amongst us, but, say what you like, John, blood
tells. It was the public-school boy who won the
War.”
The father of Edward Snooks had been a butcher
in Bristol. But Edward, after graduating from an
orderly-room clerk to a commission, had forgotten
this. Unconscious of snobbery or falsehood, he believed
himself of aristocratic descent and education. He
believed in the Conservative Party and in a God of
Battles with a sword and white whiskers, like the
brigadier in charge of the Military Police at Le Havre.
A clerk in the City, he would, when riding past the
Cenotaph on the top of a bus, raise his hat gravely,
as though returning the greeting of fellow ex-officers
and acknowledging the salutes of defunct but still
respectful privates.
“Yes, say what you like ”
“Well, perhaps they did.” Garland finished toasting
the last of the muffins. “Only, I wish they’d done it
without asking my help. Isn’t that someone coming
up the stairs ?”
Thea went out into the hall. In a moment a latch¬
key slotted into the outer door. In the sitting-room
they heard the voice of Norah Casement.
“Miggod, r’we late, Thea ? 'Ve we kept you all
waiting ?”
“It’s all right. The muffins are just ready.”
“Oh, Jim, this is my friend, Miss Mayven. Thea,
this is Captain Storman. Come in and meet the
others.”
c
STAINED RADIANCE
34
Subchapter v
Storman and Norah Casement had first met at a
dance of the Civil Service Clerical Officers’ Association.
Norah was a clerical officer. She did not believe in
the Association because of the ferocities of Mr. W. J.
Brown, and his habit of referring to clerical officers
as though they were workers, like kitchen-maids or
shop-girls. Nevertheless, she paid her subscriptions
for the sake of peace and dancing. #
She loved dancing. Prancing in grave, animalistic
fox-trots originally fashioned to stimulate virility in
the cave-shelters of Atlantis during the Third Inter¬
glacial, she would feel young men, holding her, grow
excited and unnerved, and would laugh up into their
faces with Irishy and insouciance.
Storman attended Association dances for two pur¬
poses. He enjoyed dancing and he enjoyed making
converts. A personal friend of a high Association
official, he preached seditious disregard of Association
rules and the necessity for revolutionary tactics to
young women who had previously believed that
Communists always wore topboots and drank human
blood with their porridge, the while they read the
Daily Herald propped up against the body of a
slaughtered Capitalist. But Storman did not w ear
topboots. It was inconceivable that he was an upholder
of anthropophagy. Troubled and mentally colic-
stricken, young women would listen to him and then
return to their homes in Brixton and Wimbledon,
whence they would emerge, scared into action, at the
next meeting to elect officials, and vote Conservatives
into the executive.
On the third occasion Storman and Norah met and
danced Storman had halted abruptly in the middle of
a step, “You know nothing of dancing, he explained,
STAINED RADIANCE
35
casually. “Come out into the corridor and I’ll teach
you the elements.”
Dazed, she had followed him. They reached the
corridor. Waiters lounged with empty trays. Dis¬
regarding them, Storman stamped and padded and
pirouetted. They stared. Norah blushed. The agony
was but begun. Commanded to imitate his motions
she found herself obeying. Grinning, the waiters
exclaimed poor tart.
And Norah, angry and shamed, was strangely
attracted. She danced with him often thereafter. He
never made love to her. He never paid the least
attention to her remarks. He seldom spoke on a
subject that was even faintly intelligible. He kissed
her once with a cold and passionate precision and then
asked if she would like an ice. He took liberties,
boredly. In a fight for her self-respect, she sought to
win him to a continuance of that passion which his
kiss had promised. For this reason she had invited
him to tea at the flat which she shared with Thea
Mayven and Ellen Ledgworth.
After tea, they left the flat and went down to the
River in search of fresh air. It was a soft, amethystine
night. Couples walked the Embankment arm in arm.
The arclights glowed dully. White and broad and
light-dotted, the dim waters gurgled seaward. Over¬
head were stars.
“Have you and John Garland met before ?” asked
Norah.
Storman, pipe-smoking and looking up at the stars,
came out of a brown study. “Yes,” he said.
“Miggod, I thought you had. Why didn’t either of
you mention it ?”
“It was in time of war, our last meeting, and we
were on opposite sides. He tried to brain me with
the butt of a rifle.”
36
STAINED RADIANCE
“Biggod, and what did you do ?”
“I was riding a motor-cycle/' explained Storman,
“so I slowed down."
And, abruptly tickled, his laugh boomed out. Then,
he pointed to a star burning low above the evening
roofs. It was the planet Mars. It was probable that
there were canals on Mars. Made by intelligent beings,
organized to fight for life on a dying planet. A civiliza¬
tion greater than any on earth.
Norah looked up uninterestedly at the far, red glow
of the Marxian world. What the divvle was he talkin
about ? Men in the stars. She gave a short, bright
laugh. Unconsciously, she attributed animation to
only a few intimates on her own planet. To conceive
it existing in the sky was foolishness.
Storman ceased his astronomical exposition, and
stopped, and looked down into the Thames, even as
he had done earlier in the day. Norah, bored, halted
beside him, and in a little silence they looked across
at the yellow festoonings of lights on the Surrey bank.
Then Storman tapped out his pipe, methodically, and
put it in his pocket.
“Are you tired ?” he asked.
Norah, sick of stars, nodded, yawned with mouth
finger-covered. “It’s been a sleepy afternoon. And
this place gives me the shivers. Let’s go.’’
He paid no heed. He had apparently forgotten hig own
question. Dim, tall, alien, and uncomforting, he leaned on
the Embankment wall, and turned his face towards her.
“Norah, I love you.’’
“Eh ?’’
She was stricken mute with a contemptuous surprise.
A prostitute passed them. Behind, at a short distance,
trailed a soldier. Storman looked after the two of
them till they faded into the greyness. A fog was
rising from the River.
STAINED RADIANCE
37
Norah felt as though a weight had been lifted from
her heart. Biggod, now she’d show him. In love.
The same as all the others, in spite of his Communism
and jabber. Who the divvle did he think he was ?
“By the way, Norah, are you technically what is
termed ‘pure’ ?”
She found that he had come closer to her. A warmth
emanated from him. At her gasp he put his hand
upon her shoulder, lightly, firmly.
“Don’t answer if you don’t want to. It makes no
difference. Women, I suppose, have the same curiosities
as men.*'
Norah found her voice. She had twice given herself
to a junior clerk of the Civil Service, and had once
staved off pregnancy only by an intimate knowledge
of certain appliances. But anger and disgust shook
her voice.
“If you think I'm that kind of girl ”
Suddenly his arm encircled her shoulders. In the
rising fog they now stood alone, enswathed. The
stars had vanished. Like dying suns in the dim
heavens the distant arclights gleamed. Storman’s
arm tightened.
“Do you love me ?”
He asked it with a wistfulness which gripped her
heart. The night was very still. A London lovers’
night. Norah felt a subtle warmth spread through all
her body, and, in a numbed disgust, knew it for what
it was. But love . . . only a name. She put her
hands against Storman and tried to push him away,
her throat grown dry in memories of the awry, insipid
taste of afterlust. Love ?
Perhaps it might be. Something that was different.
She glanced up, sideways, at Storman. But for that
encircling arm, he had attempted nothing. Contempt
and an angry impatience returned.
38
STAINED RADIANCE
“I want to go home,” she said.
Still wordless, he bent and brought her body close
against his own. Then his thin lips met hers. His
kisses blurred to warmth.
Norah’s arms gathered him closer. Lost in a sen¬
suous extasy, she believed in love.
Below them, the River sang its seaward-making
song.
Subchapter v {a)
The fire smouldered and glowed with little bluish
flames. It flung the shadows of the fender and two
arm-chairs gigantic upon the ceiling. And a ruddy,
furtive underglow stole from it across the floor,
imposing mystic significances upon the entortured
whorlings of the linoleum. Garland, deep in one of
the arm-chairs, pointed a hand at the fire.
“Notice those bluish flames and the soft porous
pieces in the coal ?”
“Yes. I love blue flames.”
“They are caused by the carbonization of animal
fat.”
“Uh.” Thea, remote in the other chair, a shadow,
a mystery, from which projected towards the fire
two long, slim legs, shuddered. “Why do you always
think of the unpleasant side of things ?”
“But I don’t. Animal fat isn’t unpleasant. You
often cook your food in it.”
“You’re hopeless.”
“I can’t see much of you, but your legs are adorable.”
“Nice legs, aren’t they ? First time you’ve noticed
them ?”
“No. I’ve noticed them often. They are slim,
with just that smooth curve at the calf which seems
STAINED RADIANCE
39
to us shapely. Yet, you know, of all amazing and
unpleasant evolutions, that of the human body is
the most futile and unwarranted. Man is the ugliest
of all the animals."
"Thanks."
“But it’s nothing to the ugliness he’ll ultimately
achieve—a large skull and a group of feelers. Then
he’ll look back on us, the ancestral type, with repulsion
and disgust."
"Let him look. Beast. Ugh, I’ll never have children."
"But perhaps they’ll merely laugh at our skulls,
same as we do at Victorian sidewhiskers."
They both laughed. They were alone in the flat,
for Ellen and Edward Snooks had gone to the Chelsea
Palace. Sitting in the unlighted room for the past
half-hour, they had talked lazily, disconnectedly,
appreciatively. In the darkness they were shielded
from each other and yet, subtly, made intimate.
And Garland thought :
"We are pleasantly soothed and excited, sitting
here, because of our inheritance of two conflicting
race-memories—or perhaps three. Darkness is a
thing of terror ; but locked doors and a fire spell
security; lastly ..."
"John, have you met Captain Storman before ?”
"Storman ?"
"Yes. Norah’s man."
“Yes. We stared at each other on the Embankment
this afternoon."
"Was that all ? I thought you both looked . . .
funny when you were introduced."
Garland poked the fire. The bluish flames vanished.
In their place uprose and hovered thin yellow convex
sheets of flame. Thea drew in her legs.
"Why did you do that ? It was more comfy before."
There was a little pause, Garland leaning forward,
STAINED RADIANCE
40
his ruddy face fire-ochred. He sighed. “Life’s the
foe of comfort.’’
“Goodness.’’ Thea had clasped her hands about
her knees. She considered him. “Wonder what
they’ll think of you up in Scotland when I take you
home this summer ?” She mused. “For that
matter . .
“Yes ?”
“What does England think of me when it takes
me home ?”
Garland still stared into the fire. He began to
speak softly.
“Behold, thou art fair, my love, behold, thou art fair.
Thou hast doves' eyes within thy locks ;
Thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear from Mount Gilead. . ..
Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is
comely ”
The yellow flames died away.
“John.’’
“Thea.”
“That’s wonderful. But—is it me, or just poetry ?”
“Oh, my dear !” He turned towards her and
caught one of her hands and held it. An inarticulate
pity came upon him. Goddilmighty, the hyena-like
laughter of beauty ! Never for Thea Mayven or any
other woman was that song sung ; I’ve clad you in
my dream-mate’s garments and you question their
texture and cut. . . . My dear.
The fire sank to a glow, a presence, a thing apart.
In the darkness he still held her hand. Suddenly he
spoke in a clear, shrill voice.
“You’re lost in that chair, you know.”
Wondering, yet knowing, she sat and waited. A
bitter-sweet panic choked in her throat. Garland’s
right hand moved up her arm and touched her as with
a frost; it crept betwixt the chair-back and her
STAINED RADIANCE 41
shoulders till his arm encircled her. His left arm below
her, she felt herself lifted . . .
Suddenly she was conscious of the horrifying,
unclean kisses of a stranger.
Subchapter v {concluded).
At half-past ten John Garland went by Underground
to Charing Cross, left that station, and walked across
Hungerford Bridge. Here and there, in the embrasures
above the water, gigglingly amorous young men held
prostitutes in their arms. Overhead, on the Surrey
bank, flicked and flashed bluely an advertisement
of whisky. A thin rain came down in greasy pellets
and then passed seawards.
Two young women, loitering past Garland, invited
him with chirping lip noises. He cursed them with
an absent-minded foulness and finality, and walked
on. Behind him, they protested shrilly and obscenely.
Garland leant his arms on the bridge and looked into
the water and then across at the lights of Northern
London.
They looked beautiful. All the night had a certain
beauty, wrought of the Spring and the River. Even
the voices of the starved shadows drinking of sex in
the bridge embrasures had, in distance, a cadence of
beauty. And because the beauty of unbeautiful
nights and days, the beauty of bleak and evanescent
and unexpected things, had the power to stir him
darkly and wonderingly, Garland thought :
“And damn fools speak of the Sea as the Mother of
men. She is the City : she is ours, the Great Mother,
with the sunken eyes and the painted face and the
strong, vile hands. She is ours as never was sea or
mountain or heath. Blind, drunken, whored, she is
42
STAINED RADIANCE
ours. The beauty of a passing smile upon her face
stirs us with a passion and pity as does nothing in
Nature . . . The Great Mother. Bedecked in her
whisky advertisements, her lighted ships, her roaring
factories, her creeping clouds of disease, her whimper¬
ings of song and her tellings of deathbeds. . . .
Murderous, pitiful, whimsical: with a song in her
heart and a sneer on her harlot’s lips.”
For a little, exalted and ironic in a breath, he
lingered on the bridge, then went along it and
descended into a network of thin, greasy streets,
darkly-lit, mouth-organed, fish-and-chip-smelling. Four
young men swayed upon the pavement. They were
singing, lifting up vacuous, grave faces towards the
sky. They drew aside courteously, swayingly, to
allow Garland to pass. And Garland thought :
“The desire for expression is of all desires the
most universally human. Between the singing of these
boozed louts, Shakespeare’s Hamlet, and the Ring
of the Nibelungs there is only a difference of degree.”
And, under the high shadow of Waterloo Station
he chuckled. “You bloody prig.”
Entering a sudden luminous doorway in the dark
greasiness of the street, he found himself at the foo
of a staircase that crept up to a far shimmer of brilliant
light. Nor was this any illusion. Like a serpent,
undulating, the stair arose out of blackness, and,
like a belly-tender serpent, climbed. Mounting a
serration on the monster’s back, Garland was borne
aloft into Waterloo Station. He passed quickly
through the crowds, stopped to show his pass-form
to a military policeman with a Yorkshire accent and
the small, stern eyes of a dyspeptic swine, and then
descended through ringing corridors to the cab-ranks
and stifleJof the Waterloo Road. Crossing to the
right, he climbed the steps of the Union Jack Club.
STAINED RADIANCE
43
Two Artillerymen, a Scots Guard, a Marine, and
an American sailor were sitting in the entrance-hall.
The American sailor, his small box hat toppling over
his face, snored nasally, confidently. The Marine was
eating chocolates. The Scots Guard and the two
Artillerymen were talking about women.
Garland, bulky, clad in his shoddy blue, swung
his stick and began to climb the stairs. Within view
of the entrance hall these stairs bore a carpet; their
walls were decorated with spears, javelins, testimonials,
blowtubes, and the heads of animals. Beyond view
of the entrance hall, the floor again rang beneath
Garland’s feet. On the third landing he diverged into
a maze of corridors lined with the doors of cubicles.
He was in a hive, cleanly, dim, murmurous. And
about him arose the smell of week-end baths and the
fish-and-chips smuggled to their beds by the inmates.
At room 599 he stopped, inserted a key in the lock,
swung open the door, and entered.
The cubicle contained a bed, a chair, a washbasin,
a chest of drawers, a looking-glass. Upon the bed
lay the attach^ case which Garland had laid there
earlier in the afternoon. Beside it was a copy of
“Crainquebille”.
Garland closed the door behind him, sat down on
the bed, lit a cigarette, and stared unseeingly at a
notice on the wall. It read :
SMOKING IS FORBIDDEN IN THE CUBICLES.
Garland began to unwind his puttees. The whole
floor on which his cubicle was situated was very still.
Garland’s cigarette drooped its ash tentatively towards
his breeches. He became aware of the fact that he was
sitting, his mind a fogged blank, staring into vacancy.
Half-unwound, the roll of puttee hung in his hand.
44
STAINED RADIANCE
He looked down at it, then flung it from him. Its
hairiness of touch had made him shiver.
He began to undress recklessly, with speed. His
whole body burned with a disgust of his clothes.
He kicked aside the heavy boots, ripped off the thick
socks, presently stood naked. Broad-shouldered,
white-skinned, the hair here and there on his body
was fair and silky, soft matts which he touched
tentatively. His hips were narrow, but his loins curved
strongly. Interestedly he passed his hands over the
bulging calves of his legs.
“I was made for a breeding animal.”
He suddenly raised his head and looked at his
reflection in the mirror above the chest of drawers.
His eyes were shining, his heavy lips hung slack. He
shivered again.
Cold.
From the attache case he took out a suit of blue
pyjamas. Clad in it, he turned back the blankets
from the bed, picked up "Crainquebille”, stood hesitant.
Then he walked to the window and pulled it up.
Far below was the deep, dim well of the courtyard.
Garland looked down at it, then up at the stars.
He addressed the night in curious, guilty whisper.
“By God, that was a narrow escape.”
He stood listening in that silence above London.
No reply came to him. He drew a deep breath, put the
cigarette between his lips, then suddenly spat it out.
It sailed outwards, like a rocket, spun and wavered
in some eddy of air in the courtyard, then disappeared
into the darkness. . . . By God, a narrow escape.
For Thea. For yourself. ... You damned, filthy
fool.
It was that nerved passivity of hers which had
stopped him. Quite suddenly. As suddenly as it had
begun. He had taken his lips from her face and his
STAINED RADIANCE 45
hands from her body. There had come from her a
tearless, choked sob. In another moment she would
have been as he had ceased to be. . . .
“It was that which was the third race memory
upon us in Thea’s room. Sex. Something greater
than ourselves. A memory like a poison gas. It makes
a goblin of the sun."
He was smitten with a sudden, still wonder at the
silence of the Spring night, and, in the midst of that
wonder, was slowly aware that his self-horror and
self-loathing were slipping from him. He reached to
light another cigarette and looked up at the sky with
a detached curiosity. A moment before, consciousness
of his own physical lusts had moved him to an almost
physical sickness. Now, carefully, meticulously,
detachedly, he built up a wondering thought. . . .
All the beauty and delightfulness of Thea. That
curve of her throat. The winey hair that smelt like
and tasted like an old, grave wine. Those archings of
her brows. The queer, delicate beauty of her hands.
That shy, impertinent gurgle. That adventurer’s
mind of hers. Her twists of phrase and accent. Her
memories and likes and patriotisms. ... All Thea,
all threads of lovableness to lead love and adoration
to her.
And each and all of them but enticements for him
to rape and fertilize a female beast in order that she
might bring forth young.
Those things of the Spirit that were apart from
Lust—Lust was their essence and connotation. But
for one foul biological accident, Man would never
have been Man. Unlike all other animals, he ever
longed, in an insensate biological vanity, in and out
of season, to fertilize the female of his kind. Urged
forward and unendurably pressed by this longing,
his history has seen arise marriage, love, prostitution.
STAINED RADIANCE
46
morals, art, Right and Wrong, God, the Virgin
Birth ; and Marie Stopes. With but a subtle difference
in his chemical composition—with but some glandular
modification to induce that trait of normality in the
procreative organs which was the characteristic of
all other animals, Man would not yet have been
Man. ...
Garland was suddenly conscious that the stars
glowed no longer. They leered. Sadistically. Sex
everywhere. Up there as down in Chelsea. Sex,
Nature, God, the foul Trinity back of Life. It was
God who had stooped with him in that moment of
black lust, stooped with hot breath and eternal,
wearied, unwearying, mindless purpose. . . .
A dim Ape-shape that squatted against the stars.
“You Beast," said Garland.
CHAPTER THE SECOND
Wherein Divers Folk react to God and Man as
beseems their Natures, and in a Fashion beyond
the Author’s Powers of Precis.
Subchapter i
EARLY on the Monday morning Mrs. Streseman
Mullins, owner of the millinery establishment
of Cocotte Soeurs, sent for Ellen Ledgworth. Mrs.
Streseman Mullins was a tall woman, handsomely
clothed and with a powdered face. Her breath was
rank, for she suffered from pyorrhea and dreaded
consulting a dentist. Owing to this, her husband had
proved unfaithful and she had divorced him. Craving
sex-companionship, she had promoted a designer to
managership, and, inviting him to her house for dinners,
had constantly sought to seduce him. But the designer
was a Fascist and occupied with politics. Seeking the
salvation of the Empire, he noted neither Mrs. Strese¬
man Mullins’s breath nor the cravings of her desire.
For long hours he would lecture her on Signor Mussolini
and the tactics of Bolshevism the while she writhed in
the agonies of pyorrhea and longing. Then he would
return to his wife and four children in his flat in
Brixton.
Her breath odouring the room, Mrs. Streseman
Mullins spoke to Ellen, ordering her to take a selection
of hats to a Mrs. Gayford in Mayfair, to await a decision
and selection, and to make notes on any alterations
in design which might be desired. Ellen listened with
cheerful eyes and placid face, and then went down
47
STAINED RADIANCE
48
to the shop, picked up the large box which had been
prepared, and set out for Mayfair.
She went by bus, first purchasing a copy of a London
weekly to read on the way. The weekly was a literary
one. It contained short articles on the private life of
a mistress of King Charles and the Riviera as a holiday
resort, a weekly excerpt from Pepys’ Diary, a page on
matters of grammar and syntax, book-reviews, a
photograph of Mr. H. G. Wells, and a leader by the
editor describing how he himself had risen to literary
eminence. Ellen read the leader with unimpaired
cheerfulness, skipped the book-reviews, and had
completed the selection of Pepys when she arrived at
her destination. Having no further use for the weekly,
she left it lying on the seat. A Communist navvy,
seated next to her, picked it up and, looking with
contempt upon the photograph of Mr. Wells, spat.
Ellen rang at Mrs. Gayford’s door and was taken up
to a bedroom. Mrs. Gay ford was sitting up in bed
dictating letters to her secretary, a girl of sixteen.
She took no notice of Ellen’s entry, but stopped now
and then to tap her teeth with a gold-mounted pencil.
The room was tastefully furnished in blue and white.
Einsteinian decorations whorled upon the walls.
On the mantelshelf was a bust with a sneering face.
This Ellen thought was Pan. But it was Lenin. Mrs.
Gay ford was clad in a dressing-jacket and embroidered
pyjamas. Beneath the throat of the latter her neck
showed creased and yellow. Round eyes protruded
slightly from her cultivated face. She was forty years
of age, and had sought for twenty of these to create
a sensation. She had lately publicly disowned her son,
had had her house burgled four times in succession,
had addressed meetings on Free Love, Woman’s
Right to the Illegitimate Child, and Christ an Impostor.
A convert to Communism, the damage sustained to
STAINED RADIANCE 49
her toilet by a fascistic egg at a Peace meeting had
shaken her convictions to their depths. Nevertheless,
she dictated now, in a clear, sharp voice, as to an
underling :
The Editor,
The Red Republican.
Dear Comrade,
How long will the British proletariat allow
to pass without protest the latest outrage upon
Communists in Latvia ? Following on the
suppression of the trade unions, it is now stated
that the right to strike has become illegal in that
dark land. Our Latvian comrades’ hour of
trial is ours: their menaced rights are ours.
Let demonstrations be made at the Latvian
Embassy and the murderers’ envoys shown
that we workers in Britain know how to resent
an outrage upon the liberties of the entire
proletariat.
Long Live the Revolution !
Yours fraternally, 
Ceasing to dictate, Mrs. Gayford turned her head
and looked Ellen up and down with a cold criticism.
Loving revolutions, she switched her mind reluctantly
back from the fraternal huzza concluding the letter.
“What do you want ?”
“I have brought your hats, madame,” said Ellen,
placidly.
“Cocotte Sceurs ? Very good. I will examine them,
choose, and return those I do not require.” Mrs.
Gayford spoke with deliberation, moving her lips
gracefully in the fashion which she had long practised
in front of a mirror. Slipshod in speech, she attempted
to improve herself for public occasions by the study
D
STAINED RADIANCE
50
of books on Good English. From those books she
learnt that though the English language had no
infinitive verb yet to split that infinitive was a
grammatical enormity, and to end a sentence with a
preposition a sign of under-education. Guiding
herself by these rules, porters, taxi-drivers, and
literary folk with whom she came in casual contact
regarded her either as a foreigner or a mental defective.
Ellen, turning to leave the room, was halted by a
question.
“Do you belong to the Garment Workers’ Union ?’’
“No, madame.”
“Why do you not ?’’
“Because I don’t choose to, madame.’’
Mrs. Gayford sat up more rigidly in bed, thereby
revealing the well-developed bust which she had never
been able to suppress since the bearing of her one and
only child some twenty-three years before. The pores
pitted her skin like miniature extinct craters. The
secretary, by a deft manipulation of the muscles of her
mouth, grinned unpleasantly at her employer and
pleasantly at Ellen. For the secretary was sick of
workers’ unions and Communist societies and suchlike
unsanitary organizations. She considered Mrs. Gayford
required scrubbing, mentally and physically. Ellen,
calm, broad-hipped, stood by the hatbox.
“Do you know to whom you are speaking ?”
“Mrs. Gayford, I believe, madame.’’
“What is your name ?”
“Ellen Ledgworth, madame.’’
“Very good. I shall report your insolence to your
employers. And I think the Union will take care
that you are not provided with another situation.
You can go.’’
“Very well, madame. Good morning.”
Ellen went downstairs. It was near the lunch-hour.
STAINED RADIANCE 51
She regretted she had nothing to read in the restaurant
on which she was already intent.
As she reached the foot of the stairs, a footman,
tall, imposing, and limping a little because of a soft
corn between his toes, was attempting to restrain a
young man from entering the hall. The young man,
dressed in a well-cut lounge suit, argued with virulence.
As Ellen appeared, he turned to her.
“Is my mother up there ?’’
“I don't know. Who's your mother ?”
The young man looked at her with surprise. She
was evidently not a servant. But also, she was plainly
not of any well-bred or sheltered class. Assuming a
cultured voice nervously, he said :
“I beg your pardon. Mrs. Gayford, I mean.”
“She is in bed,” said Ellen, placidly.
The young man flushed. “Bloody old fool,” he
remarked.
At this the footman, spite the agony of the soft
corn, grinned. Ellen, forgetting the servants' entrance,
made to pass out through the open door, then stood
aside to allow another visitor to enter.
It was James Storman.
“Good morning, Miss Ledgworth. Didn't know you
visited here.”
Swaying her broad hips preparatory to leaving,
Ellen smiled.
“I don't think I will again.”
“Oh. Why not ?”
“Mrs. Gayford has just told me she's going to ask
my employers to dismiss me for insolence.”
Footman and young man stood listening. Both
reared in different sections of a large house, they were
unacquainted with good manners. They stood and
eyed Storman and Ellen with mouths slightly opened
and fishlike eyes.
52
STAINED RADIANCE
Storman smoothed his hair. Clad in plum colour,
he looked well. He wore no hat. His eyes shone
humorously.
“Bloody old fool.” He came into the hall. The
Young man, regarding him dazedly, stood aside. The
Footman stepped forward.
“Mrs. Gayford expects you, sir. You are to go
right up.”
“Right. I'll settle things for you, Miss Ledgworth.
Don’t worry.”
He went swiftly up the stairs. Ellen passed through
the doorway and descended to the street. The young
man followed her, indecisively. Sinking into a settle,
the footman removed a shoe, and, stroking the soft
corn, moaned.
Out on the pavement the young man, coming near
to Ellen, raised his hat.
“I beg your pardon, but do you know who that
fellow is ?”
Ellen nodded. “He is Captain Storman, a Com¬
munist agent.”
“Good God !” The young man swore carefully,
then apologized. “You see, I'm her son. She forbids
me to enter the house and yet invites that rotter
up to her bedroom.”
“I don't think she’s in much danger.”
They smiled at each other, Ellen with a placid
coarseness, the young man with a flush. He was
Robert Gayford and was twenty-three years of age.
He had gone to Harrow but not, subsequently, to
any university. Disowned by his mother after a
police-court case of petty larceny in which he had
figured, he lived on the charity of an obese uncle who
drank Younger’s Ale, read Gibbon, provided his
nephew with an allowance, and swore whenever he
saw him. As a result, Robert Gayford stayed mostly
STAINED RADIANCE
53
at his club. Without an occupation, he had become a
Roman Catholic and upon occasion sought to gain
admittance to his mother’s house in order to convert
her from the atheistic life which she was leading.
At other times he sought life and adventure. Thought
of sex thrilled and terrified him. Consummation of
desire he had never yet experienced, though, brooding
upon it, his blood purred. “What,” he pronounced
“Hwaw”, uneasily. In stressful moments his voice
fell to a thin flatness. He wore under his coat a knitted
woollen jacket of vivid colours and obscure design.
Believing in God, he read the Morning Post and was
thrilled by its leaders.
Ellen’s last remark had given him his cue. With
questioning eyes he surveyed her figure. It was
good. Perhaps he might make her acquaintance to
good effect. Perhaps she lived alone. They would
spend the day together. She would invite him home
after dinner at a restaurant. There would be soft
lights and warmth and tenderness and she would love
him. He would seduce her.
His face becoming bright, he spoke to her again.
“Come and lunch with me. Hwaw ?”
“Pleased,” said Ellen.
A bus came. They boarded it. Throbbing, it sped
along the street. Its driver went off duty at Charing
Cross and he was hungry. The bus fled at unusual
speed. Road-workers cursed it. It splattered through
a stretch of tar. Overhead the sky had of a sudden
cleared to a wild, strange blue shadowed by sunshine.
Robert Gayford and Ellen had mounted to the top
of the bus. They sat side by side on the front seat and
peered into the dust, Ellen’s knee touched the young
man. Absorbed in thoughts of her, the touch thrilled
him with a sweat-pringling extasy. Ellen smiled at
him placidly.
54
STAINED RADIANCE
"We’ll go to the Strand Corner House.”
And, swaying upon her broad hips, she felt the
gastric juices stir pleasantly within her stomach.
Subchapter ii
Meanwhile Storman sat on the edge of Mrs.
Gayford’s bed and talked to her. The secretary stood
impatiently by the window. She wished to leave and
type the letters already dictated. Further, she loathed
Storman, for the latter treated her as he did most
women unconnected with his political faith—with the
insolence of a complete indifference.
With Mrs. Gayford he was otherwise. His primitive
sense of humour tickled to a cruel under-laughter the
while, he listened to her patiently, agreed with her
tactfully, bullied her and lied to her flatteringly and
basely. He patted her mind and stroked her brain.
Had it suited his purpose, he would have burned her
alive with an equal thoroughness.
His purpose was to procure money for the Anarcho-
communist Party. Pursuing this aim during the last
two years, he had cajoled trade union leaders, wheedled
Socialistic authors, begged from Moscow, borrowed
from the French Communist Party, and blackmailed
business firms in Manchester. To the same end, he
would have sold the bones in a London cemetery.
He thrilled Mrs. Gayford, who, blind enough in
most things, yet sensed his inhuman, selfless cruelty
of purpose. It made her draw her bed jacket about her
and snuggle down into the sheets. He was as stimulating
as electric treatment in a beauty parlour. Speaking,
he looked her straight in the eyes.
"You have done the Cause a service, comrade. In
our narrower interests we are apt to forget the broader
STAINED RADIANCE
55
issues. The Latvian persecutions will certainly be
made the subject of demonstrations. Better still,
if we can collect the money, we will send a donation
from the workers of Britain to fight the White Terror
of the Baltic/’
Knowing that this style of speech pleased and
impressed, he addressed her with the sterile blood-
and-iron pomposity of a Moscow thesis. Mrs. Gayford
sat up and nodded.
“Yes, we can raise a fund. I will set about it
through the columns of The Red Republican, if you
will give me some space this week.”
Storman shook his head. “And the Latvian workers
meantime—rotting in their prisons, dying by gibbet
and firing-squads ? . . . My God, when I think of
it ! But for our poverty, the poverty and the apathy
of the workers here, Latvia might be freed even yet.
Even yet might the red flag rise in her streets behind
the workers’ barricades ’’
He had stood up, emotional, and turned away
from the bed towards the window and the glowering
face of the secretary. Behind him, Mrs. Gayford sat
with wrinkled skin and shining eyes. Barricades
delighted her. The thought of machine-guns and
brave, clean sanitary workers pumping lead into
attacking Whites moved her with an extasy that was
religious.
“You mean—there could be an insurrection ?’’
Storman turned back towards her. “We were
discussing those demonstrations at the Latvian
Embassy, comrade. Could you arrange for a woman’s
contingent ?’’
Mrs. Gayford understood. At a motion of her head,
the secretary left the room. With thankfulness. Mrs.
Gayford addressed Storman in a whisper.
“The Latvian workers would revolt if ?”
56 STAINED RADIANCE
“If they had the arms and ammunition. But there’s
no use thinking of that. By the time our fund has
collected a few pounds—well, it will be useful for
burying the corpses.”
“But where could these arms be procured ? Not
in Latvia ?”
“A Swedish firm would send a boatload across the
Baltic. All the details have been gone into. . . .
If we had a millionaire in our party he might provide
those guns and his name live for ever in Latvian
history as Byron’s does in Greek.” He gave a weary
laugh. “Only, we’ve no millionaire.”
Mrs. Gayford was pressing the secretary’s bell.
Upon her face had come a light that transfigured
it.
“How much would the arms cost ?”
Looking at her, Storman calculated swiftly. “Eight
hundred pounds.”
“Comrade, I will give you it—in trust for the
Latvian nation. I am no millionaire, but—Miss
Robson, my cheque-book. Be quick.”
As she sat signing the cheque, Storman, brown and
tall, looked at her. The light had not gone from her
face. For a moment a contemptuous wonder held the
mind of the ex-captain of artillery.
“Oh, there’s another thing, comrade. A girl—a
Miss Ledgworth—came here this morning. I believe
she interviewed you, and there was some disagreement.”
The light faded from Mrs. Gayford’s face. She
frowned.
“Ledgworth ? No . . . Oh, the girl from Cocotte
Sceurs ?”
“I met her as I was entering. She told me you had
threatened to have her discharged.”
A faint, thin colour, leaving the wrinkles still white,
came on the woman’s face, and with it a certain
STAINED RADIANCE
57
hauteur. By a strange change, she was moved back
into the point of view and demeanour of the class
into which she had been born.
“She was insolent.”
“A revolutionist has no dignity, comrade.”
At Lenin’s phrase, a mere sulkiness replaced the
hauteur. Storman, folding the cheque and putting
it in his pocket, felt glad of the fact that it had already
left Mrs. Gayford’s hands. Otherwise, the Latvian
workers might have been constrained to storm the
barricades with toothpicks. (Where the devil exactly
was Latvia, and what was happening there ?)
Mrs. Gayford tapped her teeth with the pencil.
“I did not mean insolence from a personal point
of view. But this girl is a blackleg. She is not a
member of her union.”
“She will join to-morrow. I'll see to that.”
“Then, of course, I’ll let the matter stand.”
“Thanks, comrade.” The ex-captain of artillery
prepared to leave. “For what you have done to-day
I know that neither Latvia nor the Republic of the
World will ever forget.”
Nodding good-bye, Mrs. Gayford, comfortable
amongst the pillows, was scarcely conscious that he
had left. Instead of the room-walls surrounding her,
she saw the Latvian workers’ groups, bayonets a-glister,
marching through the bitter snow of a storming night¬
fall ; heard, far on the winds, the music of the
Marseillaise and the crackle of machine-guns. And then
she saw the People triumphant, saw in the great
square of a Baltic town the statue of a woman in
symbolic dress, reared to overlook the Sea and
City. . . .
And the garments were the garments of Liberty,
but the face, fashioned by a master-sculptor, was her
own.
58 STAINED RADIANCE
Subchapter ii (a) Anticipative
A week later the secretary of the Blackshire Miners’
Association, which had been carrying on an indepen¬
dent strike for the past six months, forwarded to
the headquarters of the Anarchocommunist Party
a receipt for £800 and a promise to support the
Anarchocommunist affiliation application at the next
Labour Party Congress.
Subchapter Hi
Suddenly, at noon, the Spring sun breathed upon
London with a warm, malarial breath, and it was
Summer.
Through the long corridors of the streets, in a
tide that was almost visible, advanced the heat ;
and through the heat the bus from Mayfair carried
Robert Gayford and Ellen Ledgworth to the entrance
of the Strand Corner House.
Streams of people eddied in and out. The streams
were hurried and apologetic. Men with chalky faces
predominated. Hurriedly, fearing indigestion, they
left or entered. Tables were crowded. Queues waited
on each floor. The band played from Lohengrin.
It was stiflingly warm.
Smiling, Ellen led the way to the third floor.
At length they found seats. Ellen ordered steak
and onions and rhubarb and cream. Sickened, Gayford
ordered the same. Sweat stood on his forehead. As
though it also sweated, his brain was in a dull, warm
daze. He leant uncertainly across the table.
“Look here, let’s spend the day together.’’
Surveying him, Ellen discovered his face to be
splotchy and unhealthy. He wanted exercise. She
nodded, placidly.
STAINED RADIANCE 59
“Don’t mind if I do. It won’t make much difference,
as your mother’s going to have me sacked.”
She was undisturbed at the prospect. A good
milliner, she would soon find another position as
good as or better than that held by her at Cocotte
Soeurs.
Food arrived. They ate. A tenor sang “Sweet
and Low”. They clapped. Stout men laid aside
their spoons and beat their moist palms together.
Girls chattered, bringing out mirrors and powder-
puffs and dabbling warm faces. Food introduced into
their stomachs exuded heat and comfort through
the pores of their skins. Mollified and dyspeptic,
they surveyed the surrounding tables and listened
to the band with a feeling of pleasant security.
Suddenly, while the musicians rested, a voice
rang out through the restaurant, down the wide well
from floor to floor. It was the voice of a man singing.
“Arise, ye outcast and ye hounded !
Arise, ye slaves of want and fear !
For Reason’s thunderous tramp has sounded
And the day is drawing near ”
A wild gibberish, sung in a sweet, cracked voice,
it stilled the restaurant. Wondering faces were
lifted. Beside the well on the third floor a man had
risen and stood singing, his hands outstretched. His
face wrung with a pallid sorrow, he stood and sang.
Open-mouthed, a waiter stared, scratching himself
intimately.
The floors hushed a moment, listening politely,
with jaws poised. A faint clapping arose. The singer
stopped, glared, made an obscene gesture common
in the bazaars of Jerusalem, wheeled about, and
was gone.
“What was it he sang ?”
6o
STAINED RADIANCE
"Did you see his face ?”
. . a stunt of the management.”
This became the general opinion. The song was
recognized and verified as the new Morning Post
patriot chant, the Hungarian National Anthem and
a lyric from the Hollywood talking-picture "Speakeasy
Love.”
"Damned funny, hwaw ?” said Robert Gayford.
"Did you know what he sang ?”
"Oh, yes,” said Ellen, placidly. Then was a little
worried, remembering her companion’s social status.
She searched carefully among her accentuations and
then decided against the "h”. "It was a nymn.”
Subchapter iv
At three o’clock on the afternoon of that day
Storman’s typist brought him a cup of tea. She was a
small, dark girl with earnest eyes and horn-rimmed
glasses. All day she typed to Storman’s dictation and
at night attended classes in ambulance work, so
that she might be prepared for the Revolution. She
and Storman had each an office at the rear of the
printing and publishing works of The Red Republican.
In these offices they planned the overthrow of
Capitalism and organized for the dictatorship of the
communes.
"A man wishes to see you, comrade.”
Storman took the tea, tasted it, and resumed work
on the pile of manuscript in front of him. "What’s
his name ?”
"Cooper. From Egypt, he says.”
"Cooper. Cooper ? . . . I’m damned. Ask him
to come in, comrade.”
A moment after the typist’s exit, the door opened
STAINED RADIANCE 6l
and a man stood looking at Storman. Then, hand
outstretched, he limped into the room.
“Koupa !”
“The same. And yourself, my Storman ? Little
Christ, it is good to see you. . . . Eh, a card-index ?
What fate for a rebel! Tea ? It is a swinish drink.
Besides, I had five pints of the so-good beer for my
lunch. Eh, Storman !”
He stood with his hand on the shoulder of the
ex-captain of artillery, then shuffled to a chair and sat
down.
They had not seen each other for five years.
Andreas van Koupa, a Dutchman who had once
lived sufficiently long in England to take out naturaliza¬
tion papers, was a poet and a tramp. He liked tramping.
He had once walked from Paris to Cairo without
crossing other water than miniature streams. The world
in undress amused him. Over the backyards of the
bourgeoisie human nature was revealed to him. He
spoke nine languages and had three wives—one in
Leningrad, one in Cairo, and a third in Alexandria.
Vain of his appearance, he had the pale, still face of
a Da Vinci Christ and beady, birdlike eyes.
Before the War he had starved in most of the
capitals of Europe, writing verses which no publisher
would accept. In Paris, after the outbreak of hostilities,
he had lived by writing obscene little sex stories which
were privately printed and sold in brothels to English
soldiers. In London, in 1916, he had been conscripted
and sent to the Somme. Terror and distaste filled him.
He attempted to commit suicide. One night he stormed
a German trench, single-handed, bombing its occupants
to submission. He was decorated. Still terror-stricken,
he volunteered as a sniper. He bore a charmed life.
Finally, in an advance, he was crippled by a British
bullet and invalided out of the Army. At the
62 STAINED RADIANCE
conclusion of the Armistice, however, volunteering as
an interpreter with the Army of the Rhine, he was
accepted. Six months later he was tried for embezzle¬
ment of commissariat funds, found guilty, and sentenced
to six months’ imprisonment. At the conclusion of
that time he tramped eastwards through a starving
Germany and Russia to Moscow, where he was
imprisoned on suspicion of being a spy of Mr.
Churchill’s. In prison he preached with a passionate
earnestness the communist doctrines which imprisoned
him. He was speedily released as a consequence and
appointed to a post on the ’Tcheka in Petrograd.
In that city he spent two years, clad in leather,
carrying a revolver, and searching out counter¬
revolutionary traitors. Then, when the Kronstadt
sailors mutinied, published their famous indictment
of the Bolsheviks and called for free councils, Koupa,
profoundly moved, left his wife and the ’Tcheka,
and threw in his lot with the sailors. Night after
night he addressed them, stirring hundreds to
enthusiasm by his passionate sincerity, his golden
voice. Snow fell. Moscow delivered ultimatum after
ultimatum. Kronstadt, angry, justice-seeking, con¬
fident of the redress of its grievances, dispatched
delegations to argue the matter. One grey dawn the
boom of heavy guns filled the air. The Workers’
Government poured high explosives into Kronstadt,
then advanced their battalions of conscripts, stormed
the town, and made of it a blood-sacrifice of death
and fire to the unquiet manes of the Revolution.
Koupa escaped to England on a Latvian cargo-boat.
After two months’ tramping in England, he applied
for a position with a company which specialized in
conducted tours to the East. His excellent knowledge
of languages procured him the position of assistant-
conductor, and a fortnight later he was on the way to
STAINED RADIANCE 63
Egypt with a party of tourists. Landing, the smells
and scents of the unforgotten East went to his head
like wine. At Cairo he deserted the party and went
to live in the Wagh el Berka with a Greek harlot from
Lemnos. There, in an attic, close to the stars, he sat
all day drinking Greek brandy and writing verses,
the while the woman earned their bread. Of nights,
restless, Koupa would walk the streets and stand by
the river-bank, and listen to songs borne on the
waters from the lost Mountains of the Moon. Sickened,
and longing for sight and sound of the sea, he set out
one night and walked to Alexandria. Arrived there,
he sat in the morning light at Mustapha and watched
Storman bathing in the Mediterranean.
When Storman came out of the water, they talked.
They talked all that forenoon. They talked for days.
Storman, a civil engineer, had just completed a two-
years contract in the Sudan. He was recuperating
prior to a return to England. From excess of expendi¬
ture of purpose and energy in the work he had just
completed, he was wearied and convinced of the
purposelessness of life. To Koupa he listened with a
cool detachment, till the latter found his measure.
"You are a Positivist,” said Koupa. "But the
only active Positivists in the world to-day are the
Communists.”
And,, lying on the warm sands, he was smitten
with vision of the inhuman drive and purpose of
Communism.
"The Communists ?” said Storman. "The Russian
half-wits ?”
And Koupa, still visioning, looked in his face and
sang him an epic saga—of a doctrinaire’s dream that
shod itself in blood and iron and climbed through
wreckage and destruction to Purpose, pitiless, selfless,
and sane. Listening, there had kindled in the narrow,
STAINED RADIANCE
64
disciplined mind of Storman a slow fire. Watching,
Koupa had seen it and tended it, till a weariness came
upon him and one morning he was gone and Mustapha
knew him no more.
And now, looking at Storman from his bright eyes
as he sat in the offices of the Anarchocommunist
Party, it came upon Koupa that he had lit a torch of
a quality and glow beyond his dreaming. God mine !
he believes ! Such a light as no man shall ever put
out. . . . This little Storman will surely find me a
job till we wring the Capitalist neck.
Chuckling, he talked of his life during the last
five years. Desiring to improve his Arabic, he had
crossed the Red Sea and entered the Wahhabi territory.
In disguise, a pilgrim, he crossed the dreary camel-
routes to Mecca, had prayed in the Kaaba, had dis¬
coursed sterile futilities of conduct with Shiite sheikhs.
In the guise of a Coptic convert to Islam, a puritanical
reformer, he had stirred up the Wahhabi rebellion against
the Hedjaz and had taken part in the triumphal
campaign which ended in the entry into Medina.
Then he had deserted and gone northwards to
Sinai, and so, across the desert, to Kantara and
Suez. He had obtained work on an England-
bound tramp and, four days before, had arrived at
Liverpool. From there he had walked to London,
“Eh, Storman ! London magic ! I could have
wept as I came within the so-dreary miles of the
redbrick : wept with gladness, as one who had come
home again. She is the mother of aliens, our London.
So I tested her spirit again. I climbed up to the third
floor of the Strand Restaurant, and, while the greasy
little clerks fed, I sang them a verse of the Inter¬
nationale. God mine, how they stared ! Eh, but yet
it is the old London ! I heard one say to the other as
I slipped out that it was a hymn I had sung !
STAINED RADIANCE
65
Koupa’s thin ripple of laughter and Storman’s
bass boomed out together. Looking at him, Storman
was without illusions. This Koupa was of the order
that the organized State would utterly stamp upon
and destroy — shiftless, shameless, a vagabond,
unreliable ; probably treacherous. But he worked his
work ; he dissolved and destroyed, he was a wrecker.
And in the house of Communism there are many
mansions.
Said Storman :
**Let’s go and have some food together. I’m hungry.”
They went to a small place near Leicester Square.
People stared as they passed. Under his arm Koupa
bore an immense, ribboned sombrero. About his
shoulders was an opera cloak. He wore flannel trousers
and muddied boots. Seeing the glances cast upon him,
he chuckled delightedly.
The waitress served them doubtfully, looking at
Koupa’s clothes and untrimmed hair. Koupa poured
the tea, ate a chocolate eclair, and fixed his bright
bird’s eyes on Storman.
“Eh, Storman, it is something to have climbed from
the ape and the Wahhabi—to eat eclairs with a silver
fork ! God mine, do you not love them also ? Or is
it indigestion or love ?”
Storman nodded. “Love.”
“Ah. She is a comrade ?”
Storman stared at him abstractedly : then laughed.
“Love of eclairs, I meant. It prevents me eating
them.”
“Ah, I had hoped some woman it was who steals
your thoughts at these times. To bear you children
for the Revolution and wring your heart with pity
that ever love was evolved.”
Storman drank tea. “You go too fast. I fell in
love three months ago.”
E
66
STAINED RADIANCE
“God mine ! Is it so ?— And a comrade ?’’ Saying
this, Koupa grinned internally. Eh, a comrade, for
certainty ! One who had bedded with Spartacus and
Karl Marx and believed in throat-cutting for political
reasons. Storman shook his head.
“She is an empty-headed little ape, Koupa. Brain¬
less, and with a rather long upper lip. Like a cultured
monkey. Some day I'll marry her, and then, I suppose,
breed the Revolution’s cannon fodder from her.”
“Take care that you breed not that which ousts
the Revolution from your heart.” Koupa, speaking
without thinking, was himself half-startled. He ate
an eclair with methodical abstraction, and was
disturbed. God mine, the poor Storman, with his so
brave, so honest stupidity ! Aloud: “You know
her—so ?”
“Better than she will ever know herself.”
“Then it is bad. For it is not love. God mine,
no !”
“Then what ?”
“Pfuu ! Love ! A tinkling thing of tendernesses
and caresses and sweet dreamings—a thing of empty
adorations and desires. You may see its results
rise staled from any marriage-bed : down in the
Strand to-night—God mine ! the good old Strand !—
you may purchase it at anything from a half-crown
upwards. Love ! ... It is Lust that has gripped
you, Storman. It will suck your blood, maybe for
years.”
Storman’s enormous laugh startled nervous tea-
drinkers. “And that—it is not poetry, as you think,
but paradox. How long has it sucked your blood,
Andreas ?”
But the poet was grave. He was dreaming a poetic
defence of harmless love against the blasphemous
Swinburnian lusters. Indigestion growing upon him
STAINED RADIANCE 67
from the Eclairs he had eaten, he looked around the
tables with a sneer.
“Boghe I Is there anything on earth more to
disgust than public feeding ? In the civilization of
our communes, my Storman, eating will be classed
with the obscene, secret bodily functions."
But Storman was indifferent. He cared nothing
for the table etiquette of the Communist state : he
cared nothing for the art and literature that would
arise in it. He cared only that in the state he wrought
to build men would rise from their beds for work that
had selflessness and purpose ; would procreate children
who would also serve that unending aim ; would
stand clearly forth in the sunlight and never again
go faltering back to darkness and the deeps of
night.
With whom the millenniards would share their
beds and brothels, tears and tribulations, was no
concern of his. He had little or no interest in human
beings, recognizing, as he did, that man is an
abstraction.
“It may be classed with arson and simony, for all
I care." He surveyed the tables as might a buccaneer,
and, even so, with little humour. “This is a well-
equipped place. It would melt down well for the party
funds."
For money poured in the party funds was as water
poured into a sieve.
Koupa chuckled and rose carefully to his feet.
“Let us go." He belted his cloak round him and put
the sombrero under his arm. “And you will tell me
how I may help the little party."
The waitress came quickly to their table after they
had gone. She counted the teaspoons and the forks,
swore under her breath, and presently sought out the
manageress.
68
STAINED RADIANCE
‘‘Two forks have gone. From that corner table.
It was the dirty man, I think."
“A good job they’re imitation,” said the manageress.
“Even though they’re hallmarked.”
Subchapier v
“Miggod, where’ve you been ?” said Norah
Casement.
Ellen sank into an arm-chair and laid aside her
bag. “Had such a nice walk,” she observed, placidly,
tiredly.
It was the sitting-room of the flat which the three
girls rented jointly. The mantelshelf clock had just
recorded the hour of eleven. All Rosemount Avenue
was very silent under a crescent moon.
“Where’s Thea ?”
“Gone to bed. Biggod, I thought you were making a
night of it somewhere.” Seated, Norah yawned,
elevating her book in the air. Ellen smiled placidly.
“Oh, no. But I've had a glorious day and a glorious
walk. Such a nice boy. He wanted me to spend the
afternoon and evening with him in London, but
I wouldn’t have that. So I took him out by Edgware
and we walked for miles and miles in the country.
A nice, shy boy. Hardly spoke all the time. We lost
ourselves for an hour or two, then found a bus-route.”
She mused, reminiscently. “I think he was a bit tired
when we got back.”
“Deadbeat, if you walked at your usual
rate.”
“Oh, and I’d just put him in a taxi at Hammersmith
when I met Billy Newman. He wants you to go to a
dance with him on Wednesday.”
“Does he ? Well, I’ll—” Norah’s voice tailed off.
STAINED RADIANCE 69
A flush came on her cheeks. She avoided Ellen’s
eye, petulantly. Ellen purred placidly.
“And how about that nice Mr. Storman ?”
A creaking noise sounded and the sitting-room
door opened slightly. Round the edge of it projected
the head of Birch, the household cat. Norah stood
up and flung her book at it. It vanished.
“Oh, I don’t know. I’m going to bed. Fed up.”
With sudden passion : “Boys are the very divvle.”
CHAPTER THE THIRD
Wherein the Bracing Effects of Military Life are
demonstrated, the Meditations of a Lady in a Bath
recorded with Due Indelicacy, and some Sympathetic
Insight shown into the Difficulties of compiling the
First Novel of an Ironist.
Subchapter i
JOHN GARLAND awoke in a hut in Burford
Camp. Sweet and clear through the dawn rang
the notes of reveille. A blackbird was whistling
in a tree outside the hut.
His pillow made of straw cased about by yellow
cloth, Garland lay with his mouth slightly open.
His lips felt foul and edged. He pushed aside the
shoddy blankets. Thereat the reveille abruptly ceased,
and the door of a distant hut banged in the morning
air. The trumpeter had gone back to bed.
And, muddily, Garland thought :
“Oh, Christ; morning already. What a damned
stink. The proletarirats smell bad this morning.”
He yawned profoundly, sat up in bed. It was a
Macdonald, made of transverse lathes of iron. It
creaked and swayed. Garland lit a cigarette. He sniffed
the air again.
“Like a dung-heap.”
He slept in a corner. Down the length of the hut
were thirty-six other beds, eighteen on either side.
Beneath their blankets the occupants lay in varying
stages of crumplement. Tunics hung from hooks.
Breeches, boots, and puttees lay upon the floor. The
STAINED RADIANCE
71
airmen slept profoundly with open mouths and evil
breaths. One of them had been sick during the night.
Outside the blackbird whistled.
“Gaily/’ thought Garland. “Birds always whistle
gaily, we imagine. But that is mere anthropophuism.
They are neither glad nor sad. They open their
windpipes to ease their stomachs, most probably.”
He chuckled and tentatively extended a pyjamaed
leg from the bed. None of the other airmen wore
pyjamas. For it was bloody swank. Perspiring in
their thick shirts, they would lie abed of an evening
and watch Garland change. But because of his D.C.M.
and his extraordinary command of foul language,
they would say nothing.
No one stirred as Garland put on his trousers, socks,
and shoes, took a towel from the locker above his
head, and went out of doors. There, in the silence,
among the long rows of huts and with the sunshine
in his face, a happiness came upon him. For once he
did not pause to think it out. He walked to the open-
air ablution-rooms whistling. Arrived there, he filled
a zinc basin and washed himself. Then, stooping, he
cleaned his teeth and drank a mouthful of water as
it gurgled from the tap.
Abruptly, raising his dripping head, he began to
sing. His voice was powerful, untrained, harsh.
“Mademoiselle from Armentieres
(Parlez-vous ?)
Mademoiselle from Armentieres
(Parlez-vous ?)
Mademoiselle from Armentieres—
Oh, every night for sixteen years
Inky Pinky
(Parlez-vous ?)”
Still the huts near at hand slept. But remote in
lines at the other side of the camp voices rose and
72
STAINED RADIANCE
fell. The orderly-sergeant was on his rounds, tipping
airmen out of bed. This he did by seizing the lower
halves of the collapsible Macdonalds and jerking them
forward. At such a moment the entire contraption
would fall to pieces and so awaken the occupant.
As Garland entered the hut, a voice came from the
bunk of the non-commissioned officer. This was the
voice of Corporal Mackay. He shouted to Garland to
stir the lazy bastards out there.
“Stir them yourself,” said Garland, and poured oil
on his hair.
“Do what I bloody well tell you, or I’ll put you
under arrest.”
“Arrest your grandmother,” replied Garland. For
he had a D.C.M. and cared nothing for corporals. He
began to fold the blankets on his bed and to set to
rights the kit and equipment above his locker. Pre¬
sently there came a steady snoring from the corporal’s
bunk.
At seven o'clock the trumpeter sounded cookhouse.
Instantly the hut sprang to life. Men leapt out of
bed and into their trousers. Socks, boots, and tunics
were rapidly donned. Then, with plates and mugs in
their hands, the airmen ran rapidly towards the shed
which was the dining-room.
Arrived there, they paraded in a queue past an
opening in the cookhouse wall. Two cooks served out
the food. Each portion consisted of a sausage and
some blackened potatoes. The tea was black and
boiled. Carrying plates and mugs, the men seated
themselves at long plank tables. By a quarter past
seven there were over two hundred men in the dining¬
room.
Garland sat midway the length of a table. About
him, hungry, simple, unwashed, the airmen ate.
They talked as they ate, with full mouths and
STAINED RADIANCE
73
unscrubbed teeth. Their laughter was unwholesome
and high, their appearances and demeanour truculent.
From listening to lectures and reading Mr. Kipling’s
poems, they considered this attitude proper and
resultant upon their vitality and courage. It was,
however, largely due to indigestion and cowardice.
Drilled and directed, punished like children and
rewarded like children, they looked from shallow,
muddied brains with pithecanthropic eyes. Even
oaths were standardized and mainly concerned various
obscene sex-functions. Eating, they related stories
of their adventures on the previous night. Prowling
in alley-ways and back kitchens, they had each raped
a woman.
“Where were you last night ?’’ asked one of them
of Garland.
Garland speared his sausage and looked at it.
“Last night I stoned a dog that had a funny
smell.’’ He sniffed at the sausage. “Yes, it’s the
same.’’
The table roared its appreciation. By such means
Garland had attained a flickering popularity. Some¬
times, however, when the moody spell was upon him,
his humour was a savage bludgeoning of cruelty. At
such moments, each apprehensive that the lash might
be laid across his own shoulders, the airmen would
laugh with scared eyes, and Garland’s popularity, fed
on fear, would soar. Yet, fearful of N.C.O.s themselves,
the other airmen secretly resented Garland’s indif¬
ference and occasional insolence to a corporal or a
sergeant. By God, if I’d stripes, I’d have shoved him
in the digger for that. Further, as Garland had been
heard to state that he did not believe in marriage, he
was secretly regarded as immoral and shocking. For
without exception the other members of the barrack-
hut believed in marriage and children and virtuous
74
STAINED RADIANCE
wives. But the women with whom they consorted
before marriage were bloody pros.
At five minutes to eight the four hundred airmen in
the camp had gathered on the tarmac in front of one
of the hangars. Presently the camp sergeant-major
appeared. He was a little man, his breeches sagging
at the seat and knees. From his face and voice he
was known as Bonzo. During the war he had been a
warrant officer in a military prison on Salisbury Plain.
As a consequence, he had never been on active service
and had no medal-ribbons. This fact galled him.
Medal-ribbons grew to be a craze with him. He
would carefully survey the tunics of ex-army privates
and reprove them if their ribbons were soiled. He had
cold, glazed eyes, like a bullock in a panic. His
moustache was twisted to fine points. He lived in a
dim cave of drill formulae, and, transferred to the Air
Force, had been puzzled and alarmed by the impact
of new ideas and necessities. He would ask newly-
joined recruits if they had been trade unionists, and
would then relate to them how such bastards had been
licked into shape in Salisbury during the War.
With a limited vocabulary, he clung firmly to the
word bastard. Airmen who did not shave properly
were bastards. Strikers were lousy bastards. Socialists
were bastards. Fearing his wife, he would upon
occasion privately record her bastardly in his thoughts.
His only daughter, whom he loved, was alone exempted
from the general accusation of illegitimacy which he
levelled against the animate world, and she had been
born ten years before, at Salisbury, as the result of
the clandestine embraces of her mother and a con¬
scientious objector.
The parade lined up. The sergeant-major called it
to attention. Then, bringing the drooping knees of
his breeches in c lose proximity to each other, he lifted
STAINED RADIANCE
75
his hand to his face. At that, a young man who had
appeared on the scene also lifted his hand to his face,
as though to draw attention to the rows of pimples
with which it was garnished.
He was Pilot Officer Brougham, and orderly officer
for the day. Gazetted to his commission six months
before, he was the son of a Liverpool grocer. He had
already crashed two aeroplanes. His face lacked a
chin. For three thousand years men—Daedalus, Da
Vinci, Lilienthal, Wilbur Wright—had dreamt and
adventured and visioned greatly that he might ride
the skies. Now, his stick under his arm, the projecting
teeth of his upper jaw resting upon his nether lip, he
walked along the ranks, inspecting chins and buttons
and hobnailed boots.
And Garland, in the front rank, standing rigid, indif¬
ferent, with the D.C.M. ribbon on his tunic, thought:
“How the anti-militarists flatter militarism ! It is
no monster clad in steel and fire, ruthless, relentless,
inhuman. It is only a shambling, cowardly ape,
underbrained, with stinks and fuddled scratchings.
Its impressiveness is that of the Zoo orang with a
newspaper cocked on its head. Oh, its cage has opened
upon occasion and it has torn and smashed and
snuffled blood till some impact on the lewd brain has
sent it whimpering and slinking. . . . Tanks and
poison-gas. Lord ! How it does fear at such times
the new clubs and battering-stones thrust in its hands,
and, in sleep, in lulls, dreams with simian snortings
of the cage and vermin-picking and a paper hat. . .
Meantime, as the names of the owners of unshaved
chins and under-blacked boots were, at the orderly
officer’s instructions, noted down in the sergeant-
major’s notebook, there spread throughout the entire
parade an increasing disbelief that Brougham had
ever been fathered by the Liverpool grocer.
76 STAINED RADIANCE
Subchapter ii
The bathroom in the flat in Chelsea was a miniature
apartment. Its frosted window looked out upon a
backyard where a dead cat had lain so long that the
flesh and fur had partly mouldered from its bones.
Enclosed on all sides, triangular, this backyard had
no apparent entrance or exit. It belonged to no one.
It was a place apart, unclean, rubbish-heaped. It lay
and festered amidst the flat-blocks. It was Property,
proud, unassailable, law-defended.
Thea Mayven had raised the bathroom window that
afternoon and had wrinkled her nose above the back¬
yard. She had the afternoon free, and was preparing
a bath for herself. This could be done only by stoking
the kitchen stove for an hour or so, and then trusting
to the pipes to carry the hot-water to the taps. For
once the trust had not been misplaced. Into the bath,
steam-emanating, poured the water. Thea, undressing
in her bedroom, listened, knowing by the depths-
descent sound of the water how full the bath had
become.
But for herself, the flat was always empty on
Wednesday afternoons. So it was her bath day, and
of the bathing she made a rite solemn, sensual, cloudily
humorous. It was the only occasion, save in hurried
glimpses at night or morning, when she ever saw her
own body. And her body amazed, pleased, and
amused her.
Undressed, proceeding from bedroom to bathroom,
she never wore her dressing-gown and seldom went by
the directest route. Naked, she would pose, walk like
a bird, placing one foot in front of the other, delighted
at the quaintness of herself. She would enter the
kitchen and look round it as though she had not been
there for a week ; would walk into the sitting-room.
STAINED RADIANCE
77
occupy one of the chairs, light a cigarette, sit cross-
legged. . . . Delightful to be naked, without the
swish and feel of clothes. Naked came I into the world.
Goodness, if someone came in just now—John, perhaps,
on half-holiday from the camp. . . .
But even thought of Garland was not disquieting.
She was not Thea Mayven. Thea Mayven was lying
alone there in the bedroom—a camisole, green dress,
stockings. Poor young Thea ! Wouldn’t she like to
be me ?
Idiot ! this’ll grow on you. You’ll walk out of the
flat some day and put Rosemount Avenue into fits.
Go and scrub yourself. Eaughow ! This is good. 'Ve
to go back for that damned towel.
Mucky mess this bathroom. Never mind. Some
day you'll have a real one, enamelled and shining, with
rubber mats and squeejees and a husband to soap your
back. . . . John. Hard at work in camp, trying to
earn that bathroom. Poor John !
Ouch—hot! Grrr. . . . Scalding. O God, our
help in ages past. Grit your teeth, girl. Stick it. Lord!
Tha’s be’r, ’s I used to say when I first came to
London. You're like a Red Indian. Are Red Indians
red ? Gently till you’re flat. Inch by inch.
Her body covered with water, she lay flat in the
bath. Above her rose the steam. She raised her arms
and clasped them behind her head. Upon those arms
was a faint, golden down.
Her rounded breasts showed flattened in the water,
like spread lilies. She splashed with one foot. At that
a wave arose at the far end of the bath, flowed up
betwixt her breasts, and gurgled against her chin.
This amused her. She splashed again, looking down
at herself consideringly. Glad my skin’s like that—
snowy, with blood under it. A nice skin. Worth a
lot. Any husband should be proud . . .
78
STAINED RADIANCE
Married. Lord !
Her face grew crimson, her eyes suddenly angry
and shamed. She had remembered that Saturday
evening when she and Garland had been left alone
in the flat. Abruptly she began to hum, to soap
herself, to thrust that memory back. The steam rose
up towards the half-opened window. Birds in the
garden, six feet long. Where’s that sponge ? Ouf !
Have to hurry up if I'm meeting Norah for tea. Else
I s’pose Ellen and her Snooks ’ll be back. Our aris¬
tocratic Snooks. How do ex-officers treat girls in
baths ? Oh, badly. Wicked Snooks. Love, you have
left me. Rotten soap. Oh, damn, I’ve forgotten to go
down to Oxford Street for the boat tickets. Time John
sent the money for his. . . . John.
Thought of him was unescapable. She stopped soaping
and leant against the side of the bath, her chin in her
hand. Very grave, poised so, like a nude Greek kore
of the Athenian vase-makers, she pondered on the
riddle of desire, and twiddled her toes, and for a little
was still.
That Saturday evening. If you hadn’t stopped him.
Poor John, poor boy. Funny boy. Sulky. Likesome.
Your funny, tender hands. If you hadn’t been stopped
what would have happened ? All of it ? Every little
bit ? Down to unbuttoning and repentance and an
offer of marriage ? Oh, damn it, don’t fool. And you
didn’t really stop him. You know you didn’t. He
stopped himself. You wanted him to go on. And then
—if he had . . . And then.
You fool, fool, fool. Filthy. Beastly vile. Both
you and John. Damn him. What does he think
I am ?—Filthy little privates should keep to filthy
little slaveys, and then talk about them in
their barrack-rooms. Probably been talking about
you. . . .
STAINED RADIANCE
79
She swore, splashed, and, in a whirl of white legs,
narrow-hipped body and strong arms, jumped out of
the bath and seized the towel she had brought from
her room. In a fury of energy she began to scrub
herself with it. Her hair, thick, short-cut, wine-tipped,
fell over her face and she flung it back with the gesture
of a boy who has been running. She scowled at herself
in the mirror for a moment. Then, still looking at that
reflection, she watched her eyebrows draw apart,
quiver a little. In the corners of her eyes little lights
twinkled.
She smiled at herself, secretly. She began to towel
herself with swift gentleness.
John’s not like that. And don’t be a fool. Be decent,
not a damned animal. Never mind the queerness, the
delight, the singing sounds when he touches you. . . .
Oh, be quiet. Plenty of time for that when you’re
married. And not too much even then. Sparing of
the whole business. Separate beds. Love nights.
Soft like velvet.
Nights in a room in a house above the sea.
The farmhouse lights couthy and dim and paraffinny
across the moors.
Such nights !
In the sound of the sea.
Nakedness.
And the sound of the sea !
A warm mist blurred her vision. Half-adream,
she was yet conscious as never before of the life within
her—of the blood quivering through each vein, of
the stroke-beats below her left breast, of the cloud-
drifts of thought across the mind-tracks of her brain.
Oh, my dears—life and love and Thea—there are
miracles awaiting you yet!
Suddenly the skin of her breasts blushed red and a
sharp, stinging tide of colour poured up her throat to
8o
STAINED RADIANCE
her cheeks. Puzzled at this strange occurrence, she
raised her eyes.
Through the keyhole of the bathroom door she saw
the water-glint of a close-pressed eye.
Subchapter in
Excitement hung over Waterloo Station like a
malarial fog. Policemen, blue-garmented, contemp¬
tuous, stuttered and shooed the crowds. Large men,
they were interested in strike-breaking, dog-racing,
batoning, pensions, and solicitous women. They
believed that drunks should have their arms twisted,
that you should always be courteous, that promotion
was bloody favouritism. Stamping large feet, they
awaited reinforcements, and meantime attempted to
hold the crowds at the Station in check.
Momentarily the throngs grew more dense. A
woman fainted. Railway porters stood around,
stroking their red ties and smiling. Near the far end
of the taxi ranks booings and cat-calls burst out,
rose tremolo, spread, and split apart into two parallel
banks of hiss fringing a narrow lane to the South¬
ampton platform.
Meaken, the noted Labour leader, was leaving for
a tour in South Africa. Unemployed, organized by
their leaders for the occasion, had marched to Waterloo
to demonstrate. At a coffee-stall outside the Station
they had halted, eating cakes, sausages, and drinking
cocoa. A few straggling, detached combats had taken
place with patriotic sailors from the Union Jack Club.
Those had ended by the sailors being arrested and
marched away by military policemen. Then the un¬
employed had flooded up into the Station and awaited
Meaken’s arrival.
STAINED RADIANCE
8l
Through the lane he came, walking with a look of
indifference upon his face. It was a mottled, unhealthy-
face, with sincere, shifty eyes. The Labour leader was
fifty-four years of age. For twenty years he had been
secretary of his union. Ever since entering Parliament
in 1920 he had preached conciliation and peace in
industry. In the House of Commons Conservative
members had entertained him to tea, sitting far back
from him because of the rankness of his breath. Over¬
come by their accents, he saw the folly of hasty
reforms. He went to a manicurist and had his nails
seen to. Sweating, he spoke of the oneness of employer
and unemployed. With the coming of the Labour
Government he had been given a salaried position and
his daughter had been presented at Court. Heavy,
sincere, he dominated his union, addressing his col¬
leagues simply as Enry or Bill. When any agitated
for high wages, he raged against them in the press.
Sub-editors, correcting his large, unpunctuated manu¬
scripts, cursed him. He was made a Privy Councillor
and had played rounders with the Duke of York.
His daughter was going with him to South Africa.
She walked beside the Labour leader, sickened by the
filth and smell of the unemployed. Why didn’t the
police clear the Station of these under-washed never-
works ? Frequently she pressed a small handkerchief
to her nose, for she had never overcome the distressing
habit of sniffling acquired in early childhood, when
handkerchiefs were scarce.
Half-way down the lane, one of the unemployed,
a slight, limping man, leant forward and knocked a
policeman’s hat over his eyes. The demonstrators
roared their approbation. The policeman was knocked
down and trodden on, joyously.
At that the lane caved in. The Labour leader
began to wield his umbrella. Sniffling, his daughter
F
82
STAINED RADIANCE
was kissed by a scavenger, an ex-tramwayman, and a
newsboy. The police drew their batons.
“Back, you sodamned fools !” shouted the slight
limping man to the demonstrators. “Behind you
there is a wagon with bottles. Aux armes !”
And, suiting his words to action, he leapt upon the
brewer’s wagon and reappeared with an empty bottle
grasped in each fist. Shouting, the unemployed armed
themselves. At this moment Storman appeared on
the roof of a taxi which had slowly worked its way
into the Station.
Hearing over the telephone of the demonstration,
he had hastened from the Anarchocommunist offices
in Leicester Square. Why couldn’t the damn Unem¬
ployment Committee have first informed him ? The
baiting of Meaken, unless properly organized, would
have little propaganda value. An autocrat, con¬
temptuous of democracy, he had little faith in the
ability of the unemployed to evolve spontaneously a
scientific blackguardism.
Arriving at the moment when the police drew their
batons, Storman climbed out on the roof of his taxi.
For a moment, tall, bare-headed, he dominated the
riot.
“Comrades ’’
A young policeman, skirmishing on the edges of
the demonstration, looked up and saw the chance
of promotion. Bursting through the unemployed,
he leapt up the side of the taxi, seized Storman
by the ankle and brought him crashing to the
ground.
At that moment the rest of the police charged.
Dropping their bottles, the unemployed fled. The
Labour leader and his daughter gained the platform.
The remnants of the riot eddied across the Station,
like the backwash of a tide. Ellen Ledgworth, hurry-
STAINED RADIANCE 83
ing to the Underground from a message made on
behalf of Cocotte Soeurs, was roughly jostled. A man
snatched at her bag.
As she and it shrank away, a fist smote upon the
nose of the thief. He ran. Ellen, panting, placid, with
her broad hips trembling, confronted her rescuer. It
was the slight, limping man of the demonstration.
From under his arm he brought forth a wide-brimmed
sombrero, put it on his head, and took it off again
with a strong gravity.
“You are unhurt, madame ?”
“Yes, thanks.”
“My name is Andreas van Koupa. I am an artist
and a poet, a foreigner in England. Madame, these
are hard times.”
Panting, Ellen took a shilling from her bag and
handed it to him. He bowed, looked at the shilling
consideringly, spun it in the air, and then limped
after the remainder of the procession.
Meantime Storman, stunned and bleeding, had been
batoned and marched to the nearest police station.
Koupa, standing on the steps of Waterloo and watching
Storman being dragged away, was seized by a sudden
thought. He limped down from the steps, and made
up the Waterloo Road towards Leicester Square.
Ellen went down to the underground booking-office,
bought a ticket, and entered the lift. Near her a man
stood learning Russian out of a grammar with inter¬
linear translations. With wrinkled brow, he raised
his face, and, fixing his eyes on an advertisement,
declined the reflective verb smietsya, to smile.
The lift shot downwards, sickeningly, like a lost
foothold in a dream. It clanged quiveringly to rest.
Iron barriers, trelliswork of steel, grated apart. Men
and women hurried out, running for their trains. The
man with the Russian grammar exclaimed “smietyess,
84 STAINED RADIANCE
smieyutsya,” with relief, pocketed the grammar, and
also ran.
Reaching Charing Cross, Ellen ascended the escalator
and caught an inner circle train. The carriage was
crowded. At the far end she saw her lover, Edward
Snooks, standing up. His face was pale and dejected.
He had just risen, offering his seat to a fat woman.
For he was an ex-officer. Calling him dearie, thankin
you kindly and I will, the fat woman srtiiled at him.
Hadn’t she seen him before ?—wasn’t he one of the
butcher’s young men ? Offended, Snooks swayed down
the carriage and raised his hat to Ellen.
“What’s wrong, Ted ? You don’t look well.’’
His eyes had the appearance of small, poached
eggs. Looking at Ellen, he tugged at his moustache.
“I'm in trouble, old thing.’’ He looked round the
carriage. “Can’t talk here. It’s serious.’’
They got out at Sloane Square and walked towards
Rosemount Avenue. On the way Snooks told of his
troubles. He had borrowed, from time to time, a total
of about Is petty cash fr°m his firm. To-morrow he
would be found out. What was he to do ? What the
hell was he to do ? My God, and it was you I spent
the money on. Cripes, what a hass I’ve been. My
God, what a hass. . . .
Emotional, his face worked. Small, unwashed
children stopped and looked at him. He had lost his
accent. Ellen put her arm across his shoulders. She
loved him, motheringly. Without his accent, he
appealed to her as a child with a lost toy. Placidly
worried, she swayed her hips.
“It’s too bad, Ted. And I don’t know what I can
do to help you. I’ve no money, either. I didn’t know
you had been stealing.’’
She moved beside him up Rosemount Avenue like
a sedate, compassionate cow. Earnest, she was
STAINED RADIANCE 85
infinitely tactless. Glancing sideways at her face,
Snooks hated her. She was like a piece of emotional
suet.
“Can’t you think of something ? Haven’t you
anything you could sell ?”
Ellen shook her head. “My stuff’s cheap. It would
fetch only a few shillings. Oh, Edward, I wish you
hadn’t ”
“Damn you, shut up.”
Placidly surprised, Ellen withdrew her arm. They
came to the flat in silence, mounted the stairs, entered.
Noise of their entrance was drowned by the sound of
a heavy thump, as of a falling body, beyond the bath¬
room door. Startled, they stood listening.
“Thea having a bath,” explained Ellen. Then :
“I'll go and take my coat off, then we can have tea.
Shan’t be a minute.”
“All right.” Snooks, taking off his hat in the hall
and hanging it on a peg, eyed the bathroom door.
A minute later, powdering her face, Ellen heard a
sudden crash, the splash of water, a startled ejaculation.
Dropping her puff, she opened the door of the bedroom
she shared with Norah, and looked down the corridor.
Water dripped from the bathroom door, rivuleted
from the keyhole, and streamed from the head and
shoulders of Edward Snooks who, half-blinded, was
just scrambling to his feet.
Subchapter in (a)
“I saw an eye glaring through the keyhole,” Thea
explained later to Norah Casement, “so I threw my
bedroom ewer at it. Snooks said he was looking
because he thought I had perhaps fainted. So I lent
him five pounds which he wanted very badly.”
86
STAINED RADIANCE
Subchapter iv
Wednesday afternoons were half-holidays at Burford
Camp. While Thea bathed in Chelsea, John Garland
sat at the desk in his office, typing out the ninth
chapter of his novel.
He typed in front of a half-open window. Looking
out, he had a view of the aerodrome, where a Rugby
match was in progress. Excited airmen ran to and
fro, hustling a ball. They were sportsmen. But across
Garland’s vision, when he raised his eyes, they were
only dim, gesticulating phantasms.
Remote above the horizon an aeroplane, homeward-
bound from a cross-country flight, droned against a
sky blue and grey and summer-stilled.
But the outside world had ebbed from Garland
auricularly as well as visually. His ninth chapter was
exasperating him to a sullen fury. His characters,
intended to collide and produce ironic mirth from
their abrasion-rubbings and ingenious theorizings on
the subject of collisions, were becoming unmanage¬
able. Frequently they completely escaped him, dis¬
appearing into jungle undergrowths of his mind;
sometimes they shammed dead ; occasionally they
broke loose and played the devil till the whole story-
structure tottered rottenly. Worst of all, he could not
get the seduction of his heroine, in the ninth chapter,
to go convincingly.
And this he knew was damning and damnable.
For, as he intended his novel to sell and make
money, he had known from the beginning that a mere
ironical portraiture of contemporary life was worse
than useless. An excellent acquaintance with current
best-sellers had prompted the remedy. Purple patches.
Sex. With a few ingenious prostitutions and seductions
his novel would be made.
STAINED RADIANCE
87
Unfortunately, even the first of these was proving
uncommonly difficult to handle. He felt a reluctant
distaste for having his heroine lose her virginity—
even though she was only an ironic heroine. The
damned woman kicked up such an infernal row about
it—as though it was the first happening of the kind
in the history of fiction. And her face, foreshortened,
tear-stained, that odd, gasping sob of hers. . . .
Pfuu !
A bumblebee entered the room, flew against a file-
rack, fell to the floor, rose again, hit the ceiling
violently, and, landing on the table in front of Garland,
hummed despondently. Leaning his chin in his hand,
Garland thought :
“You're a damn poor novelist to shy from a little
muck. This woman—Lord, why should she want all
the fuss raised over the trumpery happening ? This
is an ironic novel, not a romantic one, my good female.
Damn you, stop sniffling, else I'll choke you. . . .
Pornography's a sweated industry.
“Lord, pull yourself together. Leave the woman
alone and go on with the stuff that counts. You can
come back to her later. The stuff that counts—
Goddilmighty, you can write it and it cries to be
written.
“What's wrong with the other moderns is the lack
of purpose in their infernal books. They believe
themselves up-to-date, Neo-Georgian, yet in novel¬
writing they’re a generation behind the times. They're
obsessed by the Galsworthy-Bennett tradition. They
don’t realize that the novel of portrait and manners
is a dead dog which nowadays attracts only a casual
interest by the different types of blowflies in atten¬
dance. . . . The world is sick of mere matings and
baitings, bickerings and successes and failures in
novels. It’s grown up, has the world, and knows our
88
STAINED RADIANCE
characters for mere sawdust puppets. ‘We’ll accept
the puppets—if they’re projections of yourself,’ it
cries. ‘Live through them. Make them tell us your
thoughts, your vision of life, your hopes, your hates,
your beliefs. Never mind them acting in character—
damn their sawdust little characters—it’s you we
want, if you’re worth the having. . .
“And why does this earnest world want your purple
patches, then ? Because it’s so made, because it's
human and inconsistent, and likes an occasional dis¬
traction—lewdness and lingerie. It likes to scratch
and snigger and guffaw subduedly in the intervals of
knitting its brows. . . .
“The diversity of mistresses possessed by Wells’
and France’s heroes ! Yet Clissold and Jerome Coignard
are the only folk in fiction who don’t fade on rereading.
. . . Rabbits complete with intestines. . . .
“GoodfoldJH.G. !’’
He grinned and lit a cigarette. The Rugby match
was drawing to a close. Overhead, a mile or so away,
the aeroplane engine was missing fire intermittently,
going spat-spat. Garland knit his brows. Infernal
things, radial engines. Those trees against the horizon
—lonely. “Far off the trees were as pale wands.’’
Rossetti. This damn woman. . . .
Lord, what an unending tweeter, in fiction and fact,
the insects on their mud-ball raised over the matter of
procreation ! What thin immortal pipings of appeal
and fear and hate they raised over some male wrong¬
fully fertilizing some female insect ! Without the
female’s permission ! (She never wanted that larva.)
Wrongfully begetting fresh larvae to join the lawfully-
begotten in creeping from the slime to a fluttering of
wings against a twilit sky, to a freezing extinction on
a falling night or the brief, agonized enscorchment of
the candle flame.
STAINED RADIANCE
89
Garland leapt to his feet.
Out of the sky, beyond the Rugby players, smoke-
and-spark-emitting, winged, a thing of flame sputtered
and flashed downwards across Garland’s vision.
Involuntarily, waiting, he gripped the table.
Came a far, dull thwack, a subdued, moaning roar.
Then a bright yellow flame concaved to being against
the twilight horizon.
Running across the aerodrome, Garland was one of
the first to reach the crash. By now the flames burned
with a curious geyser-like effect. Abruptly came a
series of small explosions, scattering a shower of
debris.
“Here’s the fire-engine.”
Crowded, it roared across the aerodrome, the
ambulance following. Garland’s throat grew curiously
dry. In the midst of the geyser something was moving.
The front of the fuselage, spouting flames from its
petrol-tank, lay jaggedly askew, as though smitten a
blow by a gigantic, half-clenched fist. Half-clenched,
for a portion of the cockpit had been left intact. And,
abutting from this portion, inside the geyser-ring,
something was moving.
Then, in the flame-glow, Garland saw it for a
blackened, rounded object, eyeless, faceless, moving
slowly, lethargically, above a reddened carboniza¬
tion. . . .
“Come back, you damn fool 1” The officer of the
watch, jumping from the fire-tender, caught Garland’s
arm. “You’d burn to a cinder. You there—bring up
the crocodile !”
Towards the yellow lowe of the flames four men
advanced with a contracting steelgrip in their hands.
Behind the steelgrip trailed a rope. On a spring being
pressed the prehensile jaws of the crocodile shot
through the flames. The officer of the watch pointed.
STAINED RADIANCE
90
“There, below the cockpit. . . . Damn you,
hurry !”
The jaws of the crocodile leapt and closed. Garland
and half a dozen others seized the rope. Along the
length of the steelgrip the flames danced bluely.
“Pull r
As the men on the rope began to move, something
came soggily. Then the weight lightened. Still
grasping the rope attached to the crocodile, the men
ran backwards.
Something shapeless had been dragged out of the
geyser. The driver of the fire-tender, a boy, a recruit,
stared down at it, white-faced.
Then he began to scream.
Subchapter tv (a)
Late in that evening, while the remains of Pilot
Officer Brougham lay in the mortuary, a camp police¬
man, passing the headquarters offices, heard the sound
of a typewriter. He went up to one of the windows
and looked into a lighted room.
Seated at a table, his face glowing, Garland was
triumphantly engaged in the seduction of his heroine.
CHAPTER THE FOURTH
Wherein, after a Side-glance upon the Doings of a
Poet in an Unnecessarily Conventional Garret and
an Account of how the Salvation of Man is planned
upon the Best Approved Pattern, the Moonlight
is utilized for a Rapid Series of Snapshots.
Subchapter i
ONE midnight, a month after the arrest and
imprisonment of Storman for his share in
the Waterloo Station riot, Andreas van Koupa, acting¬
secretary of the Anarchocommunist Party, arrived
home with a bottle of Bass under each arm. On the
steps of the tenement block near Charing Cross, where
he had rented a room, he paused, turned round
cautiously, and gripped one of the bottles by the
neck. He was not mistaken. He was being pursued.
It was the Shadow.
Taking careful aim, the poet hurled one of the
bottles full at the Thing. Up the deserted street
echoed the sound of splintered glass : rich Bass flowed
in the gutter. Holding the other bottle against his
breast, Koupa surveyed the street, then nodded
satisfiedly.
“’Sgone.”
Turning about, he entered the tenement block.
His room was on the third story. Carefully, he pro¬
ceeded to negotiate the stairs. Half-way up he stopped,
placed the bottle of Bass on a step, put his leg over
the rail and looked down the black well of the stair¬
case.
91
92
STAINED RADIANCE
“The harlot,” he murmured. “The so-poor terma¬
gant tart. Dry.”
Thought of her moved him profoundly. He almost
wept. He withdrew his leg from the banisters, sat
down on the stairs, thought deeply. Some minutes
later he awoke. Beside him glimmered the bottle of
Bass. He shook his head and spoke aloud.
“God mine, what jinni have escaped from that
neck of yours !”
His head continued to shake to and fro, a fact
which interested him. Gradually the movement again
lulled him to sleep. The next time he roused it was
with the sound of Big Ben striking three hours.
Koupa arose, left the bottle of Bass on the stairs,
and climbed slowly up to his room. Entering, he lit
the gas fire and then knelt for a moment in front of
a picture tacked up in a corner. It was a Russian
ikon which he had looted in Leningrad. Slavic, ox-
eyed, the Holy Mother gripped the Holy Child under
elephantine armpits. Koupa grinned up at her.
“You are undoubtedly a virgin,” he said. “If you
had borne the unfortunate infant you would not be
holding him as though you feared he might be for¬
getting of himself.”
The Virgin stared over his head. An atheist by
faith, inclination, and training, he adored her. She,
the Virgin, holding in her arms so gingerly that which
she had mothered and the Unknown had fathered—
holding in her arms that which she feared and would
never comprehend—symbolized so much. Matter
holding Mind. Or Humanity Faith. Or Death Life.
In the dead stillness of the room Koupa, with gleaming
eyes and sardonic lips, bowed to her.
“You are the eternal Piggishness,” he said.
He sat down on the bed, unlaced his boots, removed
one, and dropped it on the floor with a thud. The
STAINED RADIANCE
93
sound echoed throughout the whole tenement block.
Preparing to drop the second boot, Koupa had a
vision. He saw innumerable weary heads turning on
grimy pillows in rooms below him—heads of folk
awakened by the familiar sound and waiting for the
second boot to drop ere they again slept. They waited
uneasily, sleepily, irritatedly, yet with certainty. The
second boot will drop in a minute, was reasoned in
the undertow of each subconscious. It must do so
in the nature of things. But one must hear it fall before
sleep comes again. . . .
With the same grin on his face as that with which
he had regarded the Virgin, Koupa removed the
second boot and placed it carefully on the bed. Then
he sat still and stared at the unshaded gasjet. Before
his eyes it blurred to a flame-ringed globe. Like the
sun in space, the chromosphere with its tentacles of
fire.
He realized that his mouth and throat were burning.
That bottle of the little so-good Bass ? Step by step
he traced it back. He had left it on the stairs.
He arose, put out the gas, and then, in his socks,
descended the summer-moistened flights of stairs.
Now and then a step creaked beneath his weight.
Coming to the bottle of Bass, he picked it up and
was just about to uncork it when he remembered the
woman of the basement.
“God mine, if she has returned she will be dry.”
Descending the stairs with unsteadiness, because
of the chill breath of night-wind that blew through
the open street-door, he turned to the left, down a
final stairway of greasy stone. The bottle of Bass he
held clasped to his breast. At a door he stopped and
knocked.
Nothing happened. His feet becoming cold on
the moist stones, he waited, then knocked again.
94
STAINED RADIANCE
Presently there sounded on the other side of the door
the scuff-scuff of footsteps. Came a woman’s voice :
“Watcha want ?”
“It is I, Andreas.”
There was the noise of a cautious unlocking. The
door opened. A black hole showed in the dimness of
the passage. Koupa went forward into it.
Behind him the door closed. He stood still, listening
to the relocking. Then someone brushed past him,
and a match-head, ignited against the sole of a
shoe, spluttered. Yellow-haloed, the pineslip illumined
a ghostly hand. Then the glare of the gasjet smote
upon Koupa’s eyes like a sword.
A girl in the uniform of the Salvation Army, but
without the hat, stood below the gas-bracket. She
regarded Koupa kindly, from out brown, patient
eyes and over the peak of a Roman nose. Approaching,
she put her face close to his.
“Cha want ?”
Koupa held up the bottle of Bass. The girl smiled,
comfortedly.
“Yaint arf a toff, Andy. Corn in Jacob. Blime !
Woz jest mopin fer a drink.”
Swaying a little, Koupa chuckled. “Nothing for
to drink at the little meeting ?”
The girl was searching a cupboard for glasses. She
shook her head. Her hair, uncut, was Titian red.
“Driest crush this side of ell. A cup o biled tea
after free hours rescue work on the streets. Prayers
an blood an God’s all they fink ev.” Sitting down,
she yawned weariedly. A prostitute, she had been
converted by the Salvation Army, had been found
work in a box-factory and had enrolled as a voluntary
helper in salvation work at nights. She had, however,
soon tired of the factory and reverted to her former
profession, though with caution. From it she earned
STAINED RADIANCE
95
a comfortable income and on free nights still went to
help the Army at its work. With a passionate zeal
she searched the streets, exhorting the erring and
guiding the strayed to safety. Gradually, because of
her zeal and fervour, she had gained a high reputation
and was much sought as a speaker at public confes¬
sionals and such-like exercises. Frequently, her throat
parched with the over-boiled tea of the Army canteens,
she would return home late at night from her rescue
work, glancing longingly at the dead-eye glitter of
windows in closed public-houses.
“Ere’s ealth, Andy. Ow’s the Revolution ?”
The poet had slid down into one of the dusty chairs
and now sat staring at the floor. At her words he
raised his eyes, took the glass from her outstretched
hand. He slowly stood up, stood to attention.
“The Revolution !”
He drank and then flung the glass over his shoulder.
It smashed to pieces against the faded wallpaper.
The girl swore.
“Daft bawstid. You’ll waken arf the bleedin tene¬
ment. ... You and yer Revolution !“
Koupa stood looking at her with dreaming eyes.
He was of a sudden very steady, and shook no longer.
“The Poet and the Prostitute—the sot and the
bawd ! Some day, little sister, the eyes of the Revolu¬
tion’s dear Unborn will look back and see us not as
we seem, but as the children we are, beating our hands
on the walls of life in the frenzied quiverings of night¬
mare. . . . The kind, so-sad eyes of the dear Unborn,
weeping tears of pity for we poor children of Change I
We shall be a song and a story then, you and I.”
“Ere, sit dahn. Gord, you aint sife. Worse’n that
loopy old bawstid, Crookshenks, at the meetin this
evenin. Only it was ell an fire an brimstone an burnin
an screamin that got im. You’re nutty on the Unborn.”
STAINED RADIANCE
96
She loosened her Army jacket, flung it aside, and
looked at Koupa with contempt. “You an yer damned
Unborn. Oo the ell are they to pity us ? Easy for you
ter go nuts on em—yer a man. They’ll never exist but
fer the women that’ll be sick and ill an beastly bearin
them. . .
Suddenly she was weeping—slow, greasy tears
coursing down her face. Koupa stared at her, patted
her shoulder, sat down with eyes and voice alike
interested.
“What did Cruikshank say ?’’
She was drying her eyes, calmly, with an unclean
handkerchief. “Cruikshenk ? Wy, the usual stuff.
Only—e’s a devil. Blieves all e syes. Blast im.’’
“Do you believe it ?” Incredibly gentle his voice,
incredibly gentle the touch she felt upon her. In a
moment the harridan had vanished. She was a quiver¬
ing, fear-stricken child, clutching him close, his arm
around her.
“Oh Gord, Andy, I dunno, I dunno. Scared stiff I
wos. . . . Wot the ell’s it all for, anywye ? You an
me an all the other wasters—our lives are muck an
pyne an opelessness. An after we kick it we’re ter be
tortured an burned fer ever an ever because Gord
mide us like this. An ow about Jesus syving us ? . . .
It’s all a bloody cheat, Gord an Jesus an the rest. . . .’’
But Koupa, shining-eyed, held her close and soothed
her. Drunkenness had fallen from him. Vision, exquisite,
torturing, was upon him.
“No cheat, child—only Jesus has been forgotten—
forgotten by God himself, grown old and weary. By
God ! What theme for a poem—a sonnet !’’ He
thrust the prostitute aside, stood up, began to search
the room in a frenzy. “Paper, damn you, have you
no paper ?—I must have it—here !”
He found a sheet and a stump of lead-pencil, sat
STAINED RADIANCE
97
down, buried his face in his hands, sat erect, began to
write. Terrified, wide-eyed, the girl stared at him.
Once she moved and he turned and cursed her foully.
His pencil flew in wavering lines. He groaned, beat
his head, finished on a sudden spurt, stood up.
“Listen :
"LOST
"In wonderment God stood amidst the throng,
Gathered on London’s fringe this haggard night,
And heard afar the beating ways in song.
The passionate speech of one whose face shone bright
"With extasy unquenched, had drawn a crowd
Encircling, from the street-glare and the strife,
And God, unnoticed, bent, and old, and bowed.
Heard clarion words : ‘Lo, I am Love and Life.’
"Soft-voiced, God asked : ‘Whose message bring you, Sir ?’
When, at the end, these two stood there alone.
‘Whose message, friend ? Why,’ cried the minister,
‘The Christ’s 1’ And God said : ‘Who is Christ ?’
' 'And blown
About the streets that night the voice of One
Cried terribly : ‘My Son ! My only Son !’ ”
Smear-faced, grotesque, standing in the light of
the gasjet, he read the sonnet. Then, looking across
at the girl, his face crinkled angrily.
“God mine ! This is the inspiration—this so foot¬
ling spaffdoodle. ... I cannot write—I cannot !
(That tenth line—it is a so-damned five-legged mule.)
Yet, if I write not, there comes and eats eternally at
my heart the pain of thoughts crying for birth. And
bring them to life I cannot. I am cursed. O God
God, God.”
His insane agony horrified her. Then she saw small
tears rolling down from the quick, bird’s eyes. Under¬
standing tears, compassion filled her. In a moment
she was standing with her arms about him.
G
98 STAINED RADIANCE
“Blime, Andy, wot is it ? Don’t cry. Lumme.”
Anxiously, pityingly, she held him, comprehending
him not at all. With the maternal wisdom of the
childless woman she soothed him, sitting again, his
face against her breast. Kneeling so, he put his arms
around her neck.
“Child, child. . . . Mother breasts to comfort me.
I am tired, tired. Hold me a little close in your silence,
mother child.”
So, in a stillness of pity, they remained. Content,
not moving, not thinking, she held him close. Time
stood still in a mist of tenderness. Then his hands,
holding her, tightened, then moved slowly down to
her waist, then to the curves of her hips. He kissed
her lips, snuggled close against her : his fingers upon
her body trembled. ... So it always ended. So
men were. Always. The quiet pity was gone. Wearily
her mouth surrendered to the clamminess of his kisses.
“Andy. Turn out the gas first.”
Subchapter i {a)
In the quietness of the summer dawn Andreas van
Koupa ascended the stairs to his room. From his
window he looked out on a London which still slept.
In a dusty mirror he caught a glimpse of his face.
A thin trickle of blood from the cut where, kissing him,
she had bitten him, had dried to a red serration on
his chin. A sick disgust shook him.
“Bloody prostitute.”
He sat down on the bed, yawned, felt a knobbly
protuberance beneath him. It was the boot which
he had carefully refrained from dropping some hours
previously.
He picked it up and dropped it, thudding, to the floor.
STAINED RADIANCE
99
Subchapter ii
At ten o’clock in the forenoon, with the summer
sun raising a blue mist from the Thames, the Tenth
Annual Congress of the Anarchocommunist Party
opened in Shettlesea Town Hall. The delegates were
welcomed -by the mayor, a Marxian dustman who
voted consistently for the Conservatives. This he did
in order to help the Tory Party to power and continue
its historic function of maddening all dustmen into
revolt.
Close up to the platform four young journalists
and three elderly ones reported the proceedings for
their respective newspapers. Under-educated, intel¬
ligent, these men had developed side by side bluff
geniality and the slyness of hunted animals. Unac¬
customed to regular meals, they were cynical of all
human aspirations towards social betterment, and
believed the Anarchocommunist Party a semi-criminal
organization, financed by Russia. One of them had
once hung around the back streets of Leningrad for
a month, gathering sensational copy. His stomach
upset by some strange sausages on which he had fed,
he had stopped at Riga on his return journey and
wired the news that human flesh was on sale in the
streets of Leningrad.
Kindly, contemptuous, the journalists listened
patronizingly the while a spectacled professor of
international repute read a survey of the prospects
of the European wheat-crops. Revolutionary phrase¬
ology, more cryptic and technical than that of chemistry,
baffled the journalists, and, in a few hurried shorthand
outlines, they noted down that a foreigner with a
poor command of English had advocated the burning
of the European wheat-crops. Then a more fiery
speaker followed the professor. He used the word
100
STAINED RADIANCE
murder, and then, three or four sentences later, the
word justified. Genuinely shocked and horrified, the
journalists recorded the speaker’s conviction that
murder was justified.
Concealed under the platform three plain-clothes
policemen were also engaged in taking notes. In their
cramped hiding-place they were almost suffocated.
They knew of no means of exit apart from the raising
of the two planks which had been unnailed to allow
their ingress. The Communist speakers on the plat¬
form, aware that policemen were concealed beneath,
sat row on row, on chairs, above the two planks.
Frequently, stamping vigorous applause of a speech,
they showered the policemen with dust and cobwebs.
At length one of the plain-clothes men fainted, and
his companions began to beat on the planks above
them. They were disregarded. Warm-eyed, delegate
after delegate arose and stood by the table and spoke
of the Brotherhood of Man.
Motion after motion was tabled for discussion. The
hall grew warm and there arose a smell of human
bodies enperspired under the stress of emotional
crises. Disagreeing, delegates cursed each other in
many dialects. Scotsmen and Welshmen, using
uncouth expressions, were listened to by fellow dele¬
gates with a shamed, amused contempt. English
delegates would then arise and move enthusiastic
condemnation of racial barriers in Kenya.
Representing a total of about 5,000 members, the
Conference, in the name of the oppressed workers of
Great Britain, passed a vote of thanks to the Soviets
for their guidance and leadership in the march of the
World Revolution, indicted the Spanish dictatorship
with the suppression of free speech, and called on the
English Government to resign.
A motion in favour of Birth Control then came up
STAINED RADIANCE
101
for debate. It was passionately combated by a tall
woman delegate with kindly face and untidy hair.
Discovering that she was a spinster, and presumably
a virgin, the Conference rocked with laughter. Amidst
laughter, catcalls, and amorous offers from male
delegates, the tall woman subsided and the motion
was passed unanimously, as was also one calling for
the complete political, economical and social emanci¬
pation of women.
“Kumred van Cooper will now speak on the inter¬
national political situation,” said the chairman.
Koupa, bird-like, refreshed from the three hours’
sleep which he had had after leaving the prostitute’s
room, stood up. Flinging out his arms in a well-
practised gesture, his voice smote to silence the whole
room.
“The trumpets of the four winds of the world
From the ends of the earth blow battle : the night heaves
With breasts palpitating and wings refurled,
With passion of couched limbs, as one who grieves
Sleeping, and in her sleep she sees uncurled
Dreams serpent-shaken, such as sickness weaves,
Down the wild wind of vision caught and whirled,
Dead leaves of sleep, thicker than autumn leaves,
Shadows of storm-shaped things,
Flights of dim tribes of kings ”
“Comrades, we have listened till we are a little
so-sick, is it not, to our good friends with the so-brave
statistics ? They tell us of wage-struggles, of coming
strikes and the rising price of bread, of electoral
machinery and the massing of minorities. By these
is the Revolution to come ? For that and by that do
we live and toil and dream ? I tell you there is a greater
thing in the world, a so-greater urge, a greater impulse.
Listen, friends little. I have been in Russia, I have
fought under the Hammer and Sickle and seen the
Red Battalions storm impregnable Perekop. I have
* CFSCOTL^D ^
102
STAINED RADIANCE
tramped through starving Europe, lived in a hut by
Nile bank, heard the sunrise blow its horns from a
Beduin tent in the sands. I have had a great Visioning,
friends mine. . . . For, wherever I have gone, in
gutters and slums, in factories and fields, I have met
that new thing in History, that Promise of Dawn—
the awakened soul of the Common People. Austere
and pure, unthinkably gracious, a thing so-shining, I
have seen it stir across the great battlelines of humanity.
... I have had a great Visioning. . .
He stopped. Tears were clouding his quick, bird’s
eyes. Leaping to their feet, the delegates cheered him
and cheered again. With English emotionalism, with
lit eyes and uplifted hearts, they looked up at the
crippled figure on the platform. Had not they also
seen the Vision Amazing ? Did not they also know of
the awakening soul of the Common People ?—awaken¬
ing somewhere, beyond the hills, in some place they
had never had the time or opportunity to visit. But
this man had. His voice led the spontaneous out¬
bursts of singing :
“Then raise the scarlet standard high !
Within its shade we’ll live and die;
Though cowards flinch and traitors sneer
We'll keep the red flag flying here I ”
God mine, what horrible doggerel! Sitting down,
Koupa seized a piece of paper and jotted down the
words of a song to supersede the “Red Flag’’. He did
not continue his speech. The delegates, well-satisfied,
cheered the announcement that the international
political situation had been adequately dealt with.
At that moment James Storman, released from prison
an hour before, appeared on the platform.
Tall, spare, his brown face was thinner than usual,
but he was as well-groomed as ever. He had endured
STAINED RADIANCE
103
a month’s imprisonment for his attempt to restrain
the rioters at Waterloo Station. And, by God, I have
an account to settle with Koupa over that business.
Hm. A damn poor gathering. These delegates have
been badly elected. Wonder what fool has been the
secretariat for the last month ?
He became aware of a thin and perfunctory hand¬
clapping. Then, to his surprise, he saw Koupa sitting
beside the chairman. The poet acted quickly. Drop¬
ping his notes, he jumped up, embraced Storman,
and kissed him on both cheeks. Applause broke out
again. That little Dutchman. A card. A Real Comrade.
Storman sat down. Puffing, the chairman drank a
pint of water. The question for the personnel of
the delegation to visit Russia was now before the
meeting.
“Before asking the Conference to nominate members,
I ave to point out the slightly hunusual situation that
as arisen. During the imprisonment of our Secretary,
Kumred Storman, is work as been taken over, halmost
entirely, by our very brilliant colleeg, Kumred van
Cooper. In is interim position e as been brilliantly
successful, and, halmost entirely through is efforts at
Eadquarters, we ave added more than 200 new members
to our lists. Further, e as refused to accept any part-
salary for this work.
“The question as therefore been raised as to wether
—seeing the Secretary must be one of the delegation
—Kumred van Cooper or Mr. Storman his, for that
purpose, to be regarded has Secretary ?’’
Storman’s great laugh boomed out, startlingly,
causing the chairman to jump. His eyes twinkling
unhumorously, the man released from prison looked
over the whispering rows of delegates. So that was
the plot ?
It was. Unpopular with the rank and file because
STAINED RADIANCE
104
of his opportunism and cold-blooded efficiency, Stor-
man had hitherto swayed the Party by sheer force of
personality and constant supervision of every activity.
During his month’s imprisonment, his power had been
shaken by an uncalculated factor. This was Koupa's
belief in the Awakening Soul of the Common People.
“Kumreds will now vote by show of ands.”
Hands were upraised to successive questions. The
tellers handed up slips with voting strengths to the
chairman. The chairman drank a pint of water, stood
up, and announced the results.
“Kumreds Pollock and Clanning hunanimously
elected to the Delegation. With regard to the third
member, the voting as gone : Van Cooper, 40 votes ;
Storman, 7 votes. Kumred van Cooper will therefore
be the third member of the Delegation.’’
“No, no !”
Koupa, drawn from consideration of a new Revolu¬
tionary hymn, was on his feet. He had listened to
the voting in terror-stricken silence. Once in Russia,
he would undoubtedly be thrown into prison for his
share in the Kronstadt Revolt.
Before he could speak, Storman had also stood up.
“Mr. Chairman, it would appear that both you and
the Conference are unaware of the Party constitution.
I am still Party secretary. As such, I shall be the third
delegate to Russia. I am on a six-months’ contract
with the Party. It requires a special meeting of the
Executive to dismiss me. And my successor must be
approved by the Third International.”
Shouts broke out. “We’ll damn soon see to that J”
“Executive ! you’re all up there—call a special
meeting !” “Throw the traitor out !” Through the
tumult Koupa, waving his arms, made himself heard,
and the noise at once subsided.
“Comrades, I agree with Storman, and beg to
STAINED RADIANCE
decline the so-great honour you would do me. Russia
—our Mecca—I have already visited. It is for the
others to go there and seek the so-great inspiration
and knowledge. And I know of the heart-hunger of
my Comrade Storman, his devotion to the Revolution.
Elect him to the delegation. While he is gone, I will,
if the meeting so decides, carry on as acting-secretary."
Ceasing, he turned to Storman and held out his
hand.
“Comrade !”
Storman surveyed him out of twinkling eyes.
Suddenly, unhumorously, his great laugh boomed
out.
Subchapter ii {a)
That evening Storman spent in the offices of the
Anarchocommunist Party, overhauling the confidential
correspondence and examining the secretary’s accounts.
The conference, after voting Storman to the Russian
delegation by a narrow majority and Koupa to the
acting-secretaryship by an overwhelming one, had
adjourned late in the afternoon to partake of high
tea and afterwards attend a dance and social reunion.
The while the records of his secretaryship were
under scrutiny, the poet was engaged, half-a-mile
away, in drinking beer, engaging in casual dances,
and relating memories of the visit of Karl Marx to his
parents’ home in Holland.
Indexing and carding, fighting out balances in
books, occupied Storman till ten o’clock. For weeks
it seemed that nothing had been filed ; ledgers were
strangely and amazingly posted. Great heaps of
unanswered letters lay on the typist's table amidst
litter of cigarette-ends and scraps of verse scrawled
106 STAINED RADIANCE
on the backs of envelopes. But on the table at which
Koupa had worked were scores of notes of appreciation
and innumerable new membership applications.
Working steadily in the quietness, Storman at
length came to the last batch of correspondence. As he
picked it up, shook it and straightened it, a grimy card
fluttered to the floor.
It was made out in Koupa’s name, and was for the
sum of fifty shillings.
He had pawned the office duplicator.
Subchapter in
As from a giant searchlight, suddenly moved to a
new position by the finger of God, the moonlight poured
into a bed-sitting-room in Shepherd’s Bush. Flooding
across space, a distance of two hundred and fifty
thousand miles, it came. Behind it, a giant reflector,
blazed the great Lunar deserts and the ink-shadowed
ring-mountains.
Above these, filling an eighth of their sky, mysterious
and wonderful to Lunarian eyes, hung, ghostly and
remote, canopied in its cloud-belts, the world that men
call Earth.
And into the bed-sitting-room in Shepherd’s Bush,
across the unplumbed gulfs, the moonlight poured
liquid. Each item of furniture offshot a velvety shadow.
The table, round, three-legged, grasped the moon-spilt
linoleum with grotesque claws. An alarum clock
ticked hirplingly. Dried grass, in vases, over-sprayed
the mantelshelf. Upon the bed a shapelessness
moved dimly.
So for a full minute after the entrance of the
moonlight. Then the couchant shadow upon the bed
split in two. One half, projected suddenly into the
STAINED RADIANCE I07
golden effulgence, budded forth a girl’s head and breast.
The alarum clock-face glimmered, dim seen.
“Oh, Miggod ! Billy ! Look at the time !’’
Subchapter in {a)
Checked, yet enticed, by a forest of grey gables,
the moonlight flung a spear of radiance within a window
in Mayfair. A bare three feet within the room, the
spear-tip quivered to rest on a writing-table and an
unfolded letter.
The Secretary,
The Anarchocommunist Party.
Sir,
I have to request that my name be deleted
from the membership lists of your Party.
I can no longer associate myself with either its
beliefs or its so-called aspirations, and shall be
obliged if the influence of my name is no longer
used in propagating these.
I am,
Yours etc.,
Griselda Gayford.
Siibchapter in (b)
That afternoon, taking a boat from Westminster
Pier, Thea Mayven and John Garland went down the
River to Limehouse. Garland was in the civilian
clothes he ordinarily stored at the Union Jack Club.
They hung upon his stout figure with a baggy
comeliness. He wore a blue shirt, a blue collar,
blue socks, and a tie with a blue stripe. A bloody
I08 STAINED RADIANCE
symphony. Under the turned-down brim of his velour
hat the eyes in his ruddy, sulky face twinkled. He had
with him a suitcase and a bundle which contained the
MS. of his novel. For he had finished the first draft,
and, typed, the front page awaited uncovering to
reveal its legend :
FIRST NOVEL OF AN IRONIST
by
John Garland.
"Body and soul are twins : God only knows which is which :
The soul squats down in the flesh like a tinker drunk in a ditch.”
—Swinburne.
This MS. he was to read to Thea during their three
weeks’ holiday. In Scotland. Beside a haystack.
Opposite him in the boat sat Thea. Her dress was
green, embroidered with gold. Her hat was green,
embroidered with gold. It had a wide brim, this hat,
because Biggod, Thea, your nose has a bump in the
middle and you need a hat with a brim. Her shoes
were low-heeled, with papier m£tcli6 soles and whorling
decorations. They were brogues, and she had bought
them for long country tramps.
All her under-garments were new. They embraced
her caressingly ; she heard the pleasant underscuff
of them whenever she moved. These garments included
a thin vest, of a close, sweat-inducing fabric ; stockings
of artificial silk ; cotton knickers which were hand
embroidered by machinery ; miniature, steel-sprung
stays. For, after five hundred thousand years of the
upright position, the pelvis of the human female is
still incapable of supporting, without aids, the weight
of the entrails and the womb, even of a virgin.
Looking at her, Garland thought :
STAINED RADIANCE log
“Ford Madox Hueffer’s character is right. All
attractive girls should be seduced and married. Then
they trouble a man less and listen to his conversation.”
And he sighed, for he could not afford to seduce
her.
Raising his head, he saw that they neared a wharf.
Beside it was moored a ship. The boat of Garland and
Thea drew alongside. Thea and Garland climbed
aboard. In the middle of the ship yawned a large hole.
Into this trunks, kitbags and motor-cycles were being
thrown by the sailors. Anxious men and women,
boarding the ship from the gangway reaching to the
wharf, attempted to catch last glimpses of their property
before it vanished. The hooks of the donkey-engine
derrick swayed threateningly amidst these people,
and, cursing them, the deckhands would stop for a
moment and wipe their faces and spit tobacco juice
and declare their admiration for Mr. Havelock Wilson.
The ship was bound for Aberdeen. Men and women
of the second class were sorted out into different sexes,
and allotted bunks in separate divisions of the fore¬
castle. These bunks lay in tiers of three. Garland found
his high up, close to a porthole. Putting his suitcase
and the bundle of his MS. into it, he went on
deck.
Poor, romantic, unprosperous, many scores of
Scots had come on board, bent on returning to Scotland
for a fortnight's holiday. Years of residence in London
had mitigated the accents of few of them. The men had
sandy hair and shallow grey eyes and wore watch-
chains with rows of medals. The women, broad-cheeked
and with wide waists and the hips which told of much
child-bearing, looked round the decks with innocent,
kindly eyes, and, smiling, showed decayed teeth.
By the rails Garland found Thea, slim and green-
clad and surveying the wharf from under her wide-
no
STAINED RADIANCE
brimmed hat. She pointed to the shore. “We’re moving
off.”
The ship appeared to be slowly drifting out into the
River. People on the wharf waved handkerchiefs.
One woman cried. Excited, the passengers also waved.
They laughed and spoke in soft gutturals. The ship
began to move down the River.
All that evening they moved down the River, by
docks of merchandise and trade, by hulls of rusty ships,
against grey stretches of saline marsh. The sunset
burned behind them. Gulls circled and cried. Still
they held on. The River seemed never-ending. Then
the ship began to rock in the rollers of the North Sea
and the tea-bell rang.
Belly-stirred, the second-class passengers emptied
themselves down the gangways to the plank-tables.
Vociferating, they demanded seats. Two Irish stewards
stood and separated them, men from women. And a
stout, motherly stewardess, in charge of the women's
table, looked about her with an austere, patient eye.
She had the care of the women’s morals in the second
class. No harm would come to any daft young bitch
while in her charge. Women passengers who had borne
five children, and slept with their husbands for thirty-
eight years on end, quailed under the look of this
stewardess and, flushing, avoided the gaze of the
menfolk, and ate hard.
After ten minutes at the table, Thea went on deck
again and bargained with a steward for two deckchairs.
It was inadvisable to leave any such bargaining to
Garland. For he was dilatory and unsatisfactory in
such things, being a funny boy.
In a little Garland, replete with tea and boiled
eggs and salad, came and looked into the sea, then
sat down in the chair next to Thea.
“Cigarette ?”
STAINED RADIANCE
III
“Please.”
And, as she smoked and the English coast maintained
its dim blur to the west, Garland stretched out his legs
and looked at her and touched her hand.
“My dear,” he said, “you are lovely. I haven’t seen
a girl on board to touch you.”
Thea smiled, twinkling her eyes at him. And
Garland, looking at her against the evening and the
sea, thought:
“I might have told her that she was more fair than
the sunset and changeful and cold and sweet as the
sea ; that she has mothered many tribes of men, that
the ages have passed through her loins ; that those
eyes of hers have looked on incest and murder, warmly ;
that she is older than man or men and things nameless
and horrifying and adorable is her body built from. . . .
And all that would have been true ; and she’d be angry
if I said it; or troubled ; look at me with darkened
eyes. So I tell her there isn’t a girl on board to touch
her. And she is pleased. My dear, my dear !”
“Look down at the water,” said Thea.
It was awash in the sunset like spilt blood ; the
English coast was a haze of blood ; the sky was
crimson—splashed. The ship moved through a silence
of horror.
With shadows upon the sea, out of the veil of
spindrift came the star-rise. Electric lights were
switched on all over the ship. Grunting, she churned
into the mysteries of the night. An old man leant
over the side of the ship, vomiting.
The ship was overcrowded. Passengers who had not
booked well ahead were given beds on stretches of
canvas in the horse-boxes. The old man had secured
such a bed but had been turned out of it by a later
arrival, a young man who smelt of beer. The young
man was burly and dark and angry ; he had thrown
112
STAINED RADIANCE
the old man’s shabby carpet-bag out of the horse
box, had sworn at him.
“Old bastard,” he had said.
Small, timid, feeble, more hopeless than hopelessness,
the old man lay against the side of the ship, coughing.
Every now and then he remembered the carpet-bag
and outreached a shaky hand to it. He did not think ;
he had lived all his life in dim cellars of thought that
grew darker day by day ; he was old.
But up on the bow of the ship, in the keen of the
wind, wrapped with coldness and starfire, Garland sat
dreaming by the side of Thea. They were almost alone
up there, by then. Mysterious, wonderful, the grey
heave of the sea, the dim horizon which towered and
sank. Thea’s face was a meeting-place of shadows ;
but for the warmth of her long legs outstretched against
his own, Garland could have dreamt her also a
dream.
But she was real; the only reality in Life ; she,
and the simple things—love, ambition, marriage,
children, toil. He knew it now. He would forsake
the Outer Wastes for ever. He also would be simple,
guarded ; think her thoughts, laugh with her, dislike
with her. Work like hell, he would, now, so that they
could build up a home together. A home, comfort,
tenderness; the weeping horrors of Life locked
out.
“Penny for them, darling.”
He picked up her hand and kissed it, then held it
close against his side, against his heart, held it fear¬
fully. But he did not look at her. He was staring out
to sea.
For towards them, like a rider triumphant upon the
spindrift, was leaping a wild radiance, menacing,
unearthly. Garland caught his breath in something
that was half a sob.
STAINED RADIANCE 113
“John ? Cold ?” She took his arm and looked up
into his face. Before she could draw away he kissed
her, suddenly, passionately, pitifully, as though
hiding his face from a blow.
The moonlight poured over the ship in a cataract
of silver.
H
CHAPTER THE FIFTH
Wherein the Monotony of a Bucolic Idyll is
relieved by Various Interesting and Agreeable
Purple Patches.
Subchapter i
GARLAND and Thea landed at Aberdeen on a
Thursday morning. While they had been upon
the sea the Government had imprisoned five Com¬
munists, a high Church dignitary had denounced
communion as a superstitious practice, and a Royal
Princess had given birth to twins in the presence of
a surgeon, an anaesthetist, two physicians and three
nurses.
They read of these things in a copy of the Daily
Mirror which Thea bought as they passed through
the Fish Market. At breakfast in the Station Hotel
they read of them. Reading, they first ate porridge,
salted, with cream upon it. Then they had eggs and
bacon and tea and oatcakes. Then they ate scones
and brown girdle-cakes.
Eating a scone, Garland said :
“This bishop is right. Communion is a relic of
cannibalism. In eating the bread and drinking the
wine we are devouring the flesh and drinking the
blood of the sacrificial victim. Symbolic cannibalism
is the central rite of the Christian Mysteries.”
But Thea was not listening. Scornful, republican,
her face a little flushed, she read aloud extracts from
the account of the Princess’s delivery.
STAINED RADIANCE 115
“All her family breed like rabbits/' said Garland,
and ate another scone.
“Fancy all that amount of doctors ! Though,
of course, I believe that all that kind of thing should
be managed as scientifically as possible.”
And, earnest-eyed, she looked at Garland over a
girdle-cake.
Garland said yes, and talked of science. Talking,
he was smitten with a sudden wondering amazement,
and looked away, and buttered another scone. She,
Thea, the girl sitting opposite him—she had once
been born. Once she must have been so small that her
father had been able to lift her on the palm of one hand.
And in her tiny brain had been no thought, no
hope, no fear, no stir of conscious consciousness ;
her body had been a red little package of miniature
and—heritage of the beast—largely archaic organs.
She had had no soul, no ego, no mind. Tiny, a
feeble, weakling animal, she had lain. And days had
passed, altering her ; months had passed, building
her ; in a year her body had moulded to certain definite
shapes ; within the grey caverns of her brain crude,
slow whorlings had involuted into a dawning con¬
sciousness. The outside world had retreated and
approached and built itself on certain foundations
before her eyes.
And slow years had passed. Her body had grown
and changed and discarded. But her mind had retained,
sifted away into different compartments of the
subconscious, all the dross and dregs of vision and
experience. The thought-whorls grew the more
complex ; below them, memories jostled the thicker.
And, strangely antagonistic to the logic of these, ever
more definite grew that consciousness that was now
almost conscious of itself, that whispering knowledge
of “I”.
n6
STAINED RADIANCE
Most utter illogic. The Ego that then first stirred
in her was an illusion—a thin wraith of a thing, a
co-ordinated, energized memory of all the sights and
sounds and touches of the outside world. It was
a mere perfume, an effluvium—yet with purpose.
Already, with a consummate daring, it was seeking
to establish dominion over that outer world, over the
outer world of its material body and instincts and
stored remembrances. It claimed to direct, to lead,
to suppress, to control. . . .
Her body grew. And then, in some year, came a
time of physiological stress, of strange and disgusting
changes to her body, of the first incursions of sex.
And, with the coming of that time, a flower upspringing
from the garbage-heap of Nature, her consciousness
became conscious and she had said : “I am Ihea
Mayven."
Odyssey.
Subchapter ii
“John, waken up ! We’ll miss our train.”
Thea was standing up and stretching, widely and
luxuriously and slimly, by the table in the empty room.
“Oh-h-h ! Glorious morning. Glorious day. Good as
gold to be alive. I want to go mad.”
“So do I. It must be the scones.”
Walking to their platform, they were conscious of
repletion and goodwill and happiness. Porters,
carrying luggage and talking of prices in the Fish
Market, looked at them sourly, surveying Thea's
lightly-clad figure with interest and the questioning
greed implanted by Providence. For Thea’s skirt
reached only to her knees, and those knees were round
and flexible and silken clad to an insolent sheen ;
STAINED RADIANCE
117
her legs were long and shaped to slim, flat ankles
and small feet in high-heeled shoes. So the porters at
Aberdeen Station, filled with the desire to propagate
their kind, looked at Thea and Garland cruelly, and
suspected that she was a prostitute, and felt stir
within them the stern morality of their covenanting
forbears.
The train ran by the sea, northwards, for mile upon
mile. And of a sudden Garland and Thea saw that it
was summer. The corn was turning from greeny-
yellow to gold. At wayside stations they watched the
waves come riding shoreward, heard the wheel and
whittoo of the peewits. They had a carriage to
themselves, and, looking out of the window, tears
came in Garland’s eyes at sight of the corn, at sight of
it climbing, smooth and yellow and surgent, the sides
of the upreaching hills. And he knew that he looked
upon the magic of the ancient world as he watched
that yellow cloakment suddenly undulate in the
passage of a morning breeze.
It was haytime. Through the opened windows of
the train they heard the clank of the mowers, saw bright
blades flash in the sun, the steamy breath arise from
horses halted at the end of a long ridge. In the fields
wide lines of men, shirt-sleeved, corduroyed, with
drooping hat-brims and smoking pipes, blowing blue
incense-whorls in the sunlight, flung the hay-swathes
apart with smooth-handled forks. And the smell of
the hay wrapped the train round like a garment,
so that it went slowly, sneezing, amidst the wide land
of the haymaking, and, turning back to the sea, turned
yet again, and was in the hayfields and the hills again.
“Summer,” said Thea, and dropped warm hands on
Garland's hands, and kissed his cheek, absently,
eagerly, thoughtlessly, as a child might, then looked
out again. “Look, there’s Micklegarth and Morecalm ;
Il8 STAINED RADIANCE
over there. And the Castle. There’s Fluinn with its
steeple ; they take it in when it rains. Not long till
we’re at Leekan now.”
It was three o’clock in the afternoon before they were
through the pass in the mountains, and Leekan
station came in sight. They got out. A place of
corrugated roofs, red-painted, odoriferous, with
drooping-headed horses in the railway yard. Through
fir-trees, half a mile up a road, glinted the red granite
of Leekan village. Then Thea cried, “Dad !” and danced
up the platform, and put her arms about the neck of
a man, and hugged him.
She brought him to Garland. Garland shook a
broad, brown hand, calloused, and with serrated edges.
“Hoo are ye ? Od, ye maun be tired wi the journey.
An Theey’s a gey responsibility, I’ll warrant.”
He said this in a slow, careful, doubtful voice,
speaking carefully and slowly, knowing that all
Englishmen were half-wits. Showing tobacco-stained
teeth, he smiled cannily. He was of middle height,
thick set, with enormous shoulders. A brown beard
streaked with grey lay over the craggy whiteness of
his collar and false front. He wore a suit of thick
tweeds. His eyes were small and friendly and shrewd
and oddly timid.
He was Thea’s father.
He had brought a trap to take them home. Thea,
light-headed, danced round it, embracing the head
of Kate, the horse, a sonsy beast who snuffled at her
and disregarded her, and, tail-switching, fell again
into a dream in the sunlight. Roger Mayven fussed
in the arranging of the luggage and a parcel of groceries
he had brought from Leekan village. Speaking to
his daughter, his tone was admonitory and full of a
shamed pride and amazement, for he was still, spite
the passage of the years, uncertain as to whether
STAINED RADIANCE IIQ
her conduct in refusing to become a bit servan lassie
an milk kye an keep a man’s house—na, na, she wad
hae none o that, but maun learn shorthan and siclike
stuff and gae stravaigin awa to London—was decent
and profitable, or not.
(And this bit cratur o an English mannie ? Fit
was it Theey said he was—an airman sodger ? Od, no
great catch for ony body !)
“Dinna cairry on like that, lassie. Fouk’ll think
ye’re daft. Noo, Maister Garlan, sit up here in front
wi me. Sit ye at the back, Theey, an min and no
let the treacle rin oot o the jar in the bit basket.
Noo, are ye a right ? Wissh, Kate.”
And Garland thought :
“That is interesting. Wissh is the eastern equivalent
of the Western Lowland whiggam. From it the
Whigs were named. I am listening to the encouraging
hiss that gave birth to the Liberal Party.”
They drove out of the station and turned to the
right, away from the direction of Leekan village and
towards the warm, purple bulking of the Grampians.
Thea sat behind, among the parcels, for she was only
a bit lassie. Thea enjoyed it. She was in the mood to
enjoy anything. Going past remembered farms, she
waved her hand to placid men in the fields. Her
father was sair affronted.
Then out of the haze in front of them came another
trap and spanked past them in the direction of Leekan.
In it sat a man with side-whiskers, a large body, and
a shy, supple smile. He waved to Roger Mayven,
and they both cried “Aye, fine day,” earnestly,
reassuringly, at the same time. Then this man looked
into the back of the Mayven trap and saw Thea, and
waved to her also.
“Hullo, Theey, holidayin ? Enjoy yersel!”
“I will, Dreaichie ! How’s the housekeeper ?”
120
STAINED RADIANCE
But Dreaichie was spanking on towards Leekan.
Roger Mayven shook his head and looked over into
the back of the trap.
“Ye shouldna hae said that, lassie.”
“Why not ? Doesn’t he still sleep with his house¬
keeper ?”
Garland, looking at Mr. Mayven, saw a tide of
colour come up under his weather-roughened skin.
The brown-faced, brown-bearded man, shocked, refused
to meet Garland’s eyes.
“Lassie, ye shouldna speak like that. I dinna
believe ony o the stories about Dreaichie an his hoose-
keeper. An he's a guid neighbour an a fine chiel.”
For Roger Mayven was charitable towards the sins
of the unashamedly sinful. Dreaichie and his house¬
keeper were just Dreaichie and his housekeeper. (A
muckle limmer o a woman. And wi a tongue on her
that wad clip cloots.) Why speak about it ? Then,
after such remark, he would moisten his roughened
lips under his beard, and with kindly eyes and con¬
templative face, speculate on Dreaichie and his
housekeeper.
But Thea, long escaped from her father and the
fear of him, was unabashed.
“He's a good enough neighbour—at least to his
housekeeper, else she wouldn’t have three children.
But what's happened ? Has he fallen out with her ?”
Behind his beard Mr. Mayven's face shrivelled.
“Aye, so they say. There’s a new bit lassie at
Dreaichie’s and they say the cratur o a hoosekeeper’s
fair daft with jealousy. . . . But there’s things that
a lassie like you has no right to speak aboot. Ye'll
be wantin yer tea, Maister Garlan ?”
“Horribly hungry, Mr. Mayven. Thea tells me that
at Cairndhu there’s real oatcakes and home-made,
crumbly cheese, and curds and cream for tea.”
STAINED RADIANCE
121
“Oh, aye, but we’ll be able to gie ye something
better than that, I’m thinkin.”
“Oh, my God,’’ said Thea. “Don’t tell me mother’s
been buying fancy cakes and getting ready an English
tea ?’’
But Mr. Mayven said nothing, except Wissh, Kate,
to the horse. They loped down a long, steep brae,
the trap bumping against Kate's hindquarters. Above
them massed firwoods. Up through those at a trot.
Beyond, poised against the horizon and the mountains,
with the gleam of the North Sea reappearing half a
mile to the left, the biggings of Cairndhu.
In front of the biggings, out on the road at sound
of the trap, in long skirts, hand-waving, appeared the
figure of a woman. Thea, waving wildly in return,
stood up in the trap. Garland looked up into a flushed,
scared, bitter face.
Tears were in Thea’s eyes, bitter tears, tears of an
overmastering, heart-breaking pity. She and her
parents were poles apart in all sympathies ; she would
never dream of turning to them for help in any
emergency.
She was more alien to their lives and longings than
a Kalmuck of the steppes. In youth they had loved
her, thwarted her, misunderstood her. She had hated
them. (God, how she had hated them !)
Now, all unconscious of the reason, she was weeping
because of that tragedy of existence which had led a
woman to beget her.
Subchapter in
At eight o’clock next morning Dreaichie was clearing
a path round his hayfield in order to allow the mowing
machine to begin. He used a long-handled, long-bladed
122
STAINED RADIANCE
scythe. Now and then he would stop to whet it, and
the underskirl of the whetting rang soft and clear
and sweet across the fields. Dreaichie’s brown, red-
ringed face dripped sweat. He worked in a drunken
extasy. The cloverheads, essence-distilling, fell
around him. Far off, a shimmer and a radiance in the
sky beyond the brae, was the North Sea.
Dreaichie was forty-five years of age. Year after
year, scythe-swinging, he had grown drunken of the
smells of the earth and clover ; it was, of all the earth-
essences, the one he most loved. But there were others :
the smell of sheep in winter buchts ; the keen, metallic
smell of new-ploughed earth ; the biting smell of
whin-burning ; sweat-reeking horses’ smell; smells
without name, innumerable. He had made a cult of
them. Simple, kindly, lascivious, he was descended
from many generations of peasants who had tilled
the earth, resisted their landlords, and begat many
children upon the bodies of their womenkind.
“Hi, Dreaichie !’’
The scytheman raised his whiskered, genial face.
Gordoun, the local postman, a man with a squint and
a belief in Scottish Home Rule, was leaning over a
distant gate.
“Dreaichie, hae ye heard o that bit grave they’ve
dug open at Pittendreich’s ? An awful auld place,
wi a skeleton and stane swords in it.”
“Eh man, fit's that ?”
“A Stane Age grave. Dug oot hundreds o years
afore there were ony English. Pittendreich and the
Dominie’s niece cam on’t yestreen. I kent ye’d be
interested.” Squinting autonomously, Gordoun waved
his hand and turned away down a steep path towards
Cairndhu.
Pittendreich lay six miles away, high up in the
mountains. Early in the afternoon, Dreaichie arrived
STAINED RADIANCE
123
there and dismounted from his bicycle. The sweat
ran in greasy runnels from his brown whiskers. Both
his feet were flat, and, as he pedalled from the middle
of the sole, they ached. At the farmhouse gate, Pit-
tendreich’s wife, muckle and sonsy, directed him.
“I wouldna gang there mysel,” she said. “There’s
only a heap o auld banes. The minister an Miss
Domina an the Maudslay laddie were up at them
yestreen.”
Leaving his bicycle, Dreaichie climbed up a foot¬
hill of the Grampians. In the centre of a cultivated
patch, a mound, grass-covered, had lain unmolested
for centuries. Yesterday, however, engaged in cutting
out new drains, one of Pittendreich’s men had set to
hacking a way through it. A few figures, sun-drenched,
stood at gaze on the top of the mound. Amongst
them was a girl, short-skirted, bareheaded, standing
hand on hip. A narrow slip o a lassie.
Dreaichie walked across a pathway beaten in the
late corn. High up above the East Coast valley was
this land. The peewits moaned below in the misty
mountain blueness. Pittendreich, crease upon crease
of his flesh shining in the sunlight, was by the
grave.
“Weel, Dreaichie, man. So ye’ve come to see it?
There’s a college professor here from Dundee the noo.
He says the bit grave’s twa thousan years auld, if it’s
a day ; but I doot he’s a leear, for the minister said
it was sax thousan.”
“Eh, man.”
Dreaichie leant forward and looked down into the
tumulus. The stone coping of the long barrow had
been laid aside. At the bottom lay a dismembered,
yellowy skeleton. Near the feet of the deceased the
professor from Dundee prodded in the earth with a
graip.
STAINED RADIANCE
124
“Two thousand years ago,” said a voice. “In the
time of Christ.”
It was the girl, short-skirted, hand on hip, her
hair flaming in the sunlight. She was Thea Mayven.
Beside her, pipe-smoking, stood Garland. Pitten-
dreich and his folk glanced at them askance. English
craturs. And, uncomfortable at hearing the name of
Christ, they turned their eyes upon the professor from
Dundee. But Garland, taking his pipe from his mouth,
shook his head.
“I doubt it. It’s Epi-palaeolithic. Long barrow burial
was a thing long past, even in Scotland, in the time
of Christ.”
The Dundee professor, black-moustached, quick¬
eyed, glanced up angrily. Thea smiled remotely and
impishly. Garland mused aloud.
“Still, it's possible. They may have been backward
folk in this district, keeping to the old ways of burial.
This man may have wandered south, become a Roman
legionary, have served in Palestine and assisted at
the execution of the Jewish thaumaturgist. It may
have been he who thrust the spear into Christ’s side.
Perhaps he returned after long years and told so many
stories about the business that his neighbours buried
him with all those pots of water in order that he might
keep his throat moist to bore the afterworld.”
“Perhaps he was a brewer’s drayman,” said
Thea.
Their laughter rang out in the sunlight. Dreaichie,
sweating, smiled sideways at them, doubtfully. Below,
over the moors, the peewits cried unceasingly.
Dreaichie bent down and picked up something by
the side of the ancient dead. The Dundee professor
looked up at him.
“What’s that thing, d’you know ? It’s the only
one I haven’t been able to identify.”
STAINED RADIANCE
125
Considering, Dreaichie turned it over in his hands.
It was a short dagger, of chert, stumpy, still edged,
dull glowing in the light. “Och, man, I think this
maun hae been a fairmer chiel in the lang syne,
same’s I am. I ken weel what it is. I’ve often
seen the like in the Highlands when I was a
laddie.”
“Eh ?” The professor from Dundee peered at it.
‘‘What is’t, then ?”
‘‘A gully knife.”
‘‘No, man, is that a fact ?” Pittendreich and his
labourers crowded around, interested. Laughing,
they passed the ancient knife amongst themselves.
Their faces, sun-reddened and high-veined, crinkled
into knowing smiles. Then they recollected the
presence of Thea. But she and Garland were staring
into each other’s eyes. One of the labourers, cupping
the knife-handle in his palm, showed in shadowplay
how the instrument had been used.
It passed back to Dreaichie’s hands. Sweating, he
turned it over consideringly.
The face of the professor from Dundee had grown
red when he heard of the nature of the implement.
For he was by nature shy of discussing all such things.
He had been married ten years and his wife had borne
him four children, but he had assisted at the con¬
ception of all of them in an absent-minded, delicate
manner, his thoughts the while deliberately switched
away to brooding upon the genesis of some stone
implement or other. Also, he knew that if he took
the gully knife back to Dundee, not one archaeologist
would recognize it under Dreaichie’s nomenclature.
For all of them were delicate-minded men, drinking
tea and discussing lake-dwellings.
He moved about in the grave, the others watching
him from above. Then Dreaichie noticed that when
126
STAINED RADIANCE
the professor from Dundee approached the foot of
the grave, the soil there emitted strange under¬
cracklings.
“Man, there’s something else below there.”
“Eh ?” The professor from Dundee peered and dug.
In a little one of the graip’s iron toes jarred against
something febrile. Dreaichie climbed down into the
tumulus and assisted. But first he slipped the gully
knife into his pocket.
Remains of yet another inmate of the mound were
uncovered. Shining with pleasure, the professor from
Dundee motioned Dreaichie aside and prepared to
photograph the bones in situ. Dreaichie craned over
them moistly.
“What are they ?”
“The bones of a woman. Can't you see ? This
man was doubtlessly her husband. She was probably
sacrificed at his burial. Look at the base of the skull
 there. That is the mark of the axe which must have
killed her.”
“Od, the nesty brutes,” said Pittendreich.
“ ‘Man scores always, everywhere,’ ” quoted Thea,
unstirred.
“Perhaps she poisoned him and then committed
suicide,” said Garland.
“She must have done it during a somersault,
then.”
Dreaichie climbed out of the pit, dusted his good
tweed trousers, breathed deeply, looked indifferently
away from the woman’s bones to those of the
man. . . .
A fairmer chiel, like himself, the man wi the gully
knife. Often, maybe, he’d looked ower those hills on
a summer afternoon. . . .
The genial brown eyes of Dreaichie blurred.
“Puir chiel,” he said.
STAINED RADIANCE
127
Subchapter iv
In the darkness Dreaichie rose from his bed, and,
softly opening the door of his bedroom, went on bare
and hairy toes along the landing to another room.
Outside the latter he stood for a little, listening, then
entered, cannily closing the door behind him.
In the bed Jean, the servant lassie, awoke and
watched him. She had been in Dreaichie’s service for
a month. It was his third visit to her at night. She
was seventeen years of age. Her father owed Dreaichie
money, so she had been sent into his service. She was
a neat, obliging girl, and had taught in Sunday school.
She now fell to arranging the pillows so that they
would serve for two instead of one.
But Dreaichie did not come to her immediately.
Instead, after surveying her with shrewd, kindly
eyes, he stood looking out of the window, holding his
shirt cannily and respectably about him, for a cool
night wind blew in.
The world seemed drowned in moonshine. Dreaichie
shook an interested head. He broke into a husky
whisper.
Od, lassie, that was a wonderfu bit grave I saw
up at Pittendreich this afternoon. . . . The skeleton
o a chiel o aulden times, laid oot wi his pots and bit
tools aroond him. A bit fairmerman, jist like mysel,
he maun hae been. . . . Od, what can be on sae
late at the Maudslay fairm ?”
The servant lassie strained to see. Across the half-
mile stretch of the valley they watched the flashing
of a lantern in the farmyard of Chapel o’ Seddel
Dreaichie’s thoughts wandered away in an effort to
apprehend some dimly-sensed essence of romance.
Jist think on t that chiel in the grave—he's
seen this same moon. ... A fairmer-body just like
128
STAINED RADIANCE
mysel. He’s the banes o a woman lying at his feet
—killed to look aifter his speerit, the Dundee professor
said. The English mannie wi Theey Mayven was
there, an he thocht that maybe the woman had
poisoned the man, an then committed suicide.”
“Whisht!”
They listened. The old farmhouse creaked unend¬
ingly, in the way of such houses. Nothing else.
“I thocht I heard the housekeeper,” whispered
Jean. Then : “You’ll get your death o cauld standin
there.”
An hour later, his shrewd, kindly eyes heavy-lidded
with sleep, Dreaichie went on tiptoe back to his own
room. An hour after that a shrilling scream awoke
the servant lassie from her sleep.
She awoke drowsily, taking it to be a yowl heard
in nightmare. But it was repeated, raggedly, horribly.
Jean sat up in bed, then cowered down into it.
The screaming rose and shook and wavered, then
fell to a tremulous whimpering. Moonlight upon the
planks, the servant lassie saw the door of her room
swing open, saw the moonlight on the face and bared
arms of Dreaichie’s housekeeper. Then a dull some¬
thing flashed in the moonlight and clanged on the
floor beside the bed.
It was the gully knife from the Stone Age grave.
Subchapter v
An amethystine dawn came over the mountains,
trailed its fainting colours across the Valley of Leekan,
drowned them in the Eastern Sea. Behind followed
the sunlight, strong and clear, dancing across the
harvest-waiting fields. There was no wind. Sheep
cried on the moors. The peewits whooped unceasingly.
STAINED RADIANCE
I29
Soon the warmth grew such that a ground mist, blue
in distance, arose, and the earth, as in some lost
geologic age, steamed. Thea and Garland, leaving
Cairndhu, went down across the shelving moor-
ledges to the sea.
“What a day !” said Garland, and took off his hat
to it.
“Clover and the sea !” said Thea, and no more than
that. Her face was flushed, her eyes brightly drowsy.
What a day !
Come to the cliff’s edge, they stood and looked
down upon the sea. The tide was going out. Lost
rocks of granite were appearing above the receding
waters. Seagulls dipped and cried. It was a little
bay that lay below them, shaped like a jagged half¬
moon. It was gull-haunted, unutterably lonely. In
that vivid dawn heat even the seaward-making waters
seemed to roll sluggishly.
They climbed down the cliff by a path made by
farm-servants stealing gulls’ eggs, and so came to a
narrow ledge of grey shingle, a beach of broken granitic
fragments. Then they saw all the face of the cliffs
spotted blackly with the mouths of caves. Thea
pointed to one.
“The Covenanters hid there,” she said. “The soldiers
lit a fire at the mouth and smoked them out. As they
came through the flames they were shot down. There’s
a tablet with their names.”
They stood and read the tablet. Amongst the
names was that of a Hamish Mayven.
“He was my ancestor,” said Thea. “There have
been Mayvens in Cairndhu since the days of Duncan.
So someone told father. Hamish and I used to get on
well. When I quarrelled with father or mother I used
to come down here and sulk, and talk with Hamish.
He wasn’t religious at all. He did it all for a lark,
I
130
STAINED RADIANCE
and because he was bored stiff. He used to sit opposite
me there, and tell me so.”
This was a new Thea. Garland ran his hand
through his hair. Puzzlement came in his sulky,
quizzical eyes. His stout figure stood silhouetted
against the cavern mouth.
“Let’s leave the sandwiches in here,” said Thea.
“They’ll keep cool.”
They went out again into the sun and sea light.
Garland unwrapped the MS. of his novel. Squatting
by Thea, he began to read it.
Thea lay on her stomach beside him. Thinly clad,
she felt the sun-warmth penetrate her clothes and
soak within her body. Listening to Garland and the
gulls, she cupped her face in her hand and played
with a little heap of sand. Sometimes Garland would
pause in his reading and look at her ; always he would
find her eyes fixed on his face. In front of them, soft
swishing, the tide went out.
Gulls and Garland and tide cried their story of
Life in Thea’s ears. Drowsy, she listened, sifting the
sand, somnolent, adream. Once, somewhere, she had
read that perhaps there was a universe within each
grain of sand, even as the universe that we inhabit
may be only a lost grain on some lost, unfertile shore.
The idea pleased her. Trickling the worlds through
her fingers, she caused planetary collisions, the extin¬
guishment of suns, the wiping out of whole races.
Black, red-and-storm streaked grew the Heavens,
whereneath countless tribes looked up at the whistling
approach of doom. . . .
When she awoke her head was cupped in Garland’s
arm and he was sprinkling water on her face. Far
out in the bay the tide, ceasing to recede, poised and
overflowed on a ridge of foam. Only the wail of the
gulls was never-ceasing.
STAINED RADIANCE I3I
“You fainted, I think.” Garland grinned at her.
“Was it my novel or a touch of sunstroke ?”
Thea shook herself, sat up. She still felt drowsy,
as though her whole body had been punched by a
flabby fist. Childlike, she rubbed her eyes with her
knuckles.
“ 'Fraid I fell asleep. Had you read much before
you noticed ?”
“Three chapters. . . . This is no time or place
for interplanetary communication.”
Thea rubbed her head against his shoulder. “I
must be still asleep.”
“No.” Garland hunched himself above the rock
where he sat. “It came to me as I read. In matters
of communication we are all as planets. Between us
lie great gulfs of space. We wander in eternal loneli¬
ness. Dimly, from far off, we hear lost snatches of
sound. Sometimes an enterprising planet, like myself,
seeks to bridge the gulf with a message and a code. ...”
He yawned in the sunlight and blinked his eyes like
a cat. “A damned straining simile.”
But Thea had sat up. “John, there must be some¬
thing about this place—astronomical, you know.
When you were reading I was sifting sand and think¬
ing that perhaps each grain was a world, and wondering
how many earthquakes I was causing. Funny.”
“It’s a special section of the earth set apart for
dreams. You never know. Perhaps the earth was
originally fertilized by seeds of life from outer space.
Perhaps the meteor that brought them fell on this
shore. Homer and Akhnaton and Queen M6o and
Buddha and Mr. Baldwin and the megatheria were
all here then—in essence. Young Thea Mayven was
here, indistinguishable from the aurochs and Lenin
and the Princess and her twins. Anatole France and
I and the Arbiter Elegantiarum were all here. ‘The
132
STAINED RADIANCE
Revolt of the Angels’ and The First Novel of an
Ironist’ were indistinguishable.”
“There ought to be a monument,” said Thea, and
stood up, and sprinkled sand over Garland. “I feel
hungry.”
They sat in the coolness of the Covenanter’s cave
and ate sandwiches and oatcakes and grey cheese.
Thea took Garland's case out of his pocket and lit a
cigarette and attempted to blow smoke through her
nose. Sneezing, she flung the cigarette away, and
considered the sea. Suddenly she jumped to her
feet.
“I know. Let’s bathe.”
“There’s only one sea.”
“Damn.” Thea scowled at him with a sudden,
unfeigned distaste.
“What ?”
“The nuisance of you being a man. Or rather—
oh, what does it matter ? No one to see us. I’m not
going to bother about you being here. . . . I'll
wear something. Dry it afterwards in the sun. You
do the same. Race you who’ll be first in the
water.”
She was first. Naked, looking out from the mouth
of the cave, Garland saw her, white and slim, like a
boy of the Greek marbles, clad in something faint and
negligible and wispy, run from the mouth of a cave
further along the shore. She did not look in his direc¬
tion, but leaping from point to point of the granite
rocks, gained the water, dropped from a ledge, and
began to swim out in the path of the sun. He stared
at the flame of her hair, shivered, and laughed.
Following her, he plunged into water cold and
grainily salt and vaguely sentient. Clad in white
cotton shorts, he swam after the dipping dot of flame
which was Thea's head. She was making for an out-
STAINED RADIANCE
133
cropping of rock, gull-haunted, in the centre of the
bay. Looking over her shoulder, she began to go
faster. It was a race.
Almost simultaneously they drew up out of the
water. Laughing, panting, Thea flung back the short
hair from her face. Her eyes were the eyes of
adventure.
“Oh, good, good. . . . Don’t look at me too
closely, because I’m not respectable. Neither are
you. . . . All right. Let’s rest here.’’
They climbed up the rock. It was higher than
appeared from sea-level. Thea gained the top first
and gave a cry.
“John ! Look at the grass !’’
The top of the rock was shallowly concave. Innumer¬
able rains, washing its sides, had silted particles of
rock into a fine powder. In far-off years chance bird-
droppings had brought the first seeds of life. Now the
concave surface was grass-covered, green, a miniature
island in the sea. When they sat down, the shore
vanished from sight. Through the afternoon haze
loomed dimly the purple mountains. Below, the sea
whispered.
“It’s an island," said Thea. “We’re alone in the
world."
Garland grunted and lay flat on his stomach. Then
he rolled over and stared up into the blue-grey sky.
Then he turned his head sideways and looked at
Thea.
She sat cross-legged, backgrounded by sea-sky, her
face not the face of Thea Mayven, but swept of per¬
sonality, of expression, of emotion. She was utterly
unconscious of his presence. The sea and the sun
were hers.
In the croon of the gulls and sea-sound he watched
her, content. Then a drowsiness began to come on
134
STAINED RADIANCE
him, and the silhouette of Thea grew gold, then blue,
then a fainting brown.
“More comfy ?”
He came out of a minute’s sleep. His head rested
in her lap. She was bending over him, her face grave.
Half a-dream, he thought and spoke.
“Not for you.” Then : “Your thighs are soft and
sweet.”
The lights twinkled in her eyes. She bent down
and rubbed her cheek against his. “Listen to the
gulls.”
Unending. He put up his hands and held her face.
Suddenly he was aware of the throbbing of her
body. The lights had died from her eyes. He touched
her breasts. Suddenly she sobbed and their lips met.
A pringling numbness leapt upon him. He thought
“God,” then ceased to think.
Subchapter v (a)
All a long hour had the tide hung poised. But
now, suddenly, it began to enter the bay ; in long
lines of surf it poured across the shingle. Crooning
inarticulately, the urge of the sea and the sky behind
it, it flooded, and the earth, understanding, shook
and murmured at its coming. And a sound of tears
and a sound of laughter rose and quivered and faltered
to a voiceless extasy.
Never-ending was the wail of the gulls.
Subchapter vi
Late in the afternoon, limping homewards from his
hayfield, Dreaichie stopped to watch with kindly,
STAINED RADIANCE
135
bloodshot eyes, two figures crossing the moor towards
Cairndhu. They came from the direction of the sea.
Mayven’s bit lassie and the young English chiel.
“Hi!”
Raising his eyes, he saw Jean, waving. Aproned,
hand upraised, she stood on the knoll outside the
kitchen door. It was tea-time. There was no sign of
the bitch of a housekeeper. She had left in the dead of
night with her three weans. God blast her, the ful
jaud.
Because of the wound inflicted by the gully knife,
he moved stiffly across the fields. A headachy pain
dizzied him. On recovering from the searing agony of
the housekeeper’s outrage, he had managed to light
the candle and stanch the flow of blood by means of
rough bandaging. Then, until morning, he’d lain
almost daft with pain. At dawn he’d sent off Geordie,
the plough-laddie, to Leekan for the doctor.
But when the doctor arrived he had been met
outside the house by Dreaichie himself, pale, weakly-
moving, but refusing attendance.
He had been unable to bear thought of the scan¬
dalous story which would spread over the countryside
if he submitted himself to the doctor’s attentions. No
one knew what had happened, except Jean, who had
been awakened by the gully knife being thrown into
her room. Puir lassie, she’d been gey frichted by
that.
“I need a woman to look aifter me.”
Shambling up the brae, that thought steadied
Dreaichie, as it had done all the afternoon. Aye, he’d
mairry Jeannie. Best thing for baith o them. She
liked him week Wouldna mind though he’d never
be able to be a husband to her. . . .
His footsteps soundless upon the grass, he crossed
the knoll to the kitchen door. In the outbuilt dairy
STAINED RADIANCE
136
he heard a murmur of voices, a laugh, a clear sentence.
Geordie’s voice speaking of castrated cattle.
Came the sound of a milk-pail being overturned,
sniggers and whispered expostulation, then Jeannie,
rumpled and flushed, emerged from the dairy. At
sight of Dreaichie she stood aghast for a moment.
Then, with a sly, contemptuous look, she disappeared
round the corner of the house.
CHAPTER THE SIXTH
Wherein, whilst devoting Two Subchapters to the
Interests of Philosophy and One to the Interests of
Art, some Discreet, if Indirect, Propaganda is done
on behalf of the Birth Control Movement.
Subchapter i
LATE in the afternoon Andreas van Koupa
came into the Strand from a side-street.
Extinguishing his partly-smoked cigarette, he placed
the unconsumed portion in his waistcoat, and yawned.
Occupied with the accounts of the Anarchocommunist
Party, he had awakened only half an hour before.
Awakening, he found his mouth dry and sooty with
over-smoking and his mind dry and sagging with
mathematical effort.
The funds of the Anarchocommunist Party showed
an unledgered deficit of £50. And Storman was due
to return from Russia within a week.
Koupa had sought the pavements to think over the
matter. Gaining the open air, however, he had lit a
cigarette, and his thoughts on the missing £50 had
gradually drizzled from his mind as he observed the
various surprising phenomena of London. The sun¬
light falling on the gables of an old Georgian house,
converted into a manure depository, had intensely
amused him. He had stood still, moving his head
from side to side and chuckling. Stepping forward
again, a black cat had made to walk across his path,
had hesitated, had only been induced to continue^by
the poet wheedling it with an inviting cheechee and
137
138 STAINED RADIANCE
then shooing it ferociously. Terrified, it had com¬
pleted the crossing in a spurt of speed, thus showing
a sign of luck. Koupa had then helped a blind man
half-way across a street and abandoned him to look
at a huge Shire horse in a lorry. Amazed at the size
of the beast, he had walked round it several times.
Descended from the small, dog-like archeophippus of
the Miocene, the draft horse has progressed through a
more amazing evolution than has man. But its brain
has grown hardly at all. Why ?
Intrigued, Koupa had stopped in front of the horse,
inspecting its skull-formation. Then the carter had
come out into the street with a sack of grain, and,
observing the poet, had scowled. Noting Koupa’s
black eyes, broad-brimmed hat, and unclean finger¬
nails, he had called out an obscene jest to another
carter. Surprised and hurt, Koupa had walked on.
And he thought :
“God mine, the cruelty of men one to another !
And the essence of all the so-great cruelties—it is
laughter. Without the curse of laughter it might well
be that man would live just and sober and moral as
the ant. But, observing the juxtaposition of things
which to them seem inappropriate in juxtaposition,
men find the muscles of their faces and throats relax
in surprise. They laugh. The things seen as inappro¬
priate in their relation then seem inappropriate and
hateful in their essence. Then the sense of order
which is in man creates in him the desire to stamp on
and abolish that which has seemed laughable. From
this have arisen all legal torments and watchings by
priests and lawyers of the so-hideous tortures of rack
and hoist.”
He came into the Strand and put out his cigarette
as he thought of these things. Now he observed that
it was late afternoon, for the sun slanted, The Strand
STAINED RADIANCE
139
was moved, in the dusty and faded sunlight, as a
river-mouth in the salmon-migration. An itinerant
fruit-vendor stood by the kerb, wearing the Distin¬
guished Conduct Medal and suffering from influenza.
Struck by a thought, Koupa bought a banana from
him and, eating it, walked along the Strand. Testing
Koupa’s twopence with his teeth, the vendor found
one of them bend sinuously.
Engulfed in the throngs, Koupa finished his banana
and put his hand in his pocket to bring out a handker¬
chief with which to wipe his lips. Pleased with the
people who looked at him curiously, he had taken off
his hat and now carried it under his arm, for he had
a good forehead. Bringing out the handkerchief, he
also brought from the pocket a small celluloid object. It
slithered to the pavement. Bending, Koupa retrieved it.
It was a note-slab of Storman’s and bore the addresses
of various influential, but uncertain, friends of the
Anarchocommunist Party.
Though carrying it in his pocket, Koupa had never
before looked in it. Now, standing athwart the pave¬
ment and blocking the way, he flicked open its loose-
hung leaves. Pinching his nether-lip, he leant against
a tailor’s street dummy, and consulted the entries.
For there was a deficit of £50.
An entry caught his eye. It read :
“Mrs. Gayford, 14 Poncefort Terrace, Mayfair. Rich.
Morrisy revolutional. Statues and machine-guns.”
“By the bones of Spartacus,” said Koupa to an
astounded Strand.
Subchapter ii
"It is Autumn,” said Thea Mayven.
She spoke to herself. She had stopped under the
140 STAINED RADIANCE
plane-trees of the Chelsea Embankment. Leaning
her arms on the place where Storman had leant his
six months before, as he talked of Mars to Norah
Casement, she looked upon the water and the yellow
dimness of the opposing shore. She sighed. Upon
her was a drowsy content. It was Autumn. Keats
and quietness.
“Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness.”
Autumn and London. How’ll it be in Scotland ?
Oh, home-made cheese and oatcakes, stocks in a field
of barley, peewits and the sound of a binder on a far-
off rig.
Quietness. Some other word ?
Fulfilment.
Looking over into the River, she leant and was
silent. Good to feel good. Nice London. Good to be
alive.
A numbing, painless drowsiness came suddenly
upon her, a minute singing held her ears. Surprised,
she looked down into the water, and, in the so doing,
the delicious faintness passed.
“Funny,” said Thea Mayven.
She turned then away from the River, towards
Rosemount Avenue. It was a Saturday afternoon.
John would not be up in London until to-morrow.
Too busy with his novel.
Thinking his name, a secret smile came on her
thin red lips. John. Oh, hell, please leave me some
peace. Just one little half-hour to myself. Keep out
of my memory just this little while. Please, please.
Oh, my dear, some day I’ll curl up and fade away,
and all they’ll find of me will be a thought and a
memory of John Garland. Throbbing on the pave¬
ment.
Every hour thought of him was upon her. Only by
rigorous self-discipline could she go through the life of
STAINED RADIANCE 141
each day with an appearance of calmness and sanity.
Even so, unawares, he would steal upon her. Before
her typewriter she would of a sudden grow still. Her
face, under the wide-set green-grey eyes, would pale
and then flush till the blood of emotion covered cheek
and neck and breasts and body in a startled amaze¬
ment. For she would be conscious of the touch of
Garland’s hands, of his hungry, ironic, wistful lips,
of the queer, adorable smell of his hair. . . . So, at
meals, in the train, awakened suddenly from sleep,
she would be haunted, and would swear because of it,
with low laughter and a blasphemous tenderness.
Minute by minute, hour by hour, day by day—to
see them flash and fade down the corridors of each
week, till Garland come to her again.
Oh, good to live and be young and be loved ! And
damnable to be feeble and pitiful and incapable of
telling oneself how much.
Awakened physically, she had been awakened
mentally as well. Conscious of this, she had questioned
Garland thereon, and he had stared and talked and
explained, gesticulating and interested, till her hair
against his chin made him halt and lose thread and grow
crimson across his sulky face, and bend to kiss her and
kiss her till she was conscious of Darkness itself beyond
the abysses. . . . Alone, in soft, shameless impatience
of the colourlessness of the labels she had been able to
supply her sensations, she would repeat over to herself,
word on slow word, descriptively, the happenings
that were good. Indecently, calmly, she would specify
them. And, in the midst thereof, she would suddenly
colour in slow, mantling waves of blood, and her eyes
would shine—the eyes of adventure.
Oh, fools that she and John had been to waste the
last two years as waste them they had. They’d lived
in shams and impatiences and mock angers simply
STAINED RADIANCE
142
because they had not lived. . . . Silly fools ! Both
of them. As if there could be anything wrong in being
natural. . . .
Autumn. It had come so quickly this year. And,
raising her eyes as she walked through Chelsea, she
saw a flock of rooks going by into the west. How
they’d be hronk-hronking over the white stubble
fields in Scotland, with a storm blowing down from
the hills !
She stopped at a florist’s and bought irises, late
irises, lifting blooms blue and grey-rayed above their
green sheaths. Holding them in her hand, she walked
out into the street. Had Garland seen her then he
would have said that she looked like a sacrifice to
Autumn.
The charwoman was cleaning the steps of No. 41
Rosemount Avenue. She moved aside her bucket to
allow of the ingress of Thea. She was a short, stout
woman with bulging breasts and scanty hair. She
looked sourly at Thea’s golden legs.
“Lovely afternoon,’’ said Thea.
“Uh,” said the charwoman.
Making tea inside the flat, Thea Mayven stopped
to laugh. And she thought :
“Had John heard that he’d have had something
funny and philosophical to say about it. . . . The
Romantic and the Realist. . . . Pfuu. Poor thing.
Perhaps she was once young and mad and had a
lover.’’
She put down the cup from which she had been
drinking, and yawned, stretching arms and legs, and
finally all her body, in a taut extasy, so that the
muscles cracked. Doing this, she was conscious, very
vividly, of the beauty of her poise and of her body.
No such consciousness had ever been hers before that
happening in Leekan cove. She had accepted her body
STAINED RADIANCE
M3
as she had accepted bacon for breakfast and shoes for
footwear. That she possessed a temple of delight had
never occurred to her till a worshipper had come to
the altar of that temple.
Standing so, she thought of physical love and lust
and the lies she had read of it. Its cruelty and its
shame. Nothing had she ever seen recorded of its
beauty, its tenderness—the queer, queer tenderness
it evoked. Like the feeling that came to you holding
soft pansies. . . .
Oh ! Tired. A sleepy, lazy afternoon.
God!
Her body had just eased from stretching when it
happened. Into her mouth came a strange gush of
tainted saliva, acid and bitter. At the same moment
she was aware of a drumming in her ears and a con¬
traction of her stomach.
A violent fit of sickness came on her and passed.
She came out of the bathroom, and, standing in front
of a mirror, looked at her face. It was repulsively
pallid. As she looked, her eyes grew startled. A little
froth spumed at the corners of her lips.
Suddenly she had remembered. For a full minute
thereafter she stood still, staring. It was the pain
of her bitten fingers which finally made her
move.
She wrenched her diary out of her handbag and
opened it with clumsy, shaking fingers. Doing so,
she noted, with a vividness of utter detachment, how,
under the tips of her nails, innumerable little white
specks showed. Her mouth felt dry and crusted. She
found the page she looked for, counted the dates
forward, recounted them. . . .
Oh, God, God, it couldn’t be that.
The second no go ; Thursday the limit.
Then, with a concentration of interest, she noted
144
STAINED RADIANCE
how black the room was growing. Further, some¬
thing else in it oppressed her.
It was filled with a low, horrible moan.
Subchapter in
“A gentleman has called from the Anarchist Party,
madam.”
“Who ?”
“A gentleman from the Anarchist Party, madam.”
Mrs. Gayford, sitting writing letters in her library,
looked up at the butler in amazement. Elected
President of the White Arts Club, she had been
unable to leave Town, her time being fully occupied
in organizing an exhibition for the Club’s members.
Her skin, being thick, dripped sweat in the warmth
of the afternoon, and her hands, resembling carefully
kept bunches of sausages, left brown stains upon the
scented notepaper which she used. The butler regarded
the crown of her head with eyes which resembled
those of a dead fish. This, however, being his con¬
ventional aspect, had not stirred Mrs. Gayford s
surprise.
It was the announcement of a visitor from the
Anarchocommunist Party.
She had grown tired of Communism, had neither
attended meetings nor subscribed to funds for several
months, had sent in a letter of resignation. To this,
however, she had received no reply, and the fact had
left her in a state of uneasy irritation. She had visioned
a dramatic expulsion. Nevertheless, filled with
enthusiasm for the White Artists, a new group which
held that all drawing and colour were false art, she
toiled daily and headachily in their interest. Far in
the dim years, in the histories of the Arts, they would
STAINED RADIANCE
145
tell of the patroness of the White Artists, the woman
who guarded the birth of Artistic Vision.
Convinced of these things, and regarding the butler
the while, her expression changed from surprise and
registered calm hauteur. The butler, imagining that
she was about to have convulsions, modified his gaze
till it was partially human. He was quickly unde¬
ceived.
“Show the man in, please.”
She would deal with him quickly and con¬
temptuously.
Andreas van Koupa limped into the room, stopped,
looked at Mrs. Gayford, and then crossed the room'
keeping his eyes upon her. These eyes, she observed',
were insanely black. In a moment she found her hand
in his. His fingers were cool and thin.
“Comrade, you have a beautiful home and beautiful
eyes.”
Saying this, the intentness left Koupa’s gaze and
was replaced by a simple admiration. Behind this
change, in the reaches of his brain, he registered that
he was adopting correct tactics. And a certain wonder
held him. For, being startled at his words, the eyes
set in the blotchy face had taken to themselves a
certain warm beauty. Her fingers returned the pres¬
sure of his. She laughed uncertainly.
“The Party does not often send me flatterers. It
more usually sends beggars.”
And Koupa said :
“You so-abominable malnourished hog ! To think
that the fortunes of the Revolution should hang on
the goodwill of the such-unbrained. . . . This ancient
sow is out of mood with the Party ; perhaps she
thinks of leaving it, having taken to herself some
new fad, some porous plaster with which to hold her
unpleasant body in one and give the physical jerks
K
146 STAINED RADIANCE
to her bleached soul. . . . So, I must find what
this is.”
These words he did not speak aloud. Instead,
glancing rapidly over the table at which Mrs. Gayford
had been working, his eyes lit on a featureless drawing.
It was upon cartridge paper, a tracery of white upon
whiteness, mystic, unnameable. Interested in all Art
developments, even in those which he considered as
the tumours and cancers of Art, the poet had heard
of the White Artists. Instantly comprehension came
to him. It was in this bloodless botching of good
paper which might have been used in lavatories or to
wrap cartridges that this good Gayford found the
Revolution-excluding interest. His gaze grew fixed.
He stared.
“What is it ?” asked Mrs. Gayford, sharply.
Koupa slowly turned towards her. He spoke with
a certain stern intentness which quietened her as
though he had laid on her shoulder his habitually chill
fingers.
“Forgive me. You say the little Party so-seldom
sends you flatterers. I flatter do not. But I love
beauty. I come in this room, I see your eyes, I look
upon the so-goodness of Nature’s creation, then I see
—that.”
He pointed to the cartridge paper whereon faint
outlines were observable. His eyes challenged hers.
“It is the work of the incomparable Briarton ? I
have not the right to look on it, perhaps ? Comrade,
I have no right to look in your eyes. I hold that all
things of beauty are mine to share.”
“You know Briarton’s work ?”
Mrs. Gayford, seated, looked up at the poet with
mounting interest. For this drawing of Briarton’s
had perplexed and worried her. A reproduction of it
was to appear in the third issue of the White Artist
STAINED RADIANCE
147
Quarterly, and Mrs. Gayford had been asked to write
an appreciation of it in the same issue. For all articles
in the Quarterly of the White Artists were apprecia¬
tions. No writer ever found aught to criticize. All
drawings, being colourless, were praised with thick
smearings of colourful adjectives and thin daubings of
uncompromising substantives. But, equipped though
she was with an excellent dictionary of synonyms,
Mrs. Gayford had found it impossible to write the
article on Briarton's work. Owing to some inartistic
coarseness of mind, she was unable to wield adjectives
without a ratio of at least one to the dozen in sub¬
stantives.
She had regarded Briarton’s drawing from all
angles of vision and under all possible lights in order
to gain some insight into its meaning. Its title,
“Nocturne”, had merely deepened her perplexity.
She had wavered between describing it as a “Night
Attack on the Barricades” or “Moonlight on the
Sahara”. Koupa's words inspired her with sudden
hope. Her slow face-muscles shook to a tremor of
interest in his appearance. His eyes, still red from
their sleep over the deficits of the Anarchocommunist
Party, seemed to her to have vision and power within
them. Koupa shook himself, as if coming out of a
reverential reverie.
“Know Briarton’s work ? Even as you yourself do.
We, the non-artists, sometimes we, is it not, have the
vision ? Briarton is but the instrument of beauty ;
you, or even I, we have a greater gift—appreciation,
the understanding, is it not ?” Saying this, Koupa
rapidly and silently debated the meaning of the
drawing. What was the so-infernal thing ? Did it
have a title ? How would it help him to impress this
so-rich cow ?
Mrs. Gayford sighed, sweatily. “Ah, yes, that is
STAINED RADIANCE
148
very true. We can appreciate, but to describe in
words—I have the pleasant but difficult task to
review Briarton for the White Artist Quarterly, and it
is—difficult."
Koupa chuckled inwardly. His line of action was
suddenly clear to him. Pulling up a chair unbidden,
he sat down.
"You also, then, are hampered by the inadequacy
of words in describing the super-achievements of Art ?
Then let us collaborate. It comes to me—a palinode
or distych. I shall write, we shall both compose. . . .
Here is paper. Your pardon ?"
“That bell-push beside you. Will you ring ? For
tea.”
Ten minutes later, when the butler brought in tea,
he found his mistress, her fingers staining the sheet
of paper she held, sitting reading aloud the description
of Briarton’s "Nocturne". Koupa, seated now on
the table, leant on an elbow and looked at his col¬
laborator with shining eyes.
NOCTURNE
Crash on the heaving slopes of weeping Night
The lilies droop.
Let dawn be damned; night’s here in shivering
Low
Blow
Wind of the wakeful woods.
A farthing ? I see girls droop with powdered hair.
And writhen lips, and old men cry in dreams.
Hush!
A beggar selling brooches in the mist !
Subchapter iv
Not for another seven months or so, anyhow. Let's
see. In March. Perhaps. Couldn’t be sure. How the
hell to know when it’ll happen ? No way of telling.
STAINED RADIANCE
149
Might have been any time within the last two months
. . . even the first time, out in the bay at home.
(God ! Of all times I hope it was then it happened. . . .)
Oh, God, God, God, but it’s awful. John. My dear,
my dear, I’m scared. . . . What the hell will it
matter to you, anyway ? You will be all right—can
go on writing and sneering and using me as you like.
Oh, beasts we’ve been, beastly fools.
Be quiet. Pull yourself together. Fool. Can’t go
on like this—hours of it. Dark. Must be late. Good
job Ellen’s away for the week-end. And Norah can’t
be in yet. Pfuu ! Pillow’s sopping wet. You fool.
Don’t think, don’t think. Not any more to-night.
Read or something. John’ll be here to-morrow.
Have to give up the office soon. Get a house some¬
where. Cost a lot of money. John must have some
before he let all this happen. Beast. Be able to live
together. Have to furnish a house, get all kinds of
things, baby clothes . . . What a damn, damn fool,
after reading Marie Stopes and knowing all about it.
Sickening. And it’ll hurt more later.
Uhh. Stiff. Have to change that pillowslip. Powder.
Damn dark. Oh, blast the thing. Not worth a light
here. Dizzy. Headache—of course, you fool. . . .
She opened the bedroom door upon a gulfing tide
of greyness from the corridor. Her feet hurt inside
her high-heeled shoes, for she had neglected to remove
those, and they creaked in the corridor. Suddenly,
spite their sound, she was conscious of a deeper silence
than that which had held the flat a moment before.
She stood still. It was true.
Someone else in the flat ?
At the thought she instantly saw a movement in
the greyness in front of her. With a cry she opened
the nearest door, slipped inside, closed it behind her,
switched on the light.
150
STAINED RADIANCE
“Oh—”
She had entered Norah’s bedroom. And from the
bed, on her sudden entrance, Norah, red-eyed, had
suddenly arisen. They stared at each other.
“Thea . . . Scared me stiff. What is it ? What’s
wrong ?”
“I don’t know. Thought I saw someone out there
in the corridor.”
“Lock the door, then. Quick.”
They locked it and stood listening. Not a sound.
For a full minute they remained rigid. Then Thea
gave a short laugh, swore, lit a match from a box
beside Norah’s bed, and went out into the corridor.
Then she searched the entire flat, flinging open doors
with facetious queries and banging them behind her.
Not a soul. She came back to Norah’s room.
“Must have been a ghost, for he’s vanished. What’s
wrong, Norry ?”
Norah’s face was ghastly and her underlip quiver¬
ing. Thea stared at her, then put her arm round
her.
“What’s wrong ?”
“Oh, everything. . . . Didn’t know you were in.
Where’ve you been ?”
“Bedroom. Snoozing, I suppose. I just woke up
a minute or two ago.”
“I wish I could go to sleep and never wake up . . .
Thea, I’ve made a divvle of a mess of things. Oh,
miggod, don’t stand there. Come and sit down. You
know I’ve told you about Billy ?”
“Often. The bank clerk, isn’t he ? You used to
meet him before Mr. Storman ”
Norah laughed, thinly. “And since.”
“Yes ?”
The other looked away. Her fingers were clenching
and unclenching in the coverlet. Thea, sitting on the
*
STAINED RADIANCE 151
bed and leaning her elbow on the pillow, was suddenly
conscious of a clamminess on her skin.
The pillow was damp.
“Thea, you can keep a secret ? Swear you won’t tell
it to anyone else. ... I must tell someone, or I’ll
go mad, I know I will. I’ve been going with Billy
while Storman’s been away in Russia. And I’m going
to have a baby.”
“What?”
“Oh, it’s horrible. It’s true. I bought a ring and
went to a doctor and was examined. And when I
told Billy about it to-night he stared and laughed
and then sidled away. . . . Oh, what a divvle of a
mess !”
Suddenly Thea knew that she herself would burst
into tears in a minute, or else laugh and laugh and
laugh because of the funniness of that word divvle—
laugh till she was hysterical and then mad. She
heard herself ask a question.
“The baby—when will it be born ?”
“Sometime in March, the doctor said.”
Subchapter v
It was a night of stars. Mellowed by the half-bottle
of Benedictine which he had drunk, to the stupefac¬
tion of Mrs. Gayford and her butler, Andreas van
Koupa walked the Chelsea Embankment under the
plane-trees. His cigar, red-tipped in the soft midnight,
comforted his throat. Within his stomach the good
Benedictine held drugged the malevolent gastric
juices which an indiscreet dinner might have induced.
Folded in his shabby pocketbook, next to his skin and
held from slipping down by his waistband, was a
cheque for £50.
152
STAINED RADIANCE
He began to count the stars and stopped when he
had reached fifty. Aldebaran held his attention a long,
twinkling moment. He leant his arms on the wall,
where Storman and Thea Mayven had leant theirs,
watching Aldebaran and thinking of the saying of
Anatole France that if one believed the stars in¬
habited it turned the sky into a horrifying shambles.
Untrue. On such a night as this comfort and cheer
signalled from life’s innumerable outposts.
His thoughts diverged into speculation upon the
inhabitability of the solar planets. Stroking his
unshaven chin, he called to mind all that he had ever
read of Mars, Venus, and the Earth’s moon. It was,
indeed, impossible to believe them uninhabited. The
canal theory of Mars had been built on the most
exact data. Venus, with its dense atmosphere, would
support vegetation, and therefore animal life. . . .
A dense and horrifying jungle of monstrous, insane
plants upwreathed itself in his vision below a pair of
hastening moons. Great seas roared with the rumble
of hurrying tides on nightmare beaches ; through the
insane foliage green, macabre ghouls leapt and snarled
and tore 
“God mine, it is the Benedictine,’’ said Koupa.
Whether these things were or no, everywhere life
swung in rhythm of purpose. Beyond the jungles and
the ghouls, secretly or openly, the Life-Force in every
planet wrought and selected and toiled with its instru¬
ment reason and its goal immortality. Triumphant
over itself, matter in motion conquered matter in
stagnation, matter whorling in steady rhythm became
matter in purpose and conquered matter in mere
instinctive motion, matter in purpose intricated its
whorlings till it was matter in reason.
The scientific Pentateuch. Reason, God, every¬
where—in life, in death, in birth.
STAINED RADIANCE
153
Looking up at the stars he thought upon birth with
a sudden great wonder. Rightly had the Christians
held it the holy mystery. The mothers of life—from
the rat and the weasel to the girl with blossoming
breasts—were partners fair and holy in the purpose
of God ; men but onlookers.
And a great tenderness and desolation came upon
Koupa at this thought. Proudly must women walk,
bearing to seed and fruit the miracles of their bodies.
No man might share with them that pride, no man
partake of the sacred mystery.
Goddess-cults—how understandable, logical, they
had been. The coarse and fleshly cults most of all.
Every woman with child was a goddess, an Ash-
taroth, fit for reverence and obscene worship.
Mellowly, under the stars, he sat himself down on
a bench. Overhead the plane-trees rustled. Sleep
drew his eyelids down upon his cheeks, released them
so that he might peer up through the leaves above
him, then closed them again upon a thought that was
a vivid prayer.
“God mine, a night of stars !’’
Subchapter vi
John Garland stepped out into the colourful
autumnal warmth of London. Clad in the shoddy
blue of the aircraftman, a blot against the sunlight,
he emerged from Victoria Station into the arms of
Thea Mayven. She stood awaiting him by the bus-
stop. She was tall, clad in white and blue. Her face
had the misty freshness of a flower. He noted with
a strange little quiver the lobeless tips of her
ears.
She put her arms around his neck, standing on the
154
STAINED RADIANCE
crowded pavement, and kissed his sulky face. And
Garland thought :
“Great God, this woman and miracle is mine.
Mine.”
So thinking, he asked how she was, and looked at
her with questioning, ironic eyes. For the ironist
within him had been more watchful than ever since
the happenings in Leekan Cove, defending the new
Garland who quivered as a lutestring at the thought
and sight of Thea.
“All right. Do you love me ?”
“ ‘Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet’—I believe
you’ve been eating cherries.”
“I have.” Thea sighed. “I’m too fond of them.
But I'll be hungry again soon. Let’s go to Putney
Heath.”
They boarded a bus, climbed to the top and found
themselves riding alone through the heat-warmed
smells of London. Thea leant her arm against the
rail. The brimful of shadow cast by her hat lay upon
her face in a semi-circle tipping her nose. Below that
semi-circle her face was soft and relaxed ; above, her
face was rigid. Now and then she closed her eyes,
and then opened them again quickly as if to surprise
herself in the midst of thoughts and in the midst of
a journey which was part of a dream.
But Garland noted none of those things. Upon his
knee he had opened a copy of “Les Dieux ont soif”,
and gazed at it with an ironic sadness. Long the
journey before he could write such stuff as this—the
stuff that life is made of. Ironic life, at least. Thinking
of the “First Novel of an Ironist” he felt a quiver of
disgust.
Then he noted that his knee was touching Thea's.
It had touched her naked knee before this. Think.
The naked knee of Thea Mayven. A white knee, a
STAINED RADIANCE 155
dimpled knee. . . . Who would think it ? Who
believe that I had done this ?
Riding up through London with the sun in his
face a drowsiness came on him. He closed the book
the better to think of the white knees of Thea. Once,
absently, she laid her hand on his. Below them they
felt the bus strain as it crossed the River and breasted
the Hill.
“It’ll be warm soon,” said Thea, raising her head.
Grunting, the bus climbed the Putney reaches,
past the Pines, where Swinburne was refused brandy.
Garland, hobnailed boots pressed against an adver¬
tisement, abandoned for something bleak and disturb¬
ing the thoughts of Thea’s knees.
But he would not tell her yet.
The bus stopped. They got off and walked across
autumn grass, grown sere. A man was selling news¬
papers and icecream. Garland bought the News of
the World in order that he might read of the murders.
For no doubt there had been murders. Overhead
were swallows. Garland lit a pipe and unfolded the
News of the World. Thea walked humming.
Tell him. But not yet. Later.
Besides, the vivid horror of the business had vanished
here in the sunlight. A baby. A son. Someone funny
and quaint and sulky. ... Be born with hobnailed
boots or else clutching a copy of Anatole France. . . .
John’ll be with me ; we’ll be together when it happens.
Wonder if I’ll scream and scream ? Like hell, no
doubt. John’s novel’ll be published by then. He’ll
be writing others. He’ll be able to get out of the
filthy Air Force. Oh, we’ll begin to live, we two . . .
and— A baby.
Smiling they walked, and the world was young.
And because it was young, its hurtfulness pained
them with a sick intensity in the midst of their glad-
156 STAINED RADIANCE
ness. Shadows would come and pass upon their faces
as they tried to remember the morning about them.
Looking at Thea, Garland would lock his lips. Not
yet. Not yet. And his throat would contract queerly.
They stopped at a stall where coloured water-drinks
were sold. Garland purchased two bottles and they
sat down on the grass and drank from heavy, unbreak¬
able tumblers. Then Thea bought cigarettes and they
walked on, into cool jungles of heath and bracken
and dwarfen trees. Below them London lay shining
bluely.
"The City of the Sun,” said Garland.
But Thea was still humming her song and did not
hear. She had begun to feel tired. Her head ached a
little because of the dancing heat-waves.
"Thank God for cool grass.”
She sat down on it in the shadow of a bush, took
off her hat and looked up at Garland. Their eyes met.
Into Garland’s came the warmth of desire. Pleasur¬
ably he looked down at her, noting the faint drops of
perspiration on her brow. And a strange tremor,
piercing in its sweetness, shot through him. For
from where he stood he could look down and see the
white hollow between her breasts.
He had kissed her there. Many times. He sat down,
smiling at her, dreaming. But Thea lay flat on the
grass, her eyes upon the faint wisps of clouds. He
touched her throat with a gentle finger.
"Oh, let me alone, John.”
Almost hysterical. Surprised, Garland withdrew
the finger, opened "Les Dieux ont soif”, lit a cigarette
and began to read. But first he glanced at the swallows
and at Thea, very still. An atmosphere to read in.
In a little he had forgotten swallows, Thea, and all
the world, forgotten technique and hints and style,
the while he read of the priest and the atheist going
STAINED RADIANCE
157
to the guillotine. Oh, by God, by God, the Master !
Then a strange, black something struggled out of
the story. He lost trace of its telling. He must tell
her. He dropped the book, turned to Thea, found her
lying as when he had last looked.
“Thea, I’ve got news—infernal news. I’ve been
trying to keep it back, but you might as well know
now. I’ve been posted overseas—to Egypt, I think.
The boat sails three weeks from to-morrow.”
V
CHAPTER THE SEVENTH
Wherein Full and Faithful Accounts, without
Asterisks, are given of a Bridal Night and a Bye-
Election, and, though We weep, the Skies are not
Wet.
Subchapter i
JOHN GARLAND and Theodora Mayven were
married at the Chelsea Registry Office on a
Monday forenoon when a squally wind blew in the
streets and the plane-trees along the Embankment
wept dustily. For it was now Autumn, and to Thea,
with child, and with grey-green eyes grown larger, the
long, wet day passed in a drowsy mist of dreams.
They sat in a restaurant and ate a large and expen¬
sive lunch and looked at each other with a new
curiosity. And the fact that Thea wore a wedding-
ring was a strange and delightful jest. Then they
went to a theatre matinee, to a play about a secret
gang and foreign princesses and the machinations of
the Communists. Holding Thea’s hand, Garland gave
himself up to the play, was thrilled, was indignant,
cheered with the rest of the audience. For Thea was
finally his and her hand was amazingly soft and warm.
Oh, God, and that look in her eyes . . . Love her,
be good to her.
And, with a wistful humour, he thought upon her
funniness of gesture and utterance, and that habit
she had of saying, as one word : “Notatall !” Turning
her head and looking at him the while he thought
this, she smiled at him secretly, consideringly.
158
STAINED RADIANCE
159
“Husband.”
“My wife.”
And the last word seemed somehow pitiful. But
he would not think on that. Not to-day. This is ours,
ours, mine and Thea’s. We shall not see its like
again. And the little secret place between her breasts
—I shall kiss it to-night.
They camp out into the soft fall of the rain and
stood, Thea's hand on Garland's arm, at Charing
Cross, and watched all London go by. Indifferently
by. And, at that sensed indifference, they held each
other with a half-desperate tenderness. But of the
unheeding menace they did not speak. Instead, they
laughed, pointing out a man with a peculiar nose and
the funniness of Nelson in the downpour, and a girl
who passed, squelching, soggily, in Russian boots.
And, holding each other, they laughed.
And they went to a cafe for tea—to a dim, green
room where smoke-clouds curled up scentedly. A
dim, quiet place. The waitress smiled at them and at
Ihea's new ring, and Garland ate four scones and
three large and squelchy cakes which he harpooned
and then dissected on the edge of his fork. Thea had
bought an evening paper. She propped it up against
the water-jug and read it composedly. But ever and
anon, catching Garland s eye over the top of a page,
she would make a little grimace at him.
Married. Unbelievable. Married.
At eight o'clock they came out of a kinema where
they had watched Miss Lilian Gish being made love
to by an English baronet called Sir Devonshire. The
rain had cleared away. The lit streets shone cold and
alien. Thea held Garland’s sleeve.
“John, d’you know you’re my husband ?”
“Suspected it.”
Be good to me, won’t you ?” And, saying this
l6o STAINED RADIANCE
trite thing mockingly, she looked up at him so that
he could have wept. For he saw himself as one in a
drama of two, a drama acted everywhere in all ages,
a drama weaving its plot to the end of marriage and
consummation upon a marriage bed. (How right of
the romantics to leave it there !) Endlessly.
And that drama was eternally tragic behind its
last curtain. The curtain came down, the author
spattered asterisks, the band played, and the lights
went out. Then tragedy. The woman gave—herself.
She became a loved, inferior, degraded thing. . . .
Rightly did the Catholics prize virginity. Believing
in the after-existence of the soul they yet, being
cautious, heeded to keeping inviolate the impermanent
body.
Thea. Soon she would not be Thea. She would
merely be his wife. Not as a glorious gift would she
give herself to him. He had a licence from the State
to use her body. She had not even a name of her
own, now. She had sold herself.
For what ? God, for what ? Oh, be good to her, as
she’s asked, you poor blackguard, for all this is of the
rottenness called Life.
“I’m tired and sleepy,” said Thea. They were
within the room of their hotel. Street noises rumbled
without. The firelight flickered upon the hearth.
“And I’m going to bed. So run away. Walk up and
down in the smoking-room and throw away cigarettes
and be nervous.”
“Not I. I shall look out at the stars while you
undress.”
He went to a window and pulled the curtain a little
aside. Then he looked up. There was not a star in
the sky.
Something slipped into his hand, something warm
and tremulous, like the heart of a captured bird.
STAINED RADIANCE l6l
Thea’s hand. Stark, she stood beside him in the
unlighted room.
“Well, am I a bad bargain ?“
He put his arms around her, standing so. Her
skin was soft, like velvet. Against the body that he
held he laid his head, kissing her.
“I shall kiss you all over,” he said.
And when he had done that, he sat for long on the
edge of the bed, looking down at her. Sleepily she
smiled up at him from the pillow. Then her eyelids
slowly closed and she was asleep. Like a child she held
fast to his hand.
Very gently he loosened her fingers.
Suhchapter ii
Ten days after his return from Russia Storman
flung himself into an active part in the St. Judas
bye-election.
The seat had been held for ten years by an Inde¬
pendent, a strong, simple man of the Cobbett stamp,
who invariably voted in the Conservative lobbies.
Unfortunately, owing to a cutting retort from an
Under-Secretary at question time in the Commons,
the member for St. Judas had next Sunday made an
indiscreet speech in his constituency. The following
day he had received a letter from the St. Judas Con¬
servative Association, apprising him of the fact that
it would henceforth be compelled to cease payment of
the annual subsidy made to him as an Independent.
The member, an old man of expensive tastes and
unimpaired virility, was overcome. For payment of
his mistress, the matron of the St. Judas Rescue Home,
he was entirely dependent on the annual subsidy. He
went to his club and spent the evening there, mixing
L
162
STAINED RADIANCE
his drinks and brooding. Suddenly, at half-past nine,
he was heard crying out in a threatening voice in the
deserted smoking-room. On two of the waiters rushing
in, they found him lying on the floor, attempting to
strangle a portrait of Disraeli which he had dragged
from the wall. He was secured and removed to a
lunatic asylum.
The bye-election which ensued was, as usual,
regarded as a test one. All parties worked feverishly.
The Conservative candidate, Leon Ropstein, canvassed
from door to door in the working-class quarters and
was photographed holding babies, stirring puddings,
and assisting a pavement artist to lay out his materials.
Nightly he addressed large meetings where free
cigarettes were to be had at the entrance. Sincere, a
zealot, he spoke of the glories of the Empire and the
heritage of Anglo-Saxondom, and also of the necessity
for strengthening the Aliens’ Act, expelling all Reds
and untrustworthy foreigners, and refusing to purchase
Soviet petrol. From his father, a German Jew who
had hawked old china in Frankfort, he had acquired
a clear, penetrating voice which instantly won the
attention his evident sincerity afterwards kept.
The Liberal candidate was Professor K. McGuire,
who held the Greek chair at Rollchester. Stroking
his stained beard, he would hold his audiences enrap¬
tured by pictures of the future, when the secrets of
the atom had been discovered and electricity was
available in the humblest home. He told how Mr.
Lloyd George had saved Western civilization by
taking control during the War and a leading part in
the Treaty of Versailles. Planks in his platform were :
Peace in Industry, Wider Education, Retrenchment,
Economy, Reform, and Revision of the Versailles
Treaty. He was supported by Grey Liberals, Lloyd
George Liberals, a Labour novelist, the local Congre-
STAINED RADIANCE l63
gationalists, and the President of the Free Union of
Seamen, which had a membership of eighteen.
The Labour candidate, General Sir John Browne-
Lovitt, C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., seriously alarmed his
opponents. Gifted with a handsome face and cultured
voice, it was feared that he would capture the women’s
vote en bloc. An ex-Conservative, he told, from
platforms and hustings, from his car, from kerb and
soapbox and wayside pulpit, how, when returned to
Parliament, it was his intention to support a vigorous
and uncompromising Socialist policy. Surrounded by
a large audience whenever he spoke, he was for several
days at the beginning of the campaign greatly
enheartened—till a sameness about this audience
caught his attention. It was always the same
audience.
Thrilled by his words and promises, and the pictures
of the Socialist Commonwealth which he painted, the
Socialists of the St. Judas Division attended every
meeting in scores, so that with difficulty the uncon¬
verted obtained seats in the various halls, or, at open-
air meetings, succeeded in approaching sufficiently
near to catch the drift of the speaker’s argu¬
ment.
On the third day of the campaign the Labour agent
received a notification from the secretary of the Local
Anarchocommunist Group to the effect that the St.
Judas Communists would aid in returning General
Sir John Browne-Lovitt to Westminster. The Labour
agent instantly wrote back declining such aid, for, a
grocer when he was not an agent, he believed that the
Communists would confiscate all groceries without
compensation. Also, they practised free love, which
would complicate grocery bills. Sir John, at his agent’s
instigation, publicly declined Communist help. He
did not wish Communists to vote for him. They
I64 STAINED RADIANCE
should go out into the open and form a party of their
own.
Hardly had he finished this speech when his meeting
was broken up by a party of young men who played
banjos and carried a Union Jack. Two of them wore
black shirts. Next day the Daily Beacon denounced
the Conservatives and their hooligan Fascist allies.
Instantly Mr. Ropstein issued a printed circular dis¬
associating himself from acts of violence, but stating
that these were a natural result of the unpatriotic
sentiments and anti-British policy of the Socialist
candidate.
These leaflets, which had been in print a week
before the campaign commenced, were scattered
broadcast over St. Judas. That evening the meetings
of both Conservative and Labour candidates were
packed, though Professor McGuire declaimed on
atoms to an almost empty hall. Speedily General
Browne-Lovitt, rising to speak, became aware that his
audience was of a different order from that which had
hitherto gathered. It was composed of the outside
public. His usual Socialist supporters, rising to the
need of clerical work in connection with the campaign,
had stayed at home, addressing envelopes. Heartened,
for, though naturally timid, he was relieved at the
thought of conveying the Socialist creed to the uncon¬
verted, General Browne-Lovitt began to speak. At
the end of ten minutes booing and persistent heckling
caused him to stop. Then he was spectator of a welcome
sight. From all over the hall strong young men
uprose, seized the hecklers by the scruff of the neck,
and flung them out into the street.
“B’Ged, I never thought they had it in them,"
said the Labour candidate. "Good lads, they’ll keep
things in order.”
But at that moment, as he sat amazed at the
STAINED ""RADIANCE 165
virility displayed by those nurtured on the theories of
Lord Passfield and Mrs. Sidney Webb, his agent leant
across and whispered to him. “These young men are
Communists. They’ve ruined the meeting.”
The meeting went on. Turning from attacking
the Empire Crusade, the General spoke of the
weak and cowardly subterfuges by which the Com¬
munists sought to destroy the Labour Movement.
Not at Reform, not even at Socialism in Our Time,
did these Communists aim, but at bloody Revolution.
Saying these things, the General, observing the
demeanour of the young men who had evicted the
hecklers, became sure that his agent was wrong. For
the young men displayed no indignation. Two of them
slept. They did not wear beards nor carry cameos of
Karl Marx.
For, like many recent converts to the Labour
cause, the General’s ideas of Communists were gathered
from news-sheets which in other circumstances he
denounced as reactionary.
In the body of the hall Storman, in command of the
! detachment detailed by the Anarchocommunist Party
to keep order at General Browne-Lovitt’s meetings,
listened to the speech in cold silence. A flicker of his
old amusement came on him as the General caught his
eye and nodded, friendlywise. For he and the General
were old acquaintances. They had both received the
surrender of Jerusalem. Storman’s battery had
dropped the screen of projectiles behind which the
shattered British battalions retired after the second
attempt on Gaza; for this, on General Browne-
Lovitt's recommendation, he had received the Military
Cross. Storman had accompanied the General on a
night reconnaissance amidst the heaps of bloody rags
and carbonized flesh which represented those unenter¬
prising enough to profit by the projectile screen. The
i66
STAINED RADIANCE
General, tripping amidst spewn entrails, had sworn
and been sick. ...
But Storman’s amusement waned quickly. Instead,
he was shaken with a sudden spasm of disgust. What
hope was there for any party which returned these
militaristic windbags to Parliament ? What hope, for
that matter, was there in all the weary business ?
Yet it was the policy of the Anarchocommunist
Party to help in the returning of Browne-Lovitt to
Westminster—a policy for which Storman himself
had always hitherto stood. It was policy to help in
securing a Labour Government. With such govern¬
ment the Communists could carry on a widespread
propaganda of anti-state agitation impossible under
the overseership of a Tory Home Secretary.
So Storman had always hitherto held, but his visit
to Russia had stirred in him anew his old passion for
accurate blue-printing of a project. Further, that
visit had aroused within him a destructive sense of
humour. Now he sat sardonic over the planlessness of
his own plans.
Meanwhile, two miles away, in the Memorial Hall
of St. Judas, Andreas van Koupa, in charge of another
Anarchocommunist detachment, had succeeded in
reducing Mr. Ropstein’s meeting to chaos. Shocked and
amazed, the Conservatives on the platform listened to
a derisive chant arise at regular intervals from amidst
the audience and drown the candidate’s speech.
Anti-aliens, the Conservatives’ most extreme policies
were generally expounded by naturalized aliens. Other
parties, brought up under the idea of pro-Britishism
and Conservatism as synonymous, accepted such
attacks and attackers without demur or questioning,
the while they weakly defended their own alien
candidates. By an infamous disregard of etiquette,
Koupa had succeeded in breaking up Mr. Ropstein’s
STAINED RADIANCE 167
meeting. Regularly, at his signal, his supporters’
voices would rise :
“We don’t want an Alien,
We don’t want a Jew,
We don’t want a Sheeny,
And we don't want you 1”
The meeting ultimately broke up amidst catcalls,
whistling, and disorder. Next morning all the Con¬
servative papers had leaders on the vicious anti-
Semitism of the Labour Party in St. Judas, and
leaderettes on the ruining of Russia by the gang of
Jews which controlled the Soviet. But the Daily
Beacon appeared with a Leader on the Equality of
Races and a leaderette on Vote for St. Judas’s Only
English Candidate.
Polling day arrived. It passed in sleet. Next
evening, at dusk, the results were announced. They
read :
K. McGuire . . . 10,080
L. Ropstein . . . 6,540
J. Browne-Lovitt . . 6,450
Subchapter iii
Garland had a fortnight’s leave before he sailed
from Southampton. In that fortnight he and Thea
had to find rooms where she might live and eat and
sleep and bear her child.
Of the horror of Thea’s position they did not talk.
Garland had no money. He had never saved a penny-
piece in his life. When he had told Thea this on
Putney Heath, after their mutual revelations, she had
stared at him like one gone mad—stared with drooping
jaw and rounded, incredulous eyes. Then she had
i68
STAINED RADIANCE
burst into high, thin laughter. What was to happen
to her when he had gone to Egypt, when her condition
made it impossible for her to work, thereafter lay like
a red shadow across the brain of Garland. She would
receive from the Air Force a pittance of marriage
allowance insufficient to pay even for the rent of
their rooms—those rooms that were still unfound.
Even with all of his own pay that he would be able
to send her, she would still be incapable of living
anywhere but in the slums or on offal.
Once a helpful thought gave Garland rest for one
night. Thea could go back to her home in Scotland
when the time came for the baby to be born.
Next morning he proposed this to her. They had
newly got out of bed. Thea had bathed and was
combing her hair. She said : “I would rather die.
Perhaps I shall ? What does it matter ?” Then
laughed.
It was the unacted, dead indifference of her tones
that silenced Garland. Whether she might live or
die when that happened she hardly seemed to
care.
But sometimes, even in those first days, Garland
would step out of the wearying, heart-breaking, foot-
aching procession, and stand aside, as of yore. Smok¬
ing, seated comfortably, he would muse in the fashion
which had become habitual to him. Strange that the
bearing of life should be either a shameful or a pride-
some thing. So thinking, he would again envisage
humanity in terms of an insect-burrow. One insect
—himself—fertilized a female insect—Thea—without
apprising the other insects beforehand that he intended
to fertilize. Fertilized, the female insect, overcome at
the non-notification of the other insects, was shamed,
and the male insect hated the whole burrow. . . .
But God, man, God, it’s Thea—7to / You swine.
STAINED RADIANCE
169
And he would go in search of her and would kiss
her suddenly, adoringly. He found a strange, whole¬
hearted pleasure in devising new methods of kissing
her.
Meantime, they searched for rooms. Flats were
at impossible prices. So they searched for a bedroom
and a sitting-room, furnished, with use of gas-cooker
and bathroom.
At the flat Norah and Ellen were under the impres¬
sion that Thea was honeymooning in Devon. Twice
the newly-married couple had to hide from Ellen, and
once from Norah and Storman. Swearing lightly, but
with her lips quivering, Thea would drag Garland into
shelter.
So they searched London for rooms. North and
south and east, on the trail of advertised rooms to
let, they searched. Landladies would receive them in
apartments decorated with the photographs of sons
and cousins who had served in the War. But hearing
that Garland was in the Air Force, they would shake
their heads. They were respectable, and could not
take in a soldier’s wife, because the other tenants
would not like it. Then Garland and Thea would
board a bus for another place, where the rent would
be twenty-five shillings a week and the walls stained
with damp-mould, and they would be asked what
church they belonged to. Or, talking with some
woman with rooms to let, a woman with breasts
bloated by child-bearing and impressed to the extent
of contemplated reductions by Thea's charm and
Garland's frankness, they would become aware of a
hiatus in the conversation. The woman, seated,
would be regarding Thea sideways with wrinkled eyes
and contemptuous mouth. “We’re respectable people
here,” she would say, and rise up, and show them out.
Unobservable though they might imagine Thea’s
170
STAINED RADIANCE
condition, by that link of common motherhood it
could not be hidden.
And their money was running short. One morning,
in the middle of the second week, when Garland
awoke he found Thea’s place beside him empty and
cold. Arising and dressing, a ghastly certainty held
him. She had gone to the River. He saw her white,
still face rising and falling on the ebb of the waters. . . .
He went downstairs and out into a forenoon of
sunlight. On the steps he met Thea, her face paler
than usual, but her eyes bright.
“Lord. Where’ve you been ?”
“Replenishing the exchequer. Look.’’
She showed him a package of notes, and, at the
dead, still sickness of his face, laughed with that
never-far-absent touch of hysteria in her voice,
“Oh, I haven’t come to that, yet. I took my slave
bangles and wrist-watch to a jeweller's and sold them.
Come and have breakfast, dear. My dear.’’
So they breakfasted, and, having eaten eggs and
bacon and toast, loved each other. The black thoughts
went from Garland’s mind. He talked to Thea of the
short time he would spend abroad, for he had only
three more years to serve in the Air Force. Also,
before he returned he’d have completed his novel,
sent it to England, and had it published. Sure to find
a publisher of some sort. One far gone in senile decay,
for preference. Perhaps bring in fifty pounds. Or more.
Good stuff in it.
He grew silent, remembering the novel, neglected
during the past fortnight. A craving to rout it out
and re-read it assailed him, for the MS. was at the
hotel. But there were still the rooms to find.
Late that afternoon, they came to the last address
on their list. It was a house in a road in Shepherd’s
Bush, It was a short road. A fried fish shop was
STAINED RADIANCE I71
No. i. On either side of the road were small, wizened
plane-trees. There was little traffic. Children played
and rolled podgily on the sidewalks. Dogs, released
for the afternoon, sniffed and barked amidst their
droppings in the dust. The houses, built in 1890,
were small, semi-detached, with bower windows and
narrow passages betwixt each block of two. One
window held a placard advertising the Salvation
Army, showing a stout man fighting a dyspeptic
snake ; another stated that light refreshments were
to be obtained inside. Nearly all of those houses were
occupied by a peculiar class of small tradesmen.
They had been the failures or the rebels of their
respective workshops or offices; yet cautious in
rebellion or failure. For each, retiring from the jostle
of mass production, had saved sufficient wherewith
to establish a small business in a back room. These
fugitive businesses they advertised with hand-painted
placards or unshined brass plates. A vague smell
compounded of many trades hung in the street. It
was called Geranium Road.
“No. 24’s the one we’re looking for,’’ said Thca,
with weariness.
They rang and a woman came to the door. She
was small, with mouse-coloured hair and a neck which
showed traces of ringworm. Behind her spectacles
showed a squint left eye and a doubtful smile. Talking
to Thea, who always opened conversation at such
moments, she eyed the fish shop and Garland’s waist¬
coat. She bade them enter.
Entering, Garland almost broke his neck. The
staircase came abruptly and at once down to the
front door. To the right of the staircase was another
door which the woman opened.
“This is one of the rooms, but I’m sure I don’t
know if I can let it. Not now. It’s so long since I
172
STAINED RADIANCE
gave that address that you got from the agent. I’ll
have to speak to Daddy first.”
“Who ?” said Garland.
She smiled at him doubtfully. “My husband. I
call him Daddy.”
“Is he in ?”
“No. He’ll be back at seven o’clock.”
Thea turned away. “We can come back at that
time, then.”
Out of her normal eye the woman considered her
kindlywise, doubtfully. “Perhaps you’d like a cup of
tea?”
“Love it,” said Thea, “but don’t trouble.”
Smiling doubtfully, the woman went out and left
them. They sat down. The room was furnished in
red. It had two arm-chairs. Sinking back in one,
Thea closed her eyes.
“I’m so tired. I wish we could get this place. It
looks—livable. . . . But I suppose it’s too dear.”
Garland looked round the room. It seemed to him
to resemble the antechamber of hell in its redness. A
bookcase caught his attention. He got up and walked
over to it. It contained a copy of Whitaker’s Almanack
for 1924, works by someone called A.L.O.E., two of
G. A. Henty, and other such, of a past generation,
bound in blue and with gilded edgings. Jammed
betwixt “A Basket of Flowers” and “Under Two
Flags” was a copy of “The Red Lily”.
“Thea. There’s a France here.”
“Is there ?” She remained with her eyes closed.
“I hate him.”
The door opened and the woman came in with a
tray. Behind her followed a small boy of about eight
years of age. He had a large head and sandy hair.
His mouth dropped. With round blue eyes he looked
at Thea. The latter held out her arms.
STAINED RADIANCE
173
“And what’s the little boy’s name, then ?”
“Now speak to the lady, Simon. Tell her your
name.”
Standing in front of the lady, Simon said nothing.
Instead, his hand wandered to Garland’s felt hat,
left lying on a chair. He picked it up and put it on
his head. He gurgled with his drooping mouth.
■‘Funny,” he said.
Thea, enchanted, laughed. The woman smiled
doubtfully. Handing cups of tea, she stood sipping
one and eating a biscuit. The boy, attracted to Thea,
climbed on her knee, planting a dusty shoe on her lap.
His mother, one eye on Garland at the bookcase, the
other on her son, reproved the latter doubtfully.
“Now, Simon, you mustn’t be cheeky.”
But Simon took no notice. Still grasping Garland’s
hat, he proceeded to punch out the dent in it, till it
stood up, big and circular, domelike. Repeating
“Funny,” the boy, seated on Thea’s lap, put his foot
in it.
And Garland thought :
“By God, if ever I’ve children like that I’ll birch
the hides off their backs.”
The woman and Thea talked of the autumn sales,
window-curtains, and the cleaning of brass. Garland
the woman referred to as “your Daddy.”
“Now, Simon, you’ll have to give the gentleman
back his hat. There, there, now, the gentleman will
be back again and will give you his hat to play with.”
The hat was restored. Simon wailed. Thea and
Garland were conducted to the front door. A doubtful
smile ushered them out. “Yes, if you’ll come back
about half-past seven.”
They walked down Geranium Road. It was six
o’clock. “Seems passable,” said Garland.
“Mrs. Stickelly ? She’s a dear and it’s a splendid
174
STAINED RADIANCE
room. Did you hear her say that if her husband allows
she’ll let the bedroom and sitting-room for fourteen
shillings a week, with use of the scullery ?”
“No, I was looking in the bookcase. That’s the
best we’ve been offered. Will we—tell her ?’’
Thea shivered. “No. I couldn’t. And she won’t
take anyone who’s going to have a baby. No one
will. I know. Later, when she discovers it, perhaps
she won't throw me out. . . . Oh, I'm tired.”
At half-past seven they returned to the red-furnished
room. Smiling doubtfully, one eye on the staircase and
the other on the street as she admitted them, Mrs.
Stickelly went for her husband and presently returned
with him. He was tall, nearly six feet high, burly,
and with a face curiously reminiscent of a blood¬
hound’s. His complexion was mottled, for he suffered
from constipation. He had a reserved, surlily secretive
expression, as if he walked in constant dread that
the numerous laxatives which he took might suddenly
effect some internal and disastrous revolution.
“Now, Mr. Garland, what’s your job ?”
“I'm in the Air Force. I’m going to Egypt in three
days’ time.”
“Oh, yes. And your good lady ? Tired with the
heat, missus ?”
Thea smiled at him. “I am a bit, Mr. Stickelly.”
“Oh. Yes.”
Thea and Garland sat on the edges of their chairs.
Mrs. Stickelly smiled doubtfully. Mr. Stickelly, seated,
cogitated with an air of uncertainty. To Garland the
silence grew strangling. He could feel his face begin
to redden. Who was this fat swine to sit in judgement
upon them ? Why didn’t he speak ?
“I was looking at your books this afternoon, Mr.
Stickelly.”
“Oh. Yes. Do you read a lot, Mr. Garland ?”
STAINED RADIANCE 175
“Bookworm, I’m afraid. My wife reads a fair amount
as well.”
“Oh. Yes. Well, she’ll have full use of my books
when she comes here. Any book you want, missus.
But Thea did not reply. They looked at her
curiously. She had fainted.
Subchapter iv
“Let’s go out to the country,” said Norah Casement
to James Storman on the Sunday morning thirteen
days after the marriage of Thea and Garland.
Storman was astonishingly free that afternoon.
He had no meetings to attend, no proofs to correct,
no rich patrons of Anarchocommunism to visit.
Neither had these duties been taken over by anyone
else—least of all by Koupa, whose help would once so
readily have been offered. During the past week
Koupa had disappeared.
But Storman was not thinking of Koupa. His eyes
had lost their old unhumorously humorous glow, but,
looking at Norah, he knew a stir of pleasure. Methodi¬
cally he examined it, probing its causes. He desired
her body. That she had anything else to offer was
unlikely. Nor did he desire anything else.
For the love that is neither lust nor friendship nor
kindliness he had never heard of. Within himself it
had no seed. Self-contained, self-planned, self-knowing,
he desired that certain of his appetites should be
satisfied. Norah would do this.
“We’ll walk to Baker Street and take an electric
train to Harrow,” he said.
Catching the looks he cast on her, Norah smiled and
once blushed deeply and redly and vividly. And a
prayer that was a blasphemy arose in her heart, the
176 STAINED RADIANCE
while Storman talked of Russia and autumn and
unemployment.
They got out at Harrow-on-the-Hill and Storman
led the way up the Hill. A tall church stood there
amidst trees and clumps of aged schoolbuildings.
Now and then they met boys from the School. These
walked with a cultivated waddle. Upon their heads
they wore flattish straw hats. Short jackets reached
to their waists. Beneath these their posteriors bulged
respectfully. Extremely scrubbed, they showed a
pallid aloofness. At sight of them Storman’s old-time
bull-laugh boomed out. But it died away almost at
once. The blatant and the obvious had ceased to
tickle him so easily. Russia. Forgetful of Norah, he
strode up the hill. Ashamed of his lack of good manners,
Norah followed.
They reached the top and passed through a church¬
yard where great pieces of masonry lay upon the
dead, making certain of no premature resurrection.
But roses bloomed through all the churchyard. Norah
pointed to a group of them and stopped to smell them,
pressing her small nose against a bloom. Standing so,
she was slim and desirable, with narrow hips, breast¬
less, with straight, thin legs. Hatless, Storman
smoothed his hair with characteristic gesture. With
his stick he pointed to the roses.
“They grow so well because they’re manured with
the dead,’’ he said.
“You’ve a horrible mind.’’
Speaking to him, she seldom called him either
James or Mr. Storman. Somehow, he was never
either to her. But his attraction deepened. Walking
with him, even while she plotted against him a great
fear would come upon her. He was mad, mad, and she
wanted someone sane and sly and reasonable and
cruel.
STAINED RADIANCE
177
She left him to peer at the inscription on a tomb
surmounted with dog-roses. Storman stood still,
looking at her with cold, clear eyes.
They came out on a terrace high above green
Middlesex. Below were hedges and the whitenesses
of roads and the long brown scaurs evolved of the
Metropolitan Railway. It was a day of dead and level
sunshine and down the hill gnats pinged and boomed.
“It’s lovely,” said Norah, leaning upon a railing
and looking at the autumnal world. Storman pointed
with his stick to the far horizon.
“Windsor is over there.”
Unavailingly they searched the sky-line for Windsor.
It was regally withdrawn. Presently their attention
was attracted by a dog-fight on the terrace behind
them. Two terriers, filled with Sunday energy, each
abrim with the lust to assert its superiority and fitness
to survive, fought. Wurring, they had affixed teeth
in each other’s necks and, rolling in the dust, tore out
great lumps of hair and hide. A thin screaming arose
from them. Their owners, respectively a middle-aged
woman with red cheeks and a lanky youth with a
pimply face, belaboured them unavailingly. Storman
leant his back against the railing, lit a cigarette, and
watched.
The terrace was filling with men and women return¬
ing from worshipping God. Shocked and eager, they
crowded around the dog-fight, occasionally prodding
the combatants with umbrellas. Becoming bored,
Storman forced his way through the circle, bent over
the two dogs and drew a small packet from his pocket.
With his hand extended he emptied the contents of
the packet over the heads and eyes of the two terriers.
Thereat they tore themselves apart with ear-splittirg
yelps, and, capering and barking insanely, fled down
the hill.
M
STAINED RADIANCE
178
“What’s in the packet ?” asked Norah, wide-eyed,
the while the occupants of the terrace regarded
Storman with indifference and pointed out to one
another where Windsor should be.
“Pepper.” Storman followed the flight of the dogs
with speculative eyes. “I keep it to throw in the
faces of Fascists who interrupt public meetings.”
“But that’s not fair, is it ? Fascists ?”
“The bourgeoisie produces a certain romantic scum.
Under proper conditions and temperature this scum
froths and ferments. It is then Fascism.”
“Oh.”
“That is really all that it is.” He mused over
unseen Windsor. “The Fascists will never concern
you. Unless they lynch me after we’re married. Then
you can sue them.”
“We’re not married yet.”
“No.” He looked at her absentmindedly. “Thank
God.”
They walked down the steep hillside to the lower
churchyard. There graves were smaller and meaner
than those around the church. Some were fenced
about with iron railings, some had new gravestones
whereon the stonemason’s name and address, in dis¬
creet capitals, apprised the living of the unostentatious
comfort that the dead might cheaply attain. Storman
pointed to the inscriptions.
“Competition. They lived their lives under it.
Even in death they cannot escape.”
“When I am dead,” said Norah, “I’d like to be
burned and my ashes taken out to sea and scattered
on the water.”
“When I am dead,” said Storman, “they may put
my head on Tower Bridge and dissect the rest of
me. I shall be elsewhere.”
“Wliere’ll you be ?”
STAINED RADIANCE 179
“Organizing the Communists in hell, I’ve no doubt,”
said Storman.
Norah yawned and sat down on the grave of a
greengrocer. She was tired. Storman looked at his
watch. It was an Ingersoll.
“Let’s go up to the Hill village for lunch.”
There, in the “Swan” they sat long, till it was after¬
noon, eating watercress and trout and drinking cider.
Made so by the cider, Norah’s red lips grew redder.
She talked of London, of the Civil Service, of Ireland.
Storman leant his arms upon the table and looked at
her gravely and absently. Outside the sun marched
across the sky.
“It’s cooler now,” said Norah, in a pause. “We’re
wasting the day. Where can we go ?”
“Down the Hill.”
“So soon ?”
“By a different way.”
Outside the inn, they were conscious that it had
not grown cooler. It was as if they stood at the
mouth of a furnace-door flung ajar. After walking
for a few minutes Norah’s thin dress began to cling to
her hips. She panted a little. Her face grew white.
Swinging his stick, bareheaded and sated, Storman
whistled the “Red Flag”.
“I’ll faint if I can’t get some place to rest.”
“You’ve eaten too much food,” said Storman.
Then : “I know a place.”
He led her down the hill by a side-path through
a narrow lane bordered by trees and red flowers. She
never learned what those red flowers were. In
remembrance ever after they danced in a hot-smelling
wind, under a blue haze of heat. They passed through
a wicket-gate, to a field set with scattered clumps of
trees and the brown flanks of grazing horses sweat-
gleaming in the sword-fall of sunshine.
l8o STAINED RADIANCE
“This is the place,” said Storman and lay down in
a shaded place beneath a tree. Norah stood looking
at him and the grass doubtfully till he reached
up a hand and pulled her down beside him. Thereat,
of a sudden blotted out, horses and field vanished.
They were alone in a dim, green world. In the grass
a grasshopper chirped and chirped. Norah sighed.
“Miggod, this’s better.”
Storman lay upon his back and closed his eyes.
Norah touched his cheek.
“Don't sleep. Tell me a story.”
He rolled over and took her in his arms. “We will
act one, instead,” he said.
She trembled against him, seeing the look in his
eyes. Nor, with the stirring of the commonest of
desires, had these eyes grown the more human. They
were a colourless flame. They seemed to look through
her, through her eyes, through her brain, through her
body, till they saw within her that nestling shape
that shamed her. His lips met hers, and, pressure on
pressure, kissed her, deeply and strongly, so that a
wild surprise and fear came upon her. She struggled.
“No, please, Jim !”
He took his lips away. Thereat she wound her
arms around his neck, impelled to the action by a
force beyond herself. She felt his hands upon her
body. In a delicious ecstasy she felt her bones and
flesh melt and dissolve in a whirling dance of atoms.
Faster and faster they whirled. . . , Lying together,
they trembled as the strings of a violin played upon by
a master hand. Storman’s bull laugh smothered itself
in her hair. . . .
Till late in the afternoon she watched him, where
he had fallen asleep by her side. Sometimes she would
draw the hair back from his forehead, broodingly, and
then sit with her hand still on his hair, listening to
STAINED RADIANCE
181
far voices beyond the trees, to the trampling of the
hoofs of the grazing horses. Content, sun-flushed,
weary, she looked down on him.
She had found her salvation.
Subchapter v
All the morning stout men had been engaged in
carrying sacks of inferior potatoes and salted meat
aboard the troopship Culmer Castle, In the Mediter¬
ranean this meat would mildly putrefy, giving off a
sweetish odour sickening to the orderlies of the mess-
decks. The troop-decks were in tiers of three, reaching
far down into the bowels of the ship. An ex-German
cattle-boat, she had been renamed in 1917 and refitted
for her present purpose. But drinking-water taps
were still labelled wasser, and in the lower decks a
smell of cowdung, faint and musk, an aged, weary
smell, lay quiescent till the Mediterranean suns that
would sweeten the meat would stir it also to expansion
and pervasion.
Above the central gangway was nailed a great
poster. It read :
IF YOU WANT A JOB
that includes
GOOD PAY
GOOD FOOD
GOOD HOUSING,
A MONTH’S HOLIDAY A YEAR
and
WORLD TRAVEL
You should
JOIN THE ROYAL AIR FORCE I
Pointing at it, the stevedores laughed and said
they didn’t bloody well think.
Now and then a greasy rain descended on South-
182 stained radiance
ampton Docks. Customs officials sweated in close,
small offices. To chance airmen they spoke with a
brusque cautiousness which concealed a certain pique.
For they were not entitled to salutes.
In the warehouse opposite the Culmer Castle berth
Air Force embarkation officers walked to and fro,
marshalling the draft and its two thousand kitbags.
Bagging at the knees and the seat of his breeches,
the sergeant-major called Bonzo lined up the airmen.
Sweating, he knew them for bastards. On an officer
approaching he would shout out "Atten” and pause,
then add “shun”. Hearing this last syllable the
airmen would bring the heels of their hobnailed boots
close together and sway. Bonzo would then salute
the officer, and the officer salute Bonzo. Then the
officer would say “Sergeant-major. Waw.”
In these pastimes several hours passed and the day
waned. Late afternoon drew on. A hurried medical
inspection of the airmen began. Filing past the medical
officer they removed their shirts and nether garments
and stood with upraised arms. Four men were dis¬
covered to have syphilis. They were placed under
arrest. Nearby, in the transport sheds, Air Force
clerks worked with the collars of their tunics hooked
„ up close to their necks. In this manner they retained
a smart and airman-like appearance. Above their
collars their faces shone red and moist and unset, and
upon the many documents passing through their
hands red-brown stains began to appear.
All afternoon a group of women and children stood
and waited outside this warehouse. They were the
wives and children of the airmen of the draft. They
had thin Cockney voices and bright eyes. They wore
cheap garments and the shoes of the children required
mending. Now and then some woman would speculate
aloud as to what was happening behind the locked doors
STAINED RADIANCE
183
of the warehouse. Then the other women would laugh
or say that the speaker was a one. Underfed, nomadic,
mostly shopgirls or domestic servants whom airmen
had first seduced and then married, these women looked
at the warehouse and the Culmer Castle with bright,
interested, dead eyes.
Presently, unseen at its source, they observed a
vast insect-crawl of pale blue upon the gangways of
the ship. The draft was being embarked. At the same
time a fog rose out of the docks, advanced in a solid
wall, and obliterated the ship. At its coming one of
the women went to the locked door of the warehouse
and beat upon it. In cover of the fog, she found
herself beginning to weep, and a low moaning that
once or twice before she had heard escape from her
lips frightened her. Her beating shook the door.
“Jiwant ?” asked a voice from inside the warehouse.
“Let me in. Please, let me in.”
The door opened. A sergeant wearing the red arm-
band of the police looked out. Showing lead-stopped
teeth, be grinned. A tidy bit of stuff.
“Now then, missus, what’s wrong ?’’
“My husband—he's gone aboard the ship. I haven't
said good-bye. Nor any of the women out here.’’
The sergeant removed his hat and scratched a
close-cropped head. “Must be some mix-up,” he
explained. “Wait a bit.” He shut the door in the
woman’s face and strolled away into the warehouse.
Under a light at a convenient distance he stopped,
pulled out an early edition of the Evening News,
and read the winners of the 3.30.
The woman waited. Suddenly the door in front
of her opened. She gave a cry.
“Oh, John, I thought you were going without—
Oh, God !”
Garland, bebelted, sweating, grimy, took her in his
184
STAINED RADIANCE
arms. He panted as one who had been running,
and kicked the door to behind him.
“I volunteered for baggage fatigue and managed to
get back,” he explained. "The gangways’ll be up in a
minute. Say good-bye, darling.”
Blindly in his arms, Thea wept with the frenzy of a
scared child. ‘‘Don’t go. Stay with me. I'm afraid.”
In the heart of Garland arose an insane hate—hate
of the place. Life, Thea, himself. He shook her,
kissed her.
‘‘Don’t cry. Thea, don’t cry.”
A thin scream arose and volumed piercingly outside
the warehouse. It was the siren of the Cidmer Castle.
Garland’s hands gripped Thea’s.
“Dear, I'll come back long before three years.
I swear I will. I’ll come back before your time comes.”
And, at the lie so told to her, Thea of a sudden
grew quiet, wiped the sweat-laden face of Garland with
her handkerchief, kissed that face, saw it disappear,
and stood in a screaming sirocco of sound as the
C'lilmer Castle flung off its gangway.
And a dead certainty came upon her. She would
never see him again. Garland, her lover, boy and
poet and care-free mocker, was gone for ever.
Subchapter vi
She hugged a pillow in bed that night and in the
morning poked it, sleepily, to make it get out and
turn off the alarum clock.
CHAPTER THE EIGHTH
Wherein Success, always a Pleasing Phenomenon,
comes to Andreas van Koupa, Garland meditates
upon the Grand Pyramid, and S tor man is apprised
of himself as an Agent of Mr. Shaw’s Life Force.
Subchapter i
THE White Argus made its third appearance
in November. Besides numerous drawings and
colourless paintings, it contained three poems by
Mynheer Andreas van Koupa. In one of these he
questioned the existence of God and rebuked atheists ;
in another he spoke of the shadows under a girl’s
breasts ; in the third he described the sensations of
a man writhing in stomach-ache.
The poem describing Briarton’s “Nocturne” appeared
over the signature of Mrs. Gayford. It was hailed by
the White Artists as a work of genius. Amazed and
enthusiastic, shabby young men went to drink tea
with the author and wonder how she had written such
a thing ; the fact made them vaguely uneasy. It was
like finding the cook, an enthusiastic believer in the
Holy Presence at Communion, indulging in cannibalism
in the back-kitchen on the strength of that belief.
Sweating, but less freely now, for the colder weather
drew on, Mrs. Gayford held triumphant salons. But
into the gatherings gradually crept the serpent of
dissension.
By the majority of the White Artists the contri¬
butions of Koupa were considered to have defaced
their journal. These contributions were denounced
185
i86
STAINED RADIANCE
to Mrs. Gayford as reactionary and Victorian. Most
violent in denunciation of them was Briarton himself.
This was at a tea-party. At that moment Koupa
was shown in. He brought a poem and read it aloud
in an unfriendly silence. It was called DUST.
“I have drunk deeply of the ancient wine.
Wandered a summer in the Sumer land.
Heard in the dusk the bells of Cretan kine
And maiden's song across the Cnossan strand :
Seen, in the sunset lowe against his God,
The sculptor-scribe who carved the Runic plan
Of suns and shames and serpents intertrod
On terraces of Toltec Yucatan.
“I hear new voices down the English morn.
Alien laughter by the Lakeland meres.
The hymnal chorus rise to Gods unborn—
“Far in the seed-time of the sleeping years
I see the Christ, an outcast, stand forlorn,
A dream, a tale, a wonderment of tears.
“This so-little thing," said Koupa, “I wrote this
morning."
He had written it many years before, but had
newly revised it with a view to its publication in the
White Argus. Mrs. Gayford refilled his cup with
tea.
“It is exquisite," she said, and then became aware
of Briarton's angry eyes.
“Is this—work—of Mr. Cooper’s to appear in the
White Argus ?" he asked.
Something in his tone caused Mrs. Gayford to look
at him closely. The other voices became stilled. Young
men ceased to fill hungry mouths with cake and discuss
Pirandello. It was felt to be a moment of crisis.
Mrs. Gayford considered Briarton, considered
Koupa, and then made her decision. “It is,” she said.
Briarton stood up. “Then no more works of mine,
STAINED RADIANCE l8?
nor, I think, of my friends, will appear between
the covers of the White Argus”
Koupa drank tea and to Briarton raised insolent
eyebrows.
“Surely I have not yet seen any—works—of yours
there, m’sieu ?”
Briarton thereon walked out of the room. He was
speedily followed by the young men. Next day Mrs.
Gayford was informed that she had been discharged
from the editorship of the White Argus ; later in
the day she received an urgent appeal to settle with
the printer the cost of the White Argus’s third issue.
But, left alone with Andreas van Koupa, Mrs.
Gayford had listened to the planning of a new magazine.
This also would be under her editorship. It would deal
with modern poetry and would be called The Lyre.
Real poetry, not the shams and symbolisms of Sitwellism
and the like putrescent cancers, would be revived in
its pages. It would purify the English language and
inspire the English-speaking nations. Uplifted, Mrs.
Gayford sat with shining eyes and skin, seeing herself
in the histories of the future immortalized as the
Reviver of Poesy.
“And, madam so dear, when we have lit the torch,
when I have proven myself on that so-little field where
I am armed to conquer, then shall I come to you and
ask you to give me the right to conquest in a yet
sweeter field.”
Mrs. Gayford started. The idea was genuinely new
to her. A startled blush mottled her skin. Looking
at Koupa, she saw his shabbiness, the raggedness of
his finger-nails, his frayed shirt. But these could be
remedied. . . .
The wife of the great poet. A second Mary
Shelley. . . .
Mrs. Gayford held out sudden, girlish hands.
i88
STAINED RADIANCE
“Are you not proved already ?” she whispered.
God mine, the so-mottled old sow wanted a little
of the love-making !
Subchapter ii
John Garland sat on the top of the Grand Pyramid
of Gizeh.
It was Sunday afternoon. From the Air Force
camp at Heliopolis he had taken a tramcar down into
Cairo, had changed at the Esbekieh Gardens, had
there inquired for routes and other tramcars to take
him to the Pyramids. Four dragomen, wearing bowler
hats and the tunics of colonels, had insisted on assisting
him. In the heat and smell they had all piled in behind
him on the tramcar for the Pyramids. The conductor
had blown a small wooden horn. Streets, brown, dusty,
uninteresting, had slid past. The conductor had come
round for fares. The four dragomen had referred him
to Garland.
"Go to hell," said Garland.
Protesting, the four dragomen had been flung off
the car and Garland had proceeded on to Gizeh.
Arrived there he had inspected the caves in the hillside
below the Pyramids, had walked across the scuttering
sand ledges till he stood in front of the Sphinx. Looking
up in the battered face, he laughed at sight of the
wonder of the ages. For it had the face of an unfortunate
pugilist.
It looked like Mr. Beckett.
"The dim savage who planned its carving can
smile among the shades. Providing he ever dreamt of
such a'Thing as pity or humour. It is a great thing to
be funny—even unintentionally—rather than impres¬
sive after five thousand years."
STAINED RADIANCE 189
And, chuckling, he went back across the sands to
the Pyramids.
Now he sat on the top of Cheops and ate peanuts.
He had purchased a bag of them before he ascended.
At that warm hour he was the only visitor who had
as yet attained the summit, though below him little
specks drifted here and there amidst the great coned
masses—tourist parties, these, from Gizeh and Cairo.
Beside him, on the top of the Pryamid, two natives
squatted and scratched the soles of their feet. One of
them had bottles of lemonade and obscene photographs
for sale.
Garland cracked a peanut and looked out over the
desert. The Moquattam hills lowered grotesquely
through the sun-haze.
“They were like that five thousand years ago, when
the queer, repulsive half-humans upbuilded these
hideous masses of rock and brickwork. They hardly
change, though the type of dark-minded savage beneath
them changes eternally. The thousands who have
come since the days of Herodotus to look upon the
Pyramids and sneer at them ! . . . Am I sneering ?
God forbid ! They are not worth a sneer—those, the
most boring monuments to futility that have ever
been erected.
“But they have value. Their colossal conceit,
had we but a single psychologist-historian with a
spark of genius, could throw more light upon the
evolution of mentality than all the rock-paintings and
books of the dead and suchlike petrified snoopety
whimperings in the dark. They mark that supreme
apishness of the savage become a barbarian—an
apishness far beyond the concept of any ape.
“For, at a certain stage in the evolution of man,
when he was half-beast, half-savage, with his tail-
stump still visible and hair in a mat across his shoulders
igo
STAINED RADIANCE
and buttocks, it would seem that he had little self-
consciousness. He had lost, being then a mongrel,
that animal swagger which induced him to antic at
the watering-places and thump his chest over a
disputed piece of carrion. He had no conceit.
“But the savage-barbarian evolved an apishness, a
conceit, beyond thinking in the world before his time.
Dimly conscious of power, those elevated headmen and
witch-doctors of ancient Egypt—surely the most
unattractive and owlish of all experimenters in
civilization—grew out of their minds Conceit like a
giant tumour. They invented immortality—an
eternity of time wherein to fertilize the wombs of
eternal squaws, to prostrate eternally their already-
decaying bodies in front of other deified Conceits,
to eternally eat and drink and perform all the obscene
functions of the body. So, for that aftermath, for that
everlasting time of stinking fecundity, they invented
ways of preserving their bodies, and their slaves and
sub-slaves, themselves victims of an insane Conceit
in that they believed their masters divine and them¬
selves capable of apprehending divinity, built those
senseless monuments to the exaggerated struttings
of the belly-filled ape.”
Increasing, rather than waning in strength, was the
afternoon sun. Upon the summit of the Pyramid it
became scorching. Perspiration became sticky, but
dryly so, like glue, around the inner rim of Garland’s
topee. He purchased a bottle of lemonade, and,
inverting it, drank. Lowering the bottle, he wished
he had brought his notebook in which to set down neat
thoughts and aphorisms for insertion in the revised
draft of his novel.
For his novel was now completed, and, as soon as
he was definitely posted from Heliopolis to some
Air Force office where a typewriter was available, he
STAINED RADIANCE igi
would set about typing the final version. Long ago
his heroine had been successfully seduced, various
other characters had died ironically, failed ironically,
succeeded ironically, postured before the curtain
for a grand ironic tableau. Thought of his novel
pleasured Garland. Unfolding it in his mind, he
proceeded to re-read the pages. The two natives
behind him spoke thinly, pipingly. They pointed down
the Pyramid. With grins, they touched Garland’s
arm and gesticulated.
“Well ?”
He looked. A large American woman was ascending
Cheops. Propelled behind by two Arabs, she clutched
uncertainly up the gigantic steps. Her panting
sounded like the beat of a dynamo. Half-way up
she stuck fast. In response to cries, one of the natives
leapt nimbly down from shelf to shelf to assist in the
haulage.
Garland did not laugh at first. Then suddenly
the irony of the business entered into his soul. He
chuckled.
He himself, seated and philosophizing on the
dung-heap of Cheops’s conceit, was but adding to what
that heap symbolized—the dung-heap up which another
insect came painfully crawling to add its own special
quota.
Subchapter in
“God mine, at last. At last. Post secula. Dream
not, little friend. It comes. At last.
“And the mottled sow purchases a magazine for the
so-long forgotten little poems of mine. And they
will succeed—now, at the last, when to me they are
wind and water. They will succeed—now, when I need
192 STAINED RADIANCE
not fight and toil and strive for their success, when
I need not pester the publishers and pay away the
good guilders to the little sneak-dog agents. They
will succeed.
“God mine, it is time, for I am weary. Grey in the
hair that Laida used to comb those long-gone times
in Haarlem. Where is the little Laida now with her
so-sweet breasts ? And from these so-damned rebel
meetings I’ve gathered rheumatism—the windy
sentiments of half-baked Prometheans ablow on me.
. . . Growing old. Time to go home with the swallows,
my little. Time to go home.
“Akh me, time to go home. And I will put by
the dreams of Spartacus and Christ. Things are so.
All strivings—they are but the spatterings of the
insect in the wayside pool—the insect that hopes to
alter the tides. I will keep me secure in the places
to which I climb, fenced round with the politics and
prejudices of the little bourgeois swine. I shall burn
the torch of art behind their shelter, not see it blown
to dust and ashes on proletecult barricades. God
mine, Art cries for security, for shelter. Have I not
earned the so-little share of those now ?
“Share ? The snivelling little puppety-dogs!
Share ? They will give me all, they who have sneered at
and starved me and refused me. They will bow to me
and photograph me and pay me for writings of fool-
doodle in their little stink-muck reviews. They will
make me the great, the eccentric poet, and, God mine,
shall I spare them ?
“Starving children and darkened brains, I have
finished with you. Ergates, you are the great Beast,
the devouring sick Beast that eternally cries for aid
and sustenance from I and the other fool Prometheans.
You fatten on our blood and sweat and ever
weaken, ever cry aloud for new victims that your
STAINED RADIANCE
193
freedom be bought on guillotine and firing-squad.
I have finished with you. Rot in your kennels. I have
finished.
“Yet I could weep. Eh, but they would stare at
you, here in this placid St. James, they who have lived
their coddled, easy lives since their mothers’ wombs
ejected them, they who reserve their tears for the
bridal chamber and the outsnufhings of their kin!
And I go to join in their warmth and coddling. But
I shall not be of them. All my life long shall I go with
dreams and remembrances of horror and sweetness
that they shall never touch. . . .
“Oh, God mine ! the flags on the barricades and
the dear, wild song of the blood revolt ; the tramping
legions in the snowing streets ; the crawling prisons
of foulness and the hymns of despair and the marching
feet of the midnight jailers leading out the bloody
wounded to the firing-squad. . . . Akh ! And all
the days and nights that thou hast seen—dawn upon
the Red Desert, the stillness of the long flights of
birds. Dawn, austere, unthinkable in purity above
the Cairene hovels. Dawn in the so-dark forests of
great Deutschland. . . . Dawns when in rags, in
hunger, thou awokest to the sting of life and hope
and cried thy little scream of wonder to the paling stars.
. . . God mine, and the nights of love, the blue, soft
nights : I shall not know them again. Tree boughs
dappled with the so-shining stars, moonlight on the
endless trails, darkness alive with the hands and lips
and limbs of shaken love of women—I shall not know
you again. ... I go into the shelter, the safety,
God mine, for I am old. I have paid. I go home.
I shall marry the so-fat sow and live on clean foods
and smooth beds and never again hear the midnight
cry upon the mountains. I shall herd in a scented sty
with those who have never drunk of the blood of
N
194
STAINED RADIANCE
Life. . . . But I have drunk ! In the scented sty
I shall not forget—God mine, I shall not forget!”
In the London streets they stared amazed at a
man who walked into the evening, weeping, with
blinded, unshielded eyes.
Subchapter iv
"Oh. Jim.”
"Hello, Norah. Alone ?”
"Yes. I’ve tea ready in the sitting-room. There’s
a comfy fire. It’s horribly cold. Still raining ?”
"Winter’s knocking at the door,” said Storman,
removing his gloves. "Listen.”
A gust of late October wind wailed up from the
River amongst the houses in Rosemount Avenue.
Against the windowpanes sounded the sveet-sveet
of thin, secretive rain. Norah shivered.
"Come into the sitting-room.”
It was warm in there, with a heaped coal-fire and
dancing shadows and still glow. Outside the windows,
with the curtains still undrawn, the evening tapped
urgently. Storman went over and looked out.
"Soon be night. I came down the street up there.
A crowded street. The folk were hurrying. Norah,
I saw a sight that made me sick.”
"What ?”
"An old man standing in the gutter. A draggled,
aimless old man. He had no laces in his boots. He
wasn’t selling anything. I don’t think he was even
standing. He was just drifting in a dead kind of way.
His coat was a green mould rag. His face was clouded
with a dim trouble in the rain. It was a face like my
father’s. My God, Norah, I thought it was my father.”
Norah said nothing. She stood by the fire, looking
STAINED RADIANCE
195
at Storman’s back with startled eyes. He turned round
suddenly, and she saw upon his face a helpless
terror.
“My God, Norah ! I never realized it before—the
abyss of poverty. It might have been my father—
that old man with the eyes of a sick bird. I've done
nothing for him or his like. Communism’s done nothing.
All the world goes by. ... I’ve schooled myself to
be cruel and unwavering—for what ? There’s a greater
cruelty—the Cruelty of the Streets, senseless, unemo¬
tional as that of an octopus. There is something
worse that the beast in man—an evil older than
Life itself.”
The windows rattled in a sudden new gust and now
came another sound—the flop-flop of blown wet leaves.
Storman swung the curtain across the window. His
great laugh boomed out.
“I've been frightening you. Where’s the switch ?”
Norah switched on the light. Storman sat down
in an arm-chair by the fire and stroked his face with
fingers that quivered. Then he took them away and
looked slowly at the fire, at the tea-table, at Norah.
He sighed.
“Comfortable here, Norah. If I weren’t a modern
Communist I’d marry you and you would have my
slippers waiting for me nightly, and be an old-fashioned,
illiterate wife, as are the wives of Revolutionists, and
have mild flirtations with the gasmeterman and the
butcher. . . . Three lumps, please.”
“Here you are.”
“Thanks. Damn.”
His shaking hand had half-emptied his cup upon
the carpet. He stood up, and poured himself fresh tea,
not looking at Norah. His face was grey beneath the
tan.
The sudden encounter with the old man had shaken
STAINED RADIANCE
196
him in a fashion unbelievable. He had suddenly and
horrifyingly been humanized by a realization of the
cold-blooded inhumanity of man.
“I’m sorry. This'll pass. Sit down, Norah. You
look warm. Ah, me. Good for lying in a husband's
arms these chill nights that are coming.”
Norah drank tea. Her face had flushed. She always
coloured at such references of Storman's. Since that
day in the field below Harrow Hill she had not thought
of Storman without the blood darkening her cheeks.
Grown shameless herself in matters of sex during
her years in London, she yet, by some curious inversion,
associated Storman, even in his most frank remarks,
with innocence. She ate brown bread and butter and
rhubarb jam.
“Sometimes marriage doesn’t mean a husband,
anyway. I went to see Thea yesterday.”
“Thea ?”
“Yes. Remember that girl—red hair, grey eyes—
at the flat when you came that Sunday ? Ages ago.
She married the airman, John Garland.”
“Oh. And what happened?”
“Garland’s been sent abroad—to Egypt or Palestine.
Thea’s living in two furnished rooms in Shepherd’s
Bush. She’s horribly lonely. It’s a shame. Just
because she's so fond of Garland, she never has any
other man for a friend. And I’m the only girl she
knows. Now she spends days by herself. Moping.
It’s horrible.”
Once Storman would not have thought her capable
of such emotion, or, believing it, would have disregarded
it. But the cracks in the walls of his world were
shivering wider and wider apart.
“When are you going to see her next ?”
“Wednesday evening, I think.”
“I’ll come with you.”
STAINED RADIANCE
197
“All right.” Surprised.
“Unless you think her neighbours’ll talk. Or her
husband disapprove. But, being married, she should
be freed from the convention which demands alike of
you, Norah, as a Civil Servant, and of Mary, as the
mother of a god, virginity.”
“And neither of us ”
“I am not responsible for both, Norah.” He set
down his cup and caught her hands and laughed into
her eyes. The lights flickered to and fro under his
even brows. She watched these lights, fascinated.
“Am I ? And you’re glad I’m responsible for one—
aren’t you ?”
She let her chin sink on her breast. Her eyes, on
a level with his, did not return his gaze, but looked
sideways into the fire. For the warmth and the sweet¬
ness of her and the picture she made, for the wanton¬
ness of her, her shy lustfulness and matter-of-factness,
for these things and the comfort and homeliness of the
room, yet another sigh was stifled in Storman.
The swallows were going home.
“Aren’t you ?” He repeated his question, idly,
pleasured by stroking the soft skin of her arm, at the
tingle of delight that went through him touching the
skin sheath of her forearm. She turned her eyes on his
slowly—bright, wavering eyes full of firelight reflec¬
tions.
“Are you ?”
“The man is always pleased, I think. He likes
to believe himself a conqueror, though it’s really the
other way about. . . . Why, what’s wrong ?”
The brightness of her eyes had been the tears in
them. Now they fell on Storman’s face. He took her
in his arms. As he did so she slipped her arms—
fiercely, despairingly—about his neck, as on that day
in the Harrow field.
I
1
STAINED RADIANCE
198
'Oh, Jim, please be glad, please help me. I—we’re
going to have a baby !”
He held her without moving. She could not see
his face because her own was hidden. A lump of coal
fell out on the hearth. Storman thought : Coal, it
will be scarce this winter. Nationalization . . .
She had said . . .
He had a sudden vision of the old man of the gutter.
A dizziness, overwhelming, unphysical, closed his
eyes.
She had said . . .
Subchapter v
Storman and Norah were married on the 18th of
November—at a church to please Norah and at a
Registry Office to please Storman. It was a dry, cold,
wintry day and Norah’s nose needed frequent repowder¬
ing. The best man was Edward Snooks, the bridesmaid
Ellen. They had lunch at the Strand Corner House
and came out to see a passing of the Prince of Wales,
in state, and wearing a large, woolly hat. For the first
time that day Storman’s great bull-laugh rang out.
Earlier the same day there had been much confusion
and hurrying to and fro in the house of Mrs. Gayford.
Mrs. Gayford herself had risen an hour before it was
necessary. She was bathed and perfumed and, standing
the while like a stout sacrifice to the Sidonian Ashtaroth,
buttoned into her underclothes. She trembled, and
her eyes grew for an hour soft and youthful.
The wedding ceremony was at St. Judas’s, the
wedding to be performed by the Canon himself.
Mrs. Gayford’s friends assembled early ; the Canon
came early. The church was suffused with a bright,
cold light. It grew to eleven o’clock.
STAINED RADIANCE
199
“Here she comes."
Came the bride on the arm of a brother-in-law—
he who had made the allowance to the disowned
Robert. He had laid aside Gibbon for the day and,
tall, stooping, asthmatic, moved angrily up the aisle
with Mrs. Gayford's arm on his sleeve. He realized
that he would have been much better employed
reading the footnotes on Zozimus than in marrying
this whore of Jack's to that unwashed Dutchman.
And, with a Gibbonian irony, he looked round the
church, at the stained-glass windows where anaemic
hopes and charities froze in the chill November
weather, and at the high altar. This last he knew
for a relic of the ancient sacrificial stone whereon
the priest was wont to sacrifice the victim, ripping
open his stomach to read the portents in the entrails.
Standing waiting in the purple blur of music, he
wondered what portents they would read of this
marriage in the entrails of a sacrifice. Beside him,
stout and preserved and clothed in fine raiment, his
sister-in-law was unusually pale. Her flabby lips
shook a little. He wondered if she were thinking
better of it—if the prospective embraces of the groom
were troubling her. Damned good job if he troubled
her considerably—she's still young enough for it.
A child a year in the good old fashion would give her
something to do. But that was hardly to be expected
these days when contraception allowed women to
practise prostitution without paying the piper.
Ah ! the groom. Weedy, but clean. Damned i
I like the look of him even now. Something about
the fellow that’s dark—they have that tinge, some of
those Dutchmen : the old Walloon taint. Borrowed
the money for his clothes, I suppose. M’m. Has a
sense of humour, at least. Fairly plainly regards
Griselda as a mine of home comforts and not impressed
200
STAINED RADIANCE
with the figure she's managed to struggle into for the
occasion. Wonder the damned woman doesn't burst
her stays.
The Canon. The chill November light showed him
for a tall, ascetic cleric with the face of a grave, cruel
horse. In and out of church he propounded the belief
that the creed of Christ was a disgusting proletarian
superstition. He was an agnostic, but believed that a
return to Mithraism, from which he traced all that was
good in Christianity, alone could bring order and
discipline to the countries of Western Europe. He
attacked St. Paul and Dr. Marie Stopes in the monthly
reviews, and declared that the true lot of labour was
helotry and gang-servitude.
The ceremony began. Koupa and Mrs. Gayford
knelt and rose and made responses, Koupa in a clear,
mellow voice, Mrs. Gayford in nervous squeaks.
And, by the saying of the ancient words they were
married, and the man who had crossed the ice to fight
for Kronstadt was given dominion over the body of
a woman whom he called the fat sow.
By evening they were on the Dover train, en route
for Calais and Greece, where the honeymoon was to
be spent. Koupa walked the corridors of the train,
smoking a cigar, fairly-clad and washed, with his nails
trimmed and his hair brushed. He put his head out
of the window once.
“God mine, the smell of the good, wild wind !”
Then he closed the window and went to his wife.
CHAPTER THE NINTH
Wherein Christmas Eve, which Some say commemor¬
ates Christ and Some Charles Dickens, is celebrated
without Plagiarism.
Subchapter Introductory
IT was Christmas Eve. Long sheets of rain fell
on the London streets, washing westwards till
over the suburbs and so by Middlesex and the West
Counties it was an attenuated drizzle that passed in
Cornwall and the Scilly Isles into a woolly fog. South,
across the Channel, was frost and brightness, with
a sinking sun that smouldered on the horizon of all
France, but rose a little by Mentone and the Azure
Coast, cleared and grew bright in Italy, lay warm
and steaming over the gloaming of the Mediterranean.
East and South Egypt lay cold and crisp, in the grip
of even such frost as held France, but up the Syrian
coast and over the mountains of Lebanon and Moab
the rain fell steadily, windlessly, on red, churned
earth.
So on all that stretch of the world where the ancient
pre-humans first wandered and prowled and dreamed by
shivering campfires, where first reason glimmered
and smoked and died and grew to life again, where
first the magic hopes and cults and revilements grew
into chains of thought, into creeds and beliefs and the
tissue of racial brainstuff, came Christmas Eve in its
guises of hail and faint heat. Between the Little Bear
and the Southern Cross, where the sparse hordes once
followed the sun southwards from the last advances
SOI
202
STAINED RADIANCE
of the ice-caps, and so passed away as a dream in
that dim morning of time, their descendants, peopling
the western outjutment of Asia as thickly as the ants,
walked and looked that evening with each behind
his mind a giant Ghost of thought, pale and remote,
infrequently glimpsed and remembered.
So it was in the lands that lie between and beneath
the Bear and the Cross.
Subchapter i
Ellen Ledgworth came out of the folding doors of
Cocotte Soeurs at half-past five. She had been let off
early, for she had worked overtime on the previous
five nights. Edward was waiting for her, in the rain,
with a steady drip of water from his hatbrim. He
kissed her with frowsy lips, having first raised his hat
in an ex-officer’s gesture of greeting.
“You've been drinking beer, dear,’’ said Ellen,
placidly.
“Only a spot. Met some of the lads of the regiment.
Ugh ! It wasn’t half so muggy on the Ypres Salient
as here. By God, and there was some fun in life
then !’’
“Better where you are, dear,’’ said Ellen, walking
by his side. “Button your coat or you’ll catch cold.
Where shall we go for tea ? I'm very hungry.’’
“That little Scotch place in the Circus is all right.’’
“That’ll be nice.’’
Presently, sitting in front of a view of Edinburgh
Castle, decorated with tartan, they ate home-made
cakes from the restaurant’s bakeries in Kennington.
These they spread with Scotch butter from Denmark.
Edward talked earnestly. He had been put up for an
ex-officer’s club, but had not at the moment sufficient
STAINED RADIANCE
203
money to pay down. In a month or so, when he got a
rise 
And, drinking tea, he held his head in three-quarters
profile towards Ellen.
“Well, I’d like to help you, Edward, but I just can’t.
You know you never paid me back that loan of Thea
Mayven’s which I paid for you. And Eve had to buy
a lot of clothes lately. You haven’t seen my new
jumper yet, have you ?”
“No.”
“Awfully pretty, I think. I hope you’ll like it.
Where are we going after this ?”
“How the devil should I know ?”
“Ted, you mustn’t talk to me like that.”
“Oh, mustn’t I ?” He spoke with a sudden, savage
contempt, lowering his voice to preserve appearances
but with the growing discontent of months overboiling
in utterance. “Mustn’t do this and mustn’t do that.. . .
Who the devil do you think you are ? It comes a bit
thick when a damned shopgirl says what I must and
must not do.”
“All right, Edward. If you feel like that the best
thing we can do is to stop seeing each other.”
“Don't worry, you won’t see me again.”
“All right,” said Ellen placidly. “We needn’t
quarrel.”
“Needn’t quarrel ? You—think you’re a woman ?
God help anyone who ever tried to marry you. You’ve
as much life in you as a suet pudding. There's any
amount of girls know how to keep a man. You don’t.
I mean it this time.”
Ellen’s tears subsided placidly. “All right, Edward.
Good-bye.”
Snooks stood up, took his hat and coat and then
stopped to search his pockets. His face was pale grey
with rage. He was elaborately polite.
204
STAINED RADIANCE
“I’m sorry I’ve got no change. Send me a note to
my digs and let me know what the bill is.”
“It’s all right, Edward. I knew I’d have to pay,
anyway.” She considered him placidly, and then
enunciated a shattering opinion. “And I don’t think
much of ex-officers if they’re all like you.”
In a moment she was left to herself, looking up at
Edinburgh Castle. When the waitress next passed she
ordered more scones and butter.
Subchapter it
James Storman had been going over the member¬
ship lists of the Anarchocommunist Party and dictating
letters to individuals with initial letters ranging from
A to G. Above his desk hung a large map. On a ledge
underneath this map reposed a little heap of red flags.
As the answers came back from members he would
place the flags in position around the districts where
members resided.
Yearly, since the General Strike, a questionnaire
had been sent out to each Communist. Had the
member had any military training, could he ride a
motor-cycle, did he possess a motor-car, had he the
right of entry to any public building ? Yearly the
answers grew in bulk. In backyards of slums and
suburban houses, in colleges and casual wards, the
five thousand Communists of Great Britain furbished
up their motor-cycles and knowledge of forming fours
in order to be prepared for the next great struggle.
“Working out the population of Great Britain at
forty-five million,” said Storman to himself, “the odds
will run something like 9,000 to every Communist.”
Last to leave the Party offices that Christmas
Eve, he walked down to the Strand and a bus. The
STAINED RADIANCE
205
vehicle was crowded inside, so he ascended to the top
and in smeary darkness and rain rode home by winding
miles of streetway to Peckham.
Below a dingy brick tenement let out in flats he
stopped and looked up and saw in the third storey
the dimness of a lighted window. He stood still in the
rain, looking at it with a queer passion. Then he sighed,
a long slow sigh.
Home.
All day Norah had been working in the flat, wearily,
till her hands ached with scrubbing, with bed-making,
with disinfecting the lavatory. Between whiles she
had had to ponder the question of a dinner for Storman
on his return. They had dinner each evening at seven
o’clock. From dawn till dusk Storman was seldom
at home, being occupied with the emancipation of
the working-classes.
Twice that afternoon, going into the sitting-room,
Norah had found the fire out, for the coals were poor
and cheap. Relighting it, she had cried because she
noted the roughened condition of her hands. Also,
she had suddenly been sick.
So, day after day in the little Peckham flat, she
was wearied and bored to the verge of madness. Hating
housework, there were moments, scrubbing at greasy
pots or excavating lumps of spilt suet from the choked
jets of the gas stove, when she would put her knuckles
to her mouth to prevent herself screaming. Once
she had started a scream, but the sound of it had
frightened her and she had left off. Far down the
dreary corridor of the hours the event of Storman’s
return would each day lie in wait like a dim beast.
She raised a flushed face from the gas-stove as
the thin face of her husband was obtruded round the
kitchen door. He raised his eyebrows.
“Well, how’s the housewife ?”
206
STAINED RADIANCE
He came in and put his arms around her, negligently,
to give the appearance of hiding from her his tender¬
ness. This was part of the game that he played with
her—played unceasingly, so that its repetition grated
on Norah's nerves as a gramophone needle on the
edge of a disc.
In the month since their marriage she had grown to
loathe and fear him—to detest him with a fierceness
undiscoverable before in her nature. It was to her as
if she had married a man and awakened on her wedding
mom to find herself mated to a pompous, fussy
hermaphrodite.
Of that passion of his that had at first terrified,
then fascinated her, of that madness she had glimpsed
and feared and finally loved, no trace was left. This
she knew, not thinking it out in so many words, but
with a wider vagueness. Selfish though the first object
of trapping Storman into marriage had been—the
purpose of fathering her bastard unborn child upon
him—yet there had been other reasons. She had, all
unconsciously, sought in his eyes that light that never
was on land or sea. She had sought Romance. And,
as a draught a candle, so marriage seemed to have
quenched that light.
“What’s for dinner ? Warmed up that meat ? Good
girl. Shall I help you carry it in ?’’ He smelt at the gas-
stove, appreciatively. “Rice pudding ? That’s fine.”
He helped to carry the dinner into the sitting-room,
then went back to close the kitchen door and put out
the gas. In the hall he called to her.
“I see the hat-rack is loose. Remind me to-morrow
to nail it up. I'll tackle those bathroom pipes at the
same time.”
Norah said nothing. Storman came into the room,
looked at her, sat down, and pulled his chair close up
to the table.
STAINED RADIANCE 207
"You look seedy. Nothing wrong with you or
the General, is there ?”
"I’m all right. Pass the mustard, will you ?’’
Every reference he made to her unborn child caused
a strange griping in her stomach. He was to be a
Communist, of course, this boy which she was to bear
after her body had grown gross and ungainly. Of
course, he was to be a boy—a Communist, a leader of
hosts, a General in the Army of the Dawn. Only
when speaking of him in these words would the old,
mad light return to the eyes of Storman, his great
bull-laugh boom out as of yore. Then he would ask
to see the account-book of household expenses, check
it up for Norah, and make suggestions for the next
day’s purchases.
He had from the beginning shown a passion for the
flat and its meagre furniture, for mending and pottering
and the setting to right of things. Every penny
possible must be saved. But they were to stint them¬
selves of nothing needful. For lunch he carried
sandwiches and a thermos flask to the office, and on
evenings would take Norah out for long walks, which
were good for her and inexpensive. There was no
need to waste money on bus-fares.
He looked round the room as he ate. "Comfortable,
this. It’s good to be home, my dear.”
Looking up at him, seeing his eyes passing over
her, Norah knew herself included amongst the things
which pleased him and gave him comfort. That was
what she was—something to keep things clean and
inexpensively polished, something to take for cheap
walks and back home again to suppers rehashed from
rehashed dinners.
Storman lit his pipe. He had given up cigarettes.
He stood up and walked slowly round the room,
stopping opposite the bookcase to push in the volumes
208
STAINED RADIANCE
so that they stood side by side, evenly. Then he
straightened a picture and walked over to the writing-
desk. There he picked up the account-book.
“Christmas puddings and a cake ? What are they
for ? Anyhow, we’re hardly likely to want more than
one pudding, are we ?”
He looked over the table at Norah. She was finishing
her plate of rice. Now she pushed it back and stood up.
“Do you grudge me that as well ? I know you
grudge me everything else. Now it’s food.’’
“You’re hysterical, Norah. We’ve got to save every
copper we can. Anyhow, come to think of it, the
Christmas puddings will keep. No need for us to gorge
to-morrow. We’re beyond that superstition. What did
the laundry bill come to ?’’
“Three and tuppence.”
He noted down the amount and added columns of
figures, put his initials at the foot of the column, neatly,
placed the book and some papers in order, closed the
desk. There fell a little silence, broken only by the
sound of the rain outside. Even as it had sounded
—surely so long ago !—on the night when she had told
him she was to have a baby. Norah had turned her
chair away from the table and had sat down in it again.
She stared into the fire. Last Christmas Eve ? Where ?
Oh, yes. Crowds and streamers. Dancing. Billy
had been there. Dancing till midnight. ... A
pretty dress, I wore, Billy said.
“We’ll wash up now, shall we ?” said Storman.
Subchapter Hi
A woman in the uniform of the Salvation Army
halted opposite a congestion of traffic in the Strand.
The rain sheeted down whitely in the glare of the
STAINED RADIANCE
209
arclights. Policemen waved white-banded arms.
Buses purred and coughed and long cars, driven by
sheltered, well-groomed chauffeurs, shook impatiently
under the beating of their engines. Above and around,
on the cliff-edges of the street, great lighted signs
changed and moved and mounted and drooped,
cataracting messages of fire above the hastening,
thinning, yet never-ceasing streams of pedestrians.
They scoured the dim night like searchlights, those
changing signs, mostly unheeded and unnoticed, unless
through the giant telescopes of packed crystals with
which Martian astronomers view the earth. Uplifted
to the skies, they cried the message of humanity to
the blotted out stars :
"KOMFY KINKLESS KORSETS.
THEY BRACE AND EMBRACE !''
"OLD HAG WHISKY.
THE SPIRIT OF SCOTLAND.”
"SLYMPER’S RIGHTEOUS RAZOR BLADES.
A NEAR SHAVE, A CLEAR SHAVE.”
Standing under one of the arclights, the woman
gazed mistily from the signs to the congested traffic.
Then she rubbed her chin and peered from one to
another of the packed and parked cars in front of her.
On mission work, she was engaged in trying to detect
signs of the white slave traffic. More than half-drunk,
figures and faces knotted themselves confusingly
before her eyes. She had shortly before called a
friendly policeman a snoorting old bastard, and so
left him profoundly moved and astonished. Meeting
a Salvation Army captain out on the same errand as
herself, she had grimaced in his face and passed him
by without a word. Now, waiting and looking and
following out her mission with a drunken tenacity.
o
210
STAINED RADIANCE
she wished for an ending of the rain, to which she
attributed the uncertainty of her vision.
She had spent the afternoon in her basement room
in the company of a Sergeant of Marines who had
pulled her chin, called her Susie, and left her asleep
without paying the final ten shillings agreed on.
Awaking with a bad headache, she had gone in mufti
to a wineshop near at hand and had bought a bottle
of brandy. Then she had put on her uniform and
sallied out into the streets. But frequently she would
return to the brandy bottle in her room, for the cold
was biting. Besides, she was lonely in her life in that
basement room, nowadays. Listlessly she spent the
days, giving herself to casual visitors or to her usual
customers. Not one of them had kick or flap about
them. By this she meant they lacked poetry. They
brought their grave lusts to her body as swine bring
hunger to a trough.
Whoosht ! The policeman had taken a quarter
turn, his arms still upraised like one crucified on an
invisible cross, but in profile now. Over the greasy
street-blocks, the traffic began to move forward with
minute skidding of rubber wheels. Splashed by a
swaying Daimler in its starting, the woman in the
uniform of the Salvation Army uniform shook her fist
at it. Thereat its occupant, a man, raised his eyes
so that they looked into hers.
She stared at him with mouth agape. He was a
man in the prime of life, dark, cleanly, aristocratic,
in evening dress. His studs winked in the soft electric
lighting of the interior of the Daimler. One white,
carefully tended hand held a cigarette to his lips.
Behind these his polished teeth shone even as his
studs,
“Gripes ! It’s Andy 1”
The car stopped, the door opened. Andreas van
STAINED RADIANCE
211
Koupa thrust out his perfect hat and head into the
rain. He grinned and seized the hands of the prostitute.
“God mine, is it you ? I had not thought to see
your face again. Come in, you so-little fool, damn
you !”
She entered in a daze. The chauffeur, equally
in a daze, leant from his seat to close the door behind
her. What was the little runt up to now ? Salvation
Army tart ? What next ? Whoa ! Old bus damned
quavery to-night. . . .
The Daimler snaked out through the traffic. The
gorgeous Koupa smelt at the prostitute.
“Brandy. Dear Christ, it is good to smell the
vileness of you again. It gives the zest to this that
I have become."
She looked at him foggily.
“Blime ! Where’d you pinch the togs, Andy ?
An this car ? Aven’t seen yew fer a month ef
Sundays."
“You exaggerate, my little. Only since November.
I have married now, you must hear. I have a wife.
I have honeymooned to Greece and eaten pork pies
in the Acropolis and listened to the opinions of my
life-mate on the probability of her having been Aspasia
in a previous incarnation. She has clothed me and
fed me, recognizing my genius. I am out of the
so-infernal cold, and comfortable."
“Wadja want wiv me, then ?"
He put his arm around her waist. “It was an
impulse so sudden. I wanted once again to smell and
touch the good gutter—akh God ! to speak and
listen to one who thinks nothing of my genius, one who
walks the streets selling her body in honest prostitution,
one whose brain-tracks are uncorroded by the slimy,
wriggling bugs of the New Thought. So I had you
brought in.” He expanded his chest, peered at her.
212
STAINED RADIANCE
touched her, then put his handkerchief to his nose.
“The so-authentic whiff of the little kennels !“ He
picked up a tube, murmuring something through it.
They were now in Westminster. The car slowed down.
“Now get out.”
In some area of her brandy-drugged mind she
discovered indignation. “Well, I likes thet. Oodja
think yer playin wiv, jest because yer a bleedin
swank ? An a bloody pimp, too. . . . Tike me back
to the Strand ; I never asked yew ter let me in.
W'ere’m I to go to now ?”
He opened the door and with a twist of his arm
propelled her out to the pavement. “To the devil,
I should think.” He chuckled without mirth. “A
Merry Christmas, Magdalene !”
The chauffeur drove off. Some impulse made him
peer back into the Daimler. . . . B’Gob ! The bleedin
little runt was sniffling !
Subchapter iv
Robert Gayford knelt in the Church of the Sacred
Heart. A smell of cheap incense filled the air. Elderly
worshippers sneezed at intervals. The organ boomed
and the choristers uplifted young voices. It was the
preliminary Christmas Eve service.
Sincerely devout, Robert crossed his breast many
times. The church was crowded and he had had to
kneel far back, beyond the ordinary pews, just inside
the door and on the cold flags. His knees developed
a frozen painfulness and he rocked upon them reproach¬
fully, with his mind half-withdrawn from the sacred
mysteries of his Faith to the need for warning tardy
worshippers of his proximity to the entrance.
A priest chanted with uplifted arms, then turned
STAINED RADIANCE
213
his back and interceded with God, in a privy but
courageous manner. This priest had a fine voice, strong
in the service of the Church. At intervals he slipped
on his tongue a pastille from a small tin box and,
reinvigorated, resumed.
Spiritually uplifted, Gayford, in consequence of
the pain at his knees, had fallen to a rhythmic swaying
to and fro. Forgotten now were his lusts and frettings.
His brain, soothed as with a soporific, comprehended
only the goodness of God. By God ! go to Mass
oftener ; live a clean life ; perhaps become a priest.
A sudden cold draught of air smote upon the back
of his neck, the door of the Church of the Sacred
Heart creaked open, prayer-book leaves fluttered and
someone, entering, tripped headlong over Gayford
and, falling upon him, levelled him with the
floor.
Neither priest nor worshippers took any notice.
Their minds uplifted, as they had been exhorted to
uplift them, to the contemplation of the mysterious
pregnancy of a virgin—a pregnancy achieved by a
mysterious visitation, warm and delicious to think of,
however sacredly—they were engaged in a vast,
echoing chant of affirmation and response. Gayford
struggled sideways from under the being who had
fallen on him. It was a woman. Kneeling upright
again, as she too knelt, he looked into her face.
It was Ellen Ledgworth.
“Fm sorry,” she whispered, placidly. Then :
“Oh, it’s you. Did I hurt you ?”
“No,” he whispered. Then : “Hush !” And he
trebled out a response.
But while he did so, he found his clasped hands
were shaking. He had found her again at last.
He had never forgotten her since that walk to
Edgware. Memory of her placidity, her wide hips.
214
STAINED RADIANCE
her cowlike gaze had troubled him innumerable times.
Often he had hung round his mother’s house, hoping
to see her visit it again. But she had never come,
and, on his once attempting to gain admittance, he
had been flung out by the footman with the soft
corn. That had been only a short time before the
bloody old fool had gone and married that Dutch
outsider.
And now he had found her again. In church.
She was close to him. He had lain beneath her for a
moment. She was warm. She did not wear much clothes.
By God, he would not lose her again.
A placid piety had directed Ellen to the church.
When the service was over, she walked out, Gayford
accompanying her. Under the street-lamp she looked
at him consideringly.
“You’ve grown older. You don’t look very
well.”
“I’ve a horribly bad cold. . . . I’ve been looking
for you everywhere ever since last Spring. Why did
you never send me your address ?”
She smiled at him, maddeningly placid. “Well,
you see, I’ve always been so busy. Besides, I had a
boy of my own, then.”
“Haven’t you one now ?”
“Oh, no.”
He was shaking. “Look here, I don’t know your
name but I like you awfully. Will you let me take you
somewhere for supper ?”
“Don’t mind if I do have some supper,” said Ellen.
“I’m fearfully hungry.”
Leading her to a restaurant, his thoughts blurred
warmly. He would have a woman at last!
A Christmas Eve ghost of memory flitted through
his mind.
Perhaps she was even a virgin.
STAINED RADIANCE
215
Subchapter v
She was haunted by a phrase she had once heard,
long before, in Scotland. "The sound of the rain on
the roof when the kye come hame.”
Homely—God, how homely. . . . She found herself
remembering long-forgotten words of the good Scots,
canty, lightsome words and jingles, things with old
laughter and the smell of the peats and sea in them ;
darksome old words like clamjamfried and glaur and
greep, words wrought for the bitter winter nights by
the plodding peasants of the Eastern sea-coast. . . .
A winter night like to-night.
"The sound of the rain on the roof when the kye
come hame.”
Oh, often she’d lain and heard it, happed in the
muckle bed under the riggin, with the whisp-whisp
of the falling rain on the roofs of Cairndhu. Just at
the closing of night-time, when the brown beasts came
oozing through the midden glaur, into the misty byre,
her father driving them, her mother clanking the
milk-cogs in the dairy, she herself warm and happit
and in bed early because of the miles across the dripping
fields she'd have to walk next morning to school. . . .
But this was London rain.
She sat in the darkness listening to it. The fire
in the grate, unheaped the past two hours, had died
down to a smouldering fluff of grey. In the coalbox
there still remained two lumps and a packet of firewood.
Daren’t burn them to-night. Much better go to
bed.
Fool. Cry if you stay in the darkness longer.
She rose from her chair, sought for the box of
matches on the mantelshelf, and lit the gas. It flared
up brightly, dazzling her eyes, till she found the
regulator and switched it low, The room was now
2l6
STAINED RADIANCE
mantled in a yellow dimness. Gas too dear to waste.
Besides, should be in bed at this time.
She looked at the table, where the tea-things were
still as she had finished with them. Ought to have
washed up. Oh, what does it matter? Besides, I'd
have to go through the room of the Stickellys to the
kitchen, and it’s cold there. . . . And they stare at
me, at my figure. Think they know I’m going to have
a baby. . . . She’s hardly spoken all day. . . . Oh,
damn her, my dear, and go to bed.
A knock sounded at the door. Thea raised her head
and called, “Come in.’’
It was Mrs. Stickelly. She wore a blouse of hard,
glittering blue. She smiled doubtfully, looking at
Thea with one eye, the while the other examined the
contents of the bookcase.
“Eh-h-h. Mrs. Garland, Mr. Stickelly would like
you to come along and speak to him.’’
“All right, Mrs. Stickelly.’’
She followed the woman along the passage, past the
down-curving stairway. The door was held open for
her. Mr. Stickelly was sitting with his collar off, his
feet extended to a great glaze of fire. He had just
finished a supper of tripe and onions.
“Sit down, Mrs. Garland.’’ He spoke heavily, for
his stomach was twinging. And, passing his hand over
it, he thought with pessimism of the three new remedies
he had tried during the last few weeks. He cleared
his throat and thought. Thea sat on the edge of her
chair, calm, unflushed. What was she going to do ?
Two months now since she had been forced to leave
the office. She had nineteen shillings in her bag. The
allowance from John just paid the rent and left a little
over. She had lived on tea and bread and margarine
since the beginning of the week. What was she
to do ?
STAINED RADIANCE
217
For she knew what he was going to say—this
unhealthy-looking, dustmanlike person. He was going
to tell her that she must leave because she was going
to have a baby.
Looking at him, she felt curious and detached in
a breath. What was the cause of the dirty yellow of
his complexion ? Wasn’t Mrs. Stickelly kind to him ?
(Did men get like that when their wives were unkind
to them ?)
She almost giggled. Mr. Stickelly cleared the
unnecessarily-sticky phlegm from his throat.
“Im-m. Mrs. Garland, I want to ask you a question.
You won’t be offended ? Mind, I don’t like asking it,
but it’s my duty. You won’t be offended ?”
“I don’t know. Perhaps you’d better ask it, Mr.
Stickelly.”
“Well, before I do, I want you first of all to know
who I am. Who I am.” He nodded his chin at her and
she had the idea that probably a large, bleached frog
would have a face like that. He meditated a little,
heavily. Then : “Who I am.”
“Yes ?”
“I’m a detective, a C.I.D. man.”
Since ushering Thea into the room, Mrs. Stickelly
had remained standing. Now, smiling doubtfully,
with one eye fixed on her husband and the other on
the wireless receiving apparatus, she nodded confirma¬
tion. Mr. Stickelly pondered, then nodded again, as
at a sudden thought. “Yes.”
“I see, Mr. Stickelly. Well, what’s the question
you want to ask me ?”
“Ah, yes, that’s just it, Mrs. Garland. About three
weeks ago you had two visitors—a man and a woman.
Was the man James Storman, the Communist ?”
Thea stared her surprise. Was that the question ?
She nodded.
2l8
STAINED RADIANCE
“Yes, he was. Why ?”
“Well, I’m very sorry to lose you, Mrs. Garland, to
lose you, and so is Mrs. Stickelly. But I’m acting
under orders from Headquarters. I can’t harbour
under my roof a Communist or a friend of Communists.”
He stared at her, his brows wrinkling in thought.
“No.”
“But—I’m not a Communist. What have I to do
with Mr. Storman’s politics ? He’s just an acquaintance
of mine.”
“I’m very sorry, but I can’t have you here after
the end of next week. Orders from Headquarters.
Orders from Headquarters.” He slowly looked aside
at Mrs. Stickelly, then nodded, as if he had forgotten
something. “Yes.” Then he looked again at Thea,
the while he slowly creaked his memory back to the
talk the chief had had with him at lunch-time.
It had been a disturbing talk. The notorious
Storman, expensively shadowed, as usual, had been
followed and seen to enter Mr. Stickelly’s house. The
shadower had hung around and ascertained that
Storman was not, however, visiting the Stickellys in
connection with some Soviet plot, but was calling on
the lodger. Promptly he had reported this to Head¬
quarters and several investigators had at once been
detailed to hunt down all that was known of Thea
Garland. This was not much, but to the police mind
the fact of her having once lived in the same flat as
the present Mrs. Storman was proof additional and
conclusive. Submitting reports to their departmental
head, the detectives had simultaneously sent in their
expenses accounts to the pay section. For a little
over £50 they had succeeded in finding out that Thea
Garland had once lived with Norah Storman.
The chief, examining their reports, had thought it
worth while to lay them before a high Government
STAINED RADIANCE
219
official. By the latter it had been suggested that
Stickelly himself might be a Communist agent, engaged
in selling secrets to the Soviets. Stickelly’s desk had
accordingly been searched during one of his absences,
without, however, anything more damning being found
in it than a packet of picture postcards showing
French prostitutes lying nude and in amorous atti¬
tudes, and a bottle of stomach-stirring acid. This,
combined with the fact that he had a record of good
and unimaginative service during the past twenty
years, and further, that as he worked in a sub¬
department unconcerned with affairs of international
importance, saved Stickelly. Next day, in the lunch-
hour, he was summoned into the office of the chief
and told of the facts of the case. After the third
telling he had absorbed them, and, deeply shocked,
had promised to have the woman Garland put out
of his house.
These things he did not explain to Thea. Looking
at her glassily, he wondered with a slow hunger at
her good looks and the flush on her cheeks. Very
slowly revolving the idea, he came to the conclusion
that, undressed, she would be singularly like the French
women in the postcards. Yes.
Which Mrs. Stickelly was decidedly not.
“So, Mrs. Garland, Fm afraid you’ll have to leave
at the end of next week.”
“But—oh, very well.” Thea stood up. With that
singular tightening round her head, she could not
argue. “Is that all ?”
Mr. Stickelly looked at Mrs. Stickelly, smiling
doubtfully, with one eye slowly veering from the
wireless set to the coalbox and the other as slowly
changing focus from the chair on which Thea had sat
to the door at which she now stood. He nodded.
“Yes. That’s all. Yes.”
220
STAINED RADIANCE
"Good night.”
She let herself out into the dark passage. A chill
gust of wind slammed the door behind her. Standing
in the draught she experienced a pleasure in its
freezing touch. She could feel it drying the perspira¬
tion on her neck and breast. She groped for the door¬
handle of her own room, let herself in, and carefully
closed the door behind her lest it, too, should
bang.
The fire was quite dead.
She stood and stared at it in the dim, yellow light.
Doing so, the belt of pain surrounding the patch of
clearness, of unnatural brightness, nestling in the
centre of her brain, suddenly snapped. It broke and
sprayed red-hot fragments across her mind.
She was to be turned out—not because of the baby
that was coming, but because of Communism. Com¬
munism ! She was to be turned out ? Where ?
"My God, girl, where ? Where are you to go ? You’ve
no money—not sufficient to last the week and pay
for moving. John’s allowance doesn’t come for another
fortnight. What to do ? What 
"Oh, God, be quiet. Be quiet. . . . You can’t
get work anywhere. You’d faint again. No one to take
you in. Quiet. Don’t, don’t, you damned fool. Don’t
scream. Keep quiet, quiet. . . .”
Suddenly she gave a low cry, putting her hand out
against the table and steadying herself. Within her
body was a slow movement, infinitely intent and
appalling. She put her hand to her side, and, beneath
the hand, felt a rounded shape laboriously curve out
and then flatten.
A sudden sweet dizziness shook her. Her lips
strained apart into a smile that creased her face
hideously.
"Merry Christmas, baby !”
STAINED RADIANCE
221
Subchapter vi
It was Christmas Eve in Bethlehem.
All afternoon and evening pilgrims and visitors had
been arriving at the little hillside town. The Pope’s
representative had arrived. Representatives from all
Catholic countries had arrived. Many Americans had
arrived, smoking cheroots and talking phrases out of
Mr. Sinclair Lewis’s latest novel. This was one of
their obsessions. They believed that foreigners
demanded in Americans idiosyncrasies according to
the novelists. For this reason they wore horn-rimmed
glasses and said Gee, uncertainly. They apostrophized
the Mountains of Moab with many Gees, contemptuous
and profane, but the Church of the Nativity
they Geed reverently. In intervals they tramped
through unsavoury reaches of muddy bazaar and
odoriferous culs-de-sac, where small tobacconist’s
dukanin sold Gold Flake and Lucky Strike cigarettes,
and itinerant vendors of toilet necessities ran after
them, crying on them to buy Jibbs’s tooth-paste and
Jillette razors.
Scores of peasants, folk from the Balkans and
South Europe generally, had walked from JerusaJem.
Undeterred by street vendors, they tramped through
muddy lanes and kennels to the Church of the Nativity.
Most of them were accompanied by their wives. An
occasional priest marshalled and commanded them,
separated them when they fought or beat their wives,
and compelled them, when possible, to give up stray
articles which they appropriated from stalls and fields
on their pilgrimage. Simple, pious, the pilgrims had
set out to visit the birthplace of the Saviour in order
for ever after to boast of the achievement to their
neighbours, to have their warts cured, to view with
sacred interest the actual stone whereon the Holy
222
STAINED RADIANCE
Mother had been delivered of the Bambino, and to
have their souls cleansed in the mercy of the com¬
passionate saints.
And, chanting, they trampled on one another as
they forced a way into the Church of the Nativity.
The rain, which had held off for the last hour or
so, now began to fall again, straight downpouring, even,
indifferent rain. A lorry containing eight aircraftmen
had come from the Air Force wireless station at
Jerusalem. It stood deserted in a back-street, for an
elderly Copt in an opposing stall had promised Jo keep
ze leedle eye on it, oh, yes, the while the Inglizi zoljers
kissed the couch of Oily Virgin, yes ?
“Oily Virgin be damned," said the driver of the
lorry. “I’ll give you a couple of piastres when I come
back—if I find everything right. If I don’t, I’ll twist
your black neck. . . . Look here, sport, where are
the wazzas ?"
He was directed to the wazzas. In groups the air¬
craftmen tramped away. Three of them went to the
Church of the Nativity. One, who had drunk too
much arrack before leaving Jerusalem, entered into
an argument with a Pimp—a member of the Palestine
Military Police, so called from the initials on his
shoulders—and was knocked down in the gutter,
where he lay temporarily forgotten and forgetting.
Four went on and hunted out the wazzas and indignant
matrons to stir girls to effort even on a night like
this—blood of the virgin, these English were virile
men !—and prepare for trade. Holding in their arms
brown, apathetic prostitutes, the aircraftmen called
to each other through partitions, asking to be awakened
in order that they might not miss the midnight Mass
in the Church of the Nativity.
The eighth member of the party did not at first
walk forward into the village. Instead, he held back
STAINED RADIANCE
223
along the track covered by the lorry till he came out
on the high shoulder of the hill whereon is Bethlehem
built. There, he looked down and across a frowsy
dimness of landscape—bleak, half-desert landscape,
with the rain descending upon it in a windless extasy.
Far away below, and on the horizon, against remote
granitic ranges, gleamed an occasional light. Back in
Bethlehem a starving pariah puppy was wailing in
the wetness.
"The chances are a hundred to one that|it rained
just in this fashion nineteen hundred and twenty-nine
years ago,” said Garland.
He had been posted from Heliopolis to Jerusalem a
month before, as clerk attached to the wireless station.
With a typewriter once more available, he had worked
ceaselessly on the revision of his novel. Of Jerusalem
or the surrounding country he had so far seen little.
This was his first excursion to Bethlehem, and it he
had taken to verify details for a final chapter of his
novel.
His hero also had visited Bethlehem on Christmas
Eve.
A curious melancholy always came upon him, and
amused him, looking over rain-drenched lands. Nine¬
teen hundred and twenty-nine years ago—hut wasn’t
there some fault in Bible chronology ? Christ had
really been born three years before the first Christmas.
So, nineteen hundred and thirty-two years ago. . . .
What was Thea doing in Shepherd’s Bush ?
With a misty detachment, as though his mind had
borrowed a garment from the landscape, he thought
of her. Adorable Thea of the wine-red hair and wine-
sweet body. Thea.
And in memory he recalled the delightfulness of
that body of hers, the touch and sight of her skin,
the curve of her bare shoulders and straight back,
224 STAINED RADIANCE
slim waist. (Almost with his two hands had he been
able to span that waist of hers.) Thea. Thea Garland.
(By the Lord !)
He forgot alike the rain and the landscape of
Moab, for this thought that Thea was Thea Garland
pleasured him. Only a few months before such realiza¬
tion of dreams would have been banished to the
remoteness of the future. Why, but for 
His pleasurable mist of thoughts cleared suddenly,
leaving a black space across which a question wrote
itself in letters of red pain :
My God, what was happening to Thea ?
Alone in that house, in that stinking little road.
Alone. What’s happening to her ? You swine, you
useless swine, what’s happening to her ?
And, held in a sudden agony, for he had received
no letter from her for over three weeks, he turned
back towards Bethlehem and fumbled for a cigarette,
and lit it. Doing so, his thoughts sought to readjust
themselves in comfort. . . . She must be all right.
Still has her job, perhaps. Besides, she can always
write to her people in Scotland if the worst comes to
the worst. And those other girls in the flat, they’d
stand a loan—only a temporary loan, wherever she
gets it. Damn it, she’s healthy and strong. Your
novel’s practically finished. If you send it off at the
end of the week, you ought to have an acceptance for
Spring publication. Perhaps fifty down and at least
ten per cent. And fifty pounds’ll pay for almost
everything. ...
He became conscious of music and subdued chanting.
Before him was the Church of the Nativity, lighted
and looming, a frenzy of architecture. _ The words of
the subdued chant seemed to fit ill with the music.
Standing by a little chapel, he stopped and strained
his ears to listen. Then he saw, in the mirk, that
STAINED RADIANCE
225
three of the other aircraftmen were also standing
near. They greeted him mirthfully.
“Elio, where in the ell Ve you bin ? . . . Sly
bird ! Pokin round the wazzas, I'll bet. Married man,
too. They’re always the worst. . . . Shh. Listen.
'Ve missed the best of it, unless it happens again in
the service.”
“Missed what ?” asked Garland.
They explained to him. In the church nearby a
service was bein eld by the Greeks—some dago crowd
that said Christmas wasn’t at Christmas but a fort¬
night later. So they’d learned from an old bloke who
spoke quite good English and said he was a Greek
priest. . . . Them Greeks, seems, oldin a service
just friendly-like with the real Christians. The old
bloke extended invitations to see it. ’d gone in, found
the place crowded and been forced to stay away at
the rear, near the door. After a lot o marchin and
formin fours, the igh cockalorum of the show ad
mounted a platform and sung out—Godstreuth, e
ad ! 
“I saw im first I”
And at that all the other dagoes ad flopped down
on their knees and yelled :
“You’re a liar !”
After the tenth chanted repetition of affirmation
and denial, the three aircraftmen had crept out and
exploded in the open air. But it appeared that, fas¬
cinated, hardly able to believe in the goodness
of the joke, they still hung around the chapel, waiting
for the chant to recur.
“Guess wot it is, y’know, some English bloke’s
made up the service for them and kidded them for a
joke. Put in them words and told the dagoes they
were real, honest-to-god prayer words.”
“Shouldn’t wonder,” said Garland.
I3
226
STAINED RADIANCE
They stood listening in the rain, but the chant
was not repeated. Damp and hilarious, they tramped
round to the main entrance of the Nativity Church.
Aside from this a long queue was slowly moving
into a narrow opening and down steep stairs.
Garland the last of them, the aircraftmen joined
the queue.
The head of the queue vanished down the hole in
the earth, like a black snake. Carried forward in its
body, Garland and the others stumbled down steep
steps into a dim, gigantic cellar. In front the queue
of pilgrims wound past an open ledge, and, as each
pilgrim came opposite this ledge, he fell on his knees
and kissed it. It was the ledge whereon Christ
had lain when adored by the wise men and the
kings.
“Gawd’slife ! what a guff!”
The air was sickening. Sweat-exuding and unwashed,
the pilgrims swopped diseases on the stone where
Christ had lain, and then, passing on and up into the
rain, ate onions and pieces of bread which they drew
from their garments, and commented on the Holy
Birth shrewdly, agriculturally, wondering if the
beasts down in the stable had been disturbed by the
Virgin’s screams, and how such beasts had ever been
driven up and down the staircase daily. Debating
this latter point, they were satisfied that such problem
of live-stock transport must have been solved by a
daily miracle wrought by the saints for the glorification
of God and the Blessed Mother.
Garland turned away from the other aircraftmen
and joined the upward-winding queue. Presently he
was in the Church of the Nativity, passing through a
dank corridor into a garish hall-space. This latter was
decorated with paintings. Beneath these gilded
inscriptions recorded the sayings of the Aramaic
STAINED RADIANCE
227
prophet in the language of the judges who had crucified
him as a disturbing vagrant. In giant stained windows
the Christ bore the Cross, supported by scores of
volunteers, allegorical, terrestrial and celestial. But
mostly he sat in strange attitudes on the knees of
innumerable Virgins. These, proud and cold, disre¬
garding the plaudits of the surrounding angels, stared
stonily and forbiddingly across the great hall-
space.
Great candelabra glowed their lights. An altar
shone red with gold and jewelwork. Around it
massed priests for the coming service. Gorgeously
clad, they scratched themselves through their thick
robes and, in a far corner, laughed over a funny story
related by a visitor. Plump, smooth men, they
believed in the divinity of the Christ, the efficacy of
prayers to the saints and the remission of sins obtained
by eating the body of the dead god and drinking his
blood. Anti-Semites, they denounced the Balfour
Promise and the efforts of American missionaries to
upset the faith of the native Muslim population.
And Garland thought :
“It is extremely improbable that Christ ever existed.
Most of his so-called sayings are second-hand, rehashes
of the voiced altruism of long millennia. Even if he
did live, he appears to have been only an illiterate
agitator, drunk with a certain power of words and
suffering from an inferiority complex which led him
on occasion to denounce the well-to-do, and on other
occasions to proclaim himself their superior, a king,
and divine. He betrayed the mazed shiftlessness of the
poet without education and without anything of any
real importance to say. He was a Judean Bernard
Shaw, seeking startling effects by denouncing his
mother and family, asserting the equality of prosti¬
tutes, cursing where others blessed. All in order to
228
STAINED RADIANCE
surprise people. Probably he watched them askance,
out of the corners of his eyes, to see how they took
it. And throughout he was consumed with a vague
anger and jealousy, especially regarding his birth, for
his mother, Miriam, was notoriously free of her body,
and the chances are ten to one that he was fathered
from her by some Greek or Roman legionary. Reminder
of this probability constantly vexed him, and, aware
that he possessed an intelligence above that of the
dark-brained peasants and artisans amongst whom he
moved, he convinced himself that his origin must
really have been through the agency of an impalpable,
divine spermatozoon—rather than from the lust-
hungry bedding of Miriam with some unsavoury
foreign mercenary.
“His life was an insane, planless failure. But, like
most agitators loud-mouthed enough, and incon¬
sistent enough to occasionally turn and attack those
whom he ordinarily defended, he left behind him a
memory of angry simplicity and kindliness which
took by storm the slave populations of the Roman
world. He appealed to the brainless proletariat as
never had prophet appealed before. He ottered
freedom and comfort and full stomachs in the next
world in exchange for suffering and stripes in this.
To an audience accustomed to suffering and stripes,
but unaccustomed to the promise, his appeal was
irresistible. He offered something for nothing. That
is still mainly his appeal.
“All over the world in the beginning of his era—
the world of the Roman Empire, at least—religions
and priesthoods were falling into decay. Children in
the streets threw mud at solemn processions of priests.
The gods had become conventions to the educated,
just as atoms and electrons are conventions, with no
real existence, to the modern chemist. Even the
STAINED RADIANCE 22Q
slaves, the freedmen, the serf-agriculturists sportively
piled manure and excrement in front of the ancient
shrines. It was the dawn of a universal disbelief in
gods, a going out into the cold air and frozen spaces
of atheism. Men were awakening from the fatuous
dreams of the savage-barbarian. But, as ever before
an awakening, their dawn-sleep was being troubled by
innumerable nightmares. Multitudes of fake religions
were springing up and dying amidst indifference and
laughter. Mithras sacrificed insanely, imported Sivas
devoured improbable universes, the heavy Isis mooned
through Egyptian mummeries in a blase Rome. It
was the dawn of reason through the wrack of night¬
mare. Men were prepared for a world without gods.
It was the dawn of hope.
“And then the idea of Christ came to the Western
world and wiped reason from the slate.
“He appealed as did none of the gods of the other
freak religions—first to the common herd, because he
voiced their woes, secondly to the quick-minded of the
old sacrificial priesthoods, because in him they saw
their salvation. For, as a god, there was nothing new
or fundamentally dangerous in him. Instead, he
possessed a great asset never before held by any other
god of the Western world—he appealed to the populace
both as a god and as a man.
“And the twisted memory of this crucified, muddle-
minded agitator had ever since lain across the cen¬
turies like a black shadow.”
A great burst of music pealed out. The crowds
inside the hall-space grew thicker. Garland was
forced back against a wall. It was the entry of the
Papal delegate.
And suddenly, thunderous and sweet upon the air,
clanged the bells of midnight.
It was Christmas Day.
230
STAINED RADIANCE
Subchapter Retrospective
He had hung senseless only four short hours. Now
it was nearly midnight. The dark air seemed to wind
in stifling swathes up the long hillslopes. Casual
sightseers lingered in gossip. A soldier rubbed the
blade of his spear with a handful of sand, and, looking
across the hill to the lights of Jerusalem, thought
grumblingly of this his extra watch and the warm
couch of the little Ionian slave at the prefect’s house.
A dog howled.
Suddenly, in the darkness, the dim brown form of
the dying malefactor, Jesus, twisted and bulged
against its cross. From his lips came a moan, a shriek
of gibberish :
“eloi eloi lama sabachthani ?”
His attention a moment attracted, the soldier
looked up. The brown body had ceased to twist.
The soldier laughed, indifferently, and flung his handful
of sand, soft-swishing, into the night.
CHAPTER THE TENTH
Wherein a Long-neglected Character repairs a Long¬
standing Neglect, and Divers Other Happenings,
of an Import to strain even the Happy and Able
Invention of the Subchapter, are recorded.
Subchapter Interlude
ON the morning of the second of February
Mrs. Streseman Mullins, of Cocotte Sceurs,
sat in her private office. Under the powder her face
was an unhealthy pinkish-yellow verging on gamboge.
All night she had writhed in the agonies of pyorrhea
and only by an effort was she able to concentrate on
the work of her establishment. Presently she rang
a bell and asked for Miss Ledgworth to be sent up
to her.
Ellen had been rapidly promoted during the past
two months. Before the previous Christmas she had
shown no ability whatsoever outside routine matters,
but, in the week leading up to the New Year, the entire
staff had noted a change in her appearance and habits
that amazed and stupefied. Placid as ever, she showed
a vigour and initiative hitherto entirely absent from
her efforts at salary-earning. One morning she sum¬
moned the manager and displayed for his inspection
two models constructed by herself—each model with
a twist of distinction and distinctiveness. The manager
promptly reported the matter and showed the models
to Mrs. Streseman Mullins. Gazing up into his face,
the proprietrix of Cocotte Sceurs, her breath unpleasant
from her chronic complaint, had discussed the matter
231
232 STAINED RADIANCE
and then, with a sigh, had allowed him to return to
his duties. As a result, Ellen’s models had been sold for
twenty-five guineas each and she herself had been
promoted to chief assistant in the designing-room, at
a salary increased by ten shillings a week.
There, by all precedents, the matter should have
ended. But it did not. In the designing department
Ellen daily worked miracles of draught manship and
design. She blossomed forth fresh creations as the
earth new life in Spring. She became a power with
whom the staff reckoned. Finally, after the visit of
a Royal patron who had a design in her mind which
she was completely incapable of putting into practical
being, Ellen was placed in charge of the designing-
room. In a placid ten minutes’ interview with the
Royal patron she safely and brilliantly performed the
surgical operation of extracting the idea, improving
upon it and swamping the Royal patron under a
thaumaturgic display of fabric-twisting. Within a
space of six weeks she had made a reputation seldom
achieved within a like number of years.
“You sent for me, madame ?’’
Surveyed by Mrs. Streseman Mullins, Ellen, placid,
respectful, stood in the doorway. The proprietrix
nodded to a chair.
“Yes. Sit down, Miss Ledgworth.”
Ellen sat down and the light from the window fell
full upon her face. It had undergone as marvellous
a transformation as had apparently the creative
powers of her mind. The cowlike expression had
disappeared in a soft, yet strong, placidity. Her lips
had reddened and now jutted out in a wide, sweet
pout. Warm brown lights flickered in her eyes. Her
figure, once compact and uninteresting, had acquired
mysteriously a charm. The broad hips, swaying as
she walked, were seductive and adorable ; her breasts,
STAINED RADIANCE
233
flattened though they were in the prevailing mode,
yet jutted forth a projection of each nipple beneath
her jumper in a fashion that caused the sales-manager,
fresh from a too-close interview with Mrs. Streseman
Mullins, and forgetful of his passion to reform the
Empire, to move warm fingers across a tingling palm.
“Whatever’s happened to change you so, Miss
Ledgworth ?”
The question was wrung in sheer amazement from
Mrs. Streseman Mullins's painted lips. As a rule
she paid little heed to her staff, beyond seeing that
they were properly dressed, were respectful to cus¬
tomers and the sales-manager, and washed low down
the backs of their necks. This last she ascertained in
frequent inspections of the work-rooms, gliding behind
each girl’s chair and acquiring information at first
hand. But Ellen, not only by her elevation to control
of the designing department and her entitlement to
the address of Miss, but by her changed physical
appearance, had ceased, in the eyes of Mrs. Streseman
Mullins, to be non-human, an employee, and suffered
an anthropophuistic change.
Ellen showed no surprise at the question. It had
been asked her, in varying degrees of intimacy and
familiarity, too often of late. She regarded her
employer with a shrewd placidity. A considering,
pitying light came in her eyes.
“Change ? Oh, there’s been some alteration in my
private life, madame. Perhaps it’s done me good.”
“Really ?” Temporarily forgetting her affliction,
or the reason for which she had originally summoned
the head of her designing department, Mrs. Streseman
Mullins stared at Ellen, rudely, undisguisedly, woman
to woman. Ellen nodded, placidly.
“I have a lover, madame.”
“You are engaged ?”
234
STAINED RADIANCE
Ellen shook her head. Sitting in comfort, she
crossed her ankles.
“No, madame. I have no intention of marrying."
Then ... I don’t understand." Mrs. Streseman
Mullins gradually sat erect. “You mean. Miss
Ledgworth ?"
Ellen elucidated further, placidly. “I have a lover,
madame. I sleep with him, sometimes."
Mrs. Streseman Mullins gasped an expulsion of
air which shot a fresh twinge of pain down each
tooth.
Ellen spoke the truth. She had Robert Gayford
for a lover. Since Christmas Eve they had frequently
met by arrangement, and, a fortnight after falling
over him in the Church of the Sacred Heart, she had
allowed him to seduce her. Lonely herself, and filled
with a placid maternal pity, she had on the afternoon
of this occurrence refused his offer of marriage. He
had thereon burst into tears of baffled desire and sex-
cowardice. Ellen had looked at him, taken him home
to his flat, and then, after taking due precautions, had,
with a placid tenderness, allowed him to satisfy his
long-thwarted virility.
The effect had been startling. The happening had
horrified and abased Gayford ; Ellen it had stirred
and amazed and transformed. Her body, long awaiting
the purpose of its design, sprang to a life that at first
placidly shocked its owner. Her mind reacted similarly.
She was as one, long healthily asleep, awakened
violently but pleasurably. In Gayford’s embraces
she discovered an ardour which staggered and terrified
him. Then she would dress, placidly, and make coffee
and saunter through his flat, searching among his
books and borrowing copies of Phillips Oppenheim.
Twice or thrice a week she went to his rooms,
a white-bodied goddess, blossoming the more each
STAINED RADIANCE
235
time into womanhood and an ample, thrilling seduc¬
tiveness. Placidly drowsy and contented, she would
then walk home along the Embankment, refusing her
lover’s escort. Her womanhood discovered required
meditation.
But meantime Robert Gayford, who had before
held out the allure of marriage in order to trap her,
now pressed it upon her because he was physically
afraid of her and desired, completely possessing her,
to be at liberty to possess her, yet not compelled to.
For her strength and exhaustless energies terrified him,
and, an unaccomplished lover who had imagined that
Nature would teach him the way in all such matters,
or that he would know by instinct, he was aghast to
discover that it was an art that could apparently be
acquired only painfully and with suffering. Further,
he desired marriage because the consciousness of his
sin weighed upon him as a good Catholic.
Meantime his uncle, looking up from Gibbon on
his nephew’s rare visits, wondered at the boy’s thin
face and undrained complexion, and, immersing
himself in the footnotes on Zozimus, thought :
“Young skunk shows the bad blood of his mother.
No guts. He wants a woman.”
And he would glance up with contempt and aversion
at the lounging Robert, listlessly recovering from the
embraces of Ellen.
For a little, after hearing Ellen’s placid disclosure,
Mrs. Streseman Mullins sat with open mouth and
fishlike eyes. Then, closing her mouth, she stood up
and pointed coldly and uneasily at the door.
“Go out. You are discharged. Leave the building
at once.” She sat down, exhausted, scared. “The
impudence of it ! To tell me that you are a . . .
Go at once.”
Ellen arose unhurriedly. “Very well, madame. I
23& STAINED RADIANCE
merely answered the question you asked me. And I
don’t mind being discharged. Rene Freres have
already offered me double what I’m getting here.
I thought of leaving at the end of the week, any¬
way.”
“Rene Freres ? Do you think they’ll employ you
when they know what your private life is ? And I shall
certainly make it my duty to inform them.”
“Why shouldn’t they ? My private life’s nothing
to do with my work—except that recently it’s improved
it. And even if Rene Freres cancel their offer because
of anything that you may tell them, I can find money
to start on a business of my own.” The ex-sales-hand
was placidly conscious of power. “I can make and
sell better hats than anyone in London. My reputation
won’t worry customers. It’ll help.”
She left the room, her wide hips moving gracefully.
Mrs. Streseman Mullins sat and looked at the door.
Then she rang the bell again.
“Send Miss Ledgworth to me.”
In a short time the door opened and Ellen reappeared.
Mrs. Streseman Mullins spoke harshly, averting her
eyes.
“Miss Ledgworth, I have reconsidered your case.
If you will give your solemn promise to abandon the
kind of life you have lately lived, I will withdraw your
notice of discharge and say nothing more about
your . . . revelation.”
Ellen’s brown, attractive eyes regarded her unwink-
ingly. “You mean give up my lover, madame ? No.
Why should I ?”
Then she saw that Mrs. Streseman Mullins was
amazed, almost frightened. “Then why did you tell
me about—your lover ? You do not tell everyone, do
you ?”
“No. I told you because you yourself want a lover.
STAINED RADIANCE
237
You’re the same as I myself was before . . . And,
of course, you’ve been married, which makes it worse.”
She regarded the proprietrix with an energetic placidity.
“Why don’t you have your teeth seen to and stop
powdering ? You’ve ever such a nice face beneath
that covering. . . . Madame, I’m sorry.”
For the proprietrix of Cocotte Sceurs, her arms out¬
spread upon the desk, was weeping noisily, flourily,
scaredly.
Siibchapter Interlude {continued)
A week later Mrs. Streseman Mullins, who had
been absent from the millinery establishment owing
to indisposition, appeared in her private office at nine
o’clock in the morning. Her appearance electrified the
staff. Her face was white and smooth and creamy, and
appeared to have disdained the aid of powder ; her
mouth, when she spoke to the sales-manager as he
brought in her letters, exuded a normal breath.
Shaken out of his thoughts of Signor Mussolini and
the Empire, the sales-manager almost dropped the
sheaf of correspondence. Mrs. Streseman Mullins
smiled at him, thereby disclosing an uneven gap, here
and there, amidst her teeth.
“I’ll attend to the letters later. Send in Miss Ledg-
worth, will you ?”
When Ellen came in she gave a start of placid
astonishment. Mrs. Streseman Mullins smiled at her,
warmly, friendliwise.
“I’d have never had the courage to go to the dentist
if you hadn't come with me.”
The following Friday both Ellen and the sales-
manager found two weeks’ pay in their envelopes.
Served out to them with those envelopes were type-
STAINED RADIANCE
238
written notifications that they were discharged from
the service of Cocotte Soeurs without further
notice.
Subchapter i
Storman was on the revolutionary tramp.
He had left London on a Wednesday, spoken at
Plymouth the evening of that day, gone on to Bristol
on the Thursday, addressed two meetings there, and,
on the Friday afternoon when Ellen and the sales-
manager were notified of their discharge, was scheduled
to address a meeting of the South Wales Anarcho-
communist Group.
The evening broke in sleet, but cleared by seven
o’clock, when the meeting opened in the Masonic
Hall. Storman arrived late, climbed to the platform,
and sat listening to the chairman and surveying the
audience.
Looking down so, he shivered, for it was draughty.
Further, it was as though he looked from the ledge of
a hunter’s pit upon a collection of trapped, unclean
animals, and knew that, but for care, he himself might
lose foothold and fall into that festering no-life.
Dark Welsh, excitable, miners crowded the hall.
The stains of coal-dust still lingered where the hair
encroached on forehead and neck. Finger-nai s
showed their black serrations against clenched fists.
And a smell, a pit-reek, pervaded all the hall. Through
this the miners peered and talked, energetically, in a
cheechee swoop and fall of conversation. They were
men brawny, eager, cowed and devout. Them eyes
showed red rims and their teeth, yellow and unhealthy,
gleamed in the revealment of loud guffaws.
The meeting opened with a hymn in Welsh, ine
STAINED RADIANCE 239
chairman stood up, Storman stood up. While the sing¬
ing held, Storman mused. These folk he, a Leninist,
should regard as mere instruments ; once he would
have so regarded them. But now he found himself
looking upon them as badgered, beaten sub-humans,
morlocks of the pits, each with a striving, pitiful, hope¬
less, individual existence. . . . Leninistic instruments ?
For what ?
The closeness of the hall gave him a headache.
Standing, his mind turned with relief to thought of
his flat in Peckham. Was Norah being extravagant ?
And he thought carefully over the question of refur¬
nishing the bedroom, of curtailing his own expenses
during the tour, of negotiating an increase of salary
from the Plenary Committee of the Party. Smoking
he must cut out altogether.
He found the hymn finished. Sharp, on his mettle,
he stood up to speak.
“Comrades, the Government is on its last legs."
This was a good opening, but, saying it, he knew
that he lied. A year ago he would not have known
this. Or would it merely have been that he would not
have troubled to remind himself that he knew ? The
legs of the Government, though rheumaticky, were
stout enough. Nothing would transpire to upset it.
Like a dirtbug, it squatted athwart all England, and
so would continue to squat. He was mouthing revolu¬
tionary bunkum, proletarian pap.
Behind his mind this causal commentary kept on
during his speech. As a result, he was uninteresting.
Speedily he lost grip of the audience. The miners’
attention wandered. Groups began to converse in
low tones. Presently many pipes were lit. The smoke
grew thick. The hall became blue-hazed as an August
moor.
When Storman finished, there was a low, half-
240 STAINED RADIANCE
hearted clapping. He had said nothing but what was
new and startling. But he had not said it so that
it could be believed. He had hardly finished when up
from beside him rose the secretary of the local Minority
Movement. He smelt of the pit. His accent was the
volplaning whine of his country. He recounted an
obscene jest in which a local coalowner was the butt.
He spoke of Jesus, Buddha, St. David, Spartacus and
Karl Marx as early Communists. He entered into
questions of pay, shifts, coal seams.
The meeting awoke. It cheered and yelled encourage¬
ment and reminders of omitted details. The speaker
accepted and absorbed the reminders. Remote, at
the back of the hall, a policeman, a Londoner, stood
large and contemptuous and faintly amused. Tears
streamed down the speaker’s cheeks.
“And, py God, when we fight next time, we fight
to a finish ! There’ll pe no Baldwin, no landlords, no
ploody coalowners left. Only the People. And we’ll
take what’s ours, what we’ve made, what we’ve been
ropped of through the centuries, and use it for our¬
selves alone. ‘From each according to his apility, to
each according to his needs.’ Py God, we’ll rememper
that when we’re on top. We’ll rememper then what
the capitalists thought were our needs. When the fat-
gutted swine work their share in the pits and their
lily-fingered whores are wheeling parrows on the sur¬
face, we’ll rememper. . . . We’ll organize a decent
State, where every man shall have justice and chance
for self-improvement, where in time there shall pe
no more weeping, neither shall there pe any tears,
as the first Communist, Jesus of Nazareth, pro¬
phesied. . .
The meeting cheered, leapt to hobnailed boot-
soles, swung, in a hysteric extasy of fine Welsh
voices, into the chorus of the Internationale.
STAINED RADIANCE
24I
Across the swelling wave of song, from the rear of
the hall to the platform, the eyes of the only two men
left unstirred met in a glance of ironic amusement.
Subchapter ii
The annual musketry practice in the Palestine
Command was being fired at Bir Salem, and the Air
Force detachment at Jerusalem was being sent down
in relays of three to take part in it.
The ranges were in high bluffs beyond a creek.
Already the sunshine was broiling in the plains about
Ludd and Bir Salem. Each sunrise the fetid creeks
shrouded themselves in malarial fogs, wherethrough
unceasingly came the chorus of the frogs. Then these
sounds would still as the first pappatapappat of firing
broke out from the ranges.
Kneeling, standing, lying, the aircraftmen fired
only a restricted table. Crouching in a trench below
the butts, but in front of them, markers noted and
signalled results. Each marker possessed a pole sur¬
mounted with a coloured disc. At the end of each
round of firing he would cautiously elevate this pole,
rotate it in various positions to apprise the rifleman of
the species of hits made, and then withdraw again
into shelter. Occasionally the poles would rapidly
describe arcs against the skyline. Then the instructor
would curse the rifleman concerned as clumsy bastard.
For an arc indicated a complete miss.
Behind the riflemen each day, as the sun increased
in strength, a native vendor of cooling drinks would
approach with large, coloured bottles set about his
person on an arrangement of trays. He had a brown,
dried face, like that of a well-preserved mummy. He
believed all English infidels would one day burn in
0
1
242 STAINED RADIANCE
hell, and have no cooling drinks provided. Walking
behind a kneeling rifleman, he would interrupt a long
and steady aim with his constant cry :
“Dringgs. Leemonade. Nice and cool. Lovely.”
The last word he pronounced lovilly. Waddling
uncertainly behind the belching rifles, under the burn
of the sun, out over the sands to the pools of the
quietened frogs, his voice would echo, plaintive,
unceasing, a monosong :
“Lovilly.”
In the second week of February John Garland came
on the ranges. He had descended from Jerusalem by
railway, together with two other aircraftmen. They
were lodged the night in a hut and the following morn¬
ing marched out to the ranges in a squad under a
sergeant who held the M.C., had been an officer in the
Canadian army, and was saving up money to buy
himself out of the Air Force and purchase a garage in
Jaffa. A pleasant man, he was a convinced inter¬
nationalist. Reading Mr. H. G. Wells, he believed in
the Open Conspiracy of scientists and business men to
seize control of the world which they already con¬
trolled. He hoped they would succeed in wresting
power from themselves. His squad he regarded as
being trained in murder.
As the party marched to the ranges, he walked by
Garland and talked to him, for Garland’s voice had
seemed more cultured than that of the average air¬
craftman, who split infinitives and dropped aitches as
regularly as he broke the Ten Commandments. Look¬
ing round the ranges as they approached, Garland
answered the sergeant absently.
“But for the scientists, sergeant, you wouldn’t
have your present job. Fourteen million wouldn t
have been killed or disabled in the late War. You
wouldn’t have your M.C. or I my D.C.M. Ihe dream
STAINED RADIANCE 243
of salvation by science is on a par with the dream of
salvation by incantation."
The rest of the squad, listening to Garland and the
sergeant, guffawed, and remarked amongst them¬
selves that this Garland must be a religious bloke.
Ten of them detailed to fire, and two to act as
markers in the butts during the first practice, the
squad under the command of the scientific sergeant
took up a position at ten o'clock. Of the markers
selected Garland found himself one. The firing opened.
It came raggedly. Some of the aircraftmen poised
long upon their triggers, some fired quickly, trusting
to God. The markers, crouched in the trenches,
listened to the whippoot-whippoot of the bullets over¬
head. Then, on the firing ceasing at the end of a round,
they noted the results on each target, and, uplifting
their poles above the trench parapet, signalled the
results.
Occasionally a ricochet bullet would hum back¬
wards towards the trench, always burying itself in the
second bank of sandbags just below each target. At
such occurrence the other aircraftman would throw
himself flat on his face, cursing. Standing upright,
Garland would look at the punctured sandbag medi¬
tatively.
Once, when a round had ceased and the other
marker was signalling results over the parapet, he
glanced at the religious bloke. His back resting
against the trench-wall, Garland was reading a soiled
letter.
"Oi, wike up, chiner. The bleedin instructor'll be
after you.”
‘‘Go to hell," said Garland. He folded the letter
and put it in his pocket. An afterthought :
"And take the bloody instructor with you."
Eyeing him, the other marker noted a white, set
244
STAINED RADIANCE
face and curiously dead eyes. Bloke looked as though
he was going to be sick. Blast im.
Presently Garland picked up his pole, indifferently,
and began to record the hits on his target.
An hour passed. The voice of the lemonade seller
came occasionally to the markers in their trench. The
riflemen were now firing from the standing position.
A whistle blew shrilly. There came with it a hail in
the voice of the scientific sergeant.
“You fellows, there ! Time to fire your practice.”
Garland and his companion climbed out of the
trench and crossed the sand. They picked up their
rifles, oiled and ready, were handed clips of cartridges,
and instructed to give the bores a final pull-through.
Two of those aircraftmen who had already fired crossed
to the trench to record for the ex-markers. The others
surrounded the lemonade seller.
“Lying position first,” said the scientific sergeant.
“Spread out that blanket a bit more, will you ? Ready ?
Lying position, prepare !”
At this order Garland and his companion fell flat
upon their stomachs, holding their rifles clear of the
ground. The sergeant took out his watch.
“Load !”
The two aircraftmen clicked back the bolts of their
rifles, placed each a clip in position, and with their
thumbs forced five cartridges down into the magazine.
Each then shot home the bolt and set the safety
catch.
“Prepare to fire.”
Garland’s companion flung forward his rifle, brought
the butt against his right shoulder, peered along the
sights, altered the sighting gauge. The sergeant
inspected. He looked down at Garland absently.
“Fire left-handed, do you ?”
“Yes.”
STAINED RADIANCE 245
“Right. Five rounds deliberate : take your time.
Fire !”
Crack ! Psst! Crack ! Psst! Crack ! Psst! Crack !
Psst ! went Garland’s rifle. The scientific sergeant
called out to him.
“Here, not rapid firing. Deliberate, I said. . . .
Want to start over again ?“
Liking Garland’s accent, he offered him this conces¬
sion. Garland shook his head.
“No, thanks. I knew it was deliberate. . . .
They think in the butts I’ve finished.”
For the hidden marker for Garland’s trench was
showing the recording pole. Four times he elevated
it. A buzz of excitement rose from the audience of
aircraftmen. Bloody good shooting.
Garland had scored four bulls.
“Damned fool that marker,” said the sergeant.
Stentorian : “Hi! Didn’t you hear me say wait for
five rounds, blast you ?”
The recording pole disappeared. Crack ! Psst ! went
the rifle of Garland’s companion. Garland clicked
back his bolt, ejected a spent shell, jammed home the
bolt again, and looked sideways. His audience had
become spectators : their eyes were on the target.
Garland set his teeth, swung his head aside, gripped
a hand, suddenly sweat-ejecting, above the magazine
feeder, and pressed the trigger with his little finger. . . .
“Christ !” said the scientific sergeant.
He jumped back. From Garland’s rifle had come a
sputter, a crackling backward ejection of gas, a flash
of livid blue flame. Dropping the rifle, Garland rolled
aside. The sergeant swore, ran forward, and leant
over him.
“Hurt ?”
“My hand.”
The sergeant looked at Garland’s left hand, tore
STAINED RADIANCE
246
out his packet of field dressing, shouted to one of the
gaping aircraftmen to get water, and knelt down.
. . . By God ! grinning with his hand smashed !
“Keep it up. Plucky devil.”
“Unscientific world, isn’t it, sergeant ?” grinned
Garland, and fainted.
Subchapter in
It was ten o’clock at night, and Andreas van Koupa
was having his bath.
Bathing he made a lengthy process. His valet,
personally selected from some seven applicants, was
named Clelland. He was tall, spare, with weak eyes
and a truculent manner. The manner had caused
Koupa to engage him. He promised amusement.
Finding that he had been baptized James, Koupa
brooded upon the matter and then delivered a ukase.
“James will not do, my little. It is seemly for a
valet to be called James. And a seemly valet I will
not tolerate. I shall call you Sardanapalus. ”
“Very good, sir.”
Clelland had been in service for twenty years and
a valet for ten of these. Born in Dorset, he had been
begot by a gardener upon a cook. From his earliest
years he had looked upon service with the gentry as
only technically inferior to the service of God. He liked
being a servant. No man capable of paying him a
salary could be of the same blood and flesh-texture as
himself. He was convinced of hierarchy upon hierarchy
of the divinely comfortable divinely ordained to that
comfort. He was a fatalist in philosophy, and as a
result stole as much as possible whenever opportunity
offered. He seldom left a master but he was the richer
in saleable studs and links. To rob his master he was
STAINED RADIANCE
247
as divinely appointed as was his master to have his
face shaved and his bath prepared.
His truculent manner was due to a purely nervous
weakness, and had misled Koupa. But the poet went
in constant hope of provoking revolt in the heart of
Clelland. Suspecting him of current proletarian super¬
stitions, Koupa would talk scoffingly of Mr. Ramsay
MacDonald, trades unions, and the New Leader. To
all such remarks Clelland agreed with enthusiastic
respect. Sighing, Koupa gave up his self-appointed
task.
“He has the soul of the proverbial worm, this
Sardanapalus. But its turning he will not emulate.
He is an efficient blot upon my bedroom. I shall
rename him Ashurbanipul.”
WTien he could remember to do so, the poet worked
his valet hard. He enjoyed being tended as though
he were a paralytic. Examining his own soul in the
early days after Clelland’s engagement, he was delighted
to find in it a certain shame of having his person tended
and seen to and shaved by alien hands.
“God mine, but this is good. My soul, thou art
bourgeois. Unless it be that thou art ultra-modern.
Which is worse.”
He lay in his bath, thinking of this. It was a wide,
deep bath, sunken in the floor. It steamed pleasingly.
Grateful odours floated over the head of the poet.
About his body the water, softened by expensive
bath-salts, had a caressing intimacy. Towels, in series
for service, stood by the electrical warming apparatus.
Great sponges of silky texture lay within reach.
“But it may be that all service of the individual
master is shameful. It is a survival of the bullying
with bone and sinew and club. Even before the day
of the club was the day of the personal servant. Man’s
unfortunate gregariousness was the indirect cause of
248
STAINED RADIANCE
his appearance. The so-great he-ape sought companion¬
ship in his forest-wanderings, in his vermin-hunts, in
his raids upon the screeching female-group. He
caused some lesser male to accompany him, to hand
oyer the choicer vermin caught, to assist in the abduc¬
tion of the female. Then he would sit, slow-dozing by
the stagnant drinking-pool, the while the lesser ape
assiduously picked the lice from his master’s back
and shoulders. Or licked his wounds. Or was killed
and eaten when the hunger-time and famine came."
And the poet gently twiddled his toes, and, regarding
his tended body, smiled.
He loved the life into which he had climbed through
the affections and prestige of the one-time Mrs. Gay-
ford.. He drank of its comforts and luxuries, not
sparingly, not ravenously, but slowly, as a gourmet
at an exquisite banquet. At meals he ate much, but
with deliberation. He had himself clad in costly and
highly-coloured underwear at ten o’clock each morn¬
ing. For twelve hours out of the twenty-four he slept
in a large and expensive Empire bed, with rounded
pillows and springs of ease and wonder, so that he
would feel himself lying, already dead, in some Jehovian
heaven. And, with this humour upon him, he had a
barrel-organ come and play outside his bedroom
window, two mornings in succession, in order that the
illusion might be complete.
But his acts of eccentricity, outside the hiring of
the barrel-organ and the naming of his valet, were
few. With a grave appreciation he lived this new life.
And he would think :
‘‘Like my he-ape of the drinking-pools, I also am
a cannibal. I live on food grown on sweating farms,
by the toil of serf-like yokels. I go clad in silk from
the men-manured fields of France. Like a vampire
sucking blood I suck life and service from Ashur-
STAINED RADIANCE 249
banipul and a so-great host of others. In return, I
now and then write the so-little sonnet. I am one of
the world’s anointed. For this consummation
dreamers have dreamt, inventors invented, rebels
rebelled, kings have been kingly. For this they died
at Marathon and were crucified along the Appian
Way—that I might forget them and sleep.”
He slept as one who had due to him long arrears of
sleep. He slept luxuriously, frighteningly, so that
even after twelve hours nightly his valet had to shake
him awake. He slept with a vast, comfortable, imper¬
sonal weariness. He nightly sank himself in a tideless,
dreamless sea of no-consciousness.
‘‘And the so-fat sow would protest ? God mine,
have I not the long years to atone for ? Has she slept
upon the snows of Russia or in half the windy ditches
of Europe, as I have ? I could outsleep Arthur in
Avalon, and with better excuse.”
Mrs. Koupa feared and admired him, nor yet saw
any prospect of wearying of the novelty. It was as
the mating of a middle-aged peacock to a sea-hawk,
but the ex-Mrs. Gayford was unconscious of the fact.
The hawk alternately thrilled and frightened her.
Once, when she had protested against his refusal to
attend a dinner owing to his affirmation that he needed
sleep, Koupa had burst into a torrent of abuse. Who
was she to criticize ? Was he her paid servant ?
Could he not be master in his own house ? And,
grasping her shoulders cruelly with his long fingers,
he had thrust blazing eyes within a few inches of her
own. She had thereat soothed him and apologized,
abjectly. Koupa, alone, had smiled at himself in a
great mirror.
“God mine, I think she half-believes this house is
verily mine.”
The first issue of The Lyre had met with an excellent
250
STAINED RADIANCE
reception. By careful advertising and the employment
of an expensive press-agency, it had achieved not only
stimulating reviews but a surprising sale. Reviewers,
praising Koupa’s poems, which filled half the issue,
had done so with sentences beginning : “The maturing
of Mynheer Andreas van Koupa’s verse since early
days has been even and deliberate. . . “From a
poet of promise, he has achieved genius. . . And
the like.
Elected member of an exclusive literary club,
Koupa had now arranged for the publication of his
poems in three slim volumes. Less than a fourth had
previously appeared in print, but they were to be
published as reprints. Advance notices had already
appeared in most journals. And Koupa thought :
“I wrote them ten, fifteen—so-long years ago.
They refused, those English houses and publishers.
Not one of them would usher my dream-children into
the world. And now they praise with their so-buttered
words. They speak of growing genius. . . . God
mine ! I could not now outsound the bullock-bleat of
a Chesterton or the whip-whoo of a De la Mare. They
praise and acclaim not me, but the scabby young
pimp of the Montmartre brothels. . . . Ave atque
vale : To you the so-good glory, O my youth ; to me,
the comforts. Had you not gone an-hungered how
would I now be able to feast on the fruits of your so-
tortured brain ?"
And he would reflect :
“It was well that I was of the Keatsian, not
the Shelleyan genius. Had I expressed my so-brave
rebel philosophy in terms political, even now it would
be looked coldly upon. But I swathed it in trees and
streams and damp stars and the bedgowns of the
ancient gods. Wherefore I am a poet.”
Convinced that no good could come from the stirring
STAINED RADIANCE
251
of the gutters, he had dropped all relations with the
Anarchocommunist Party. Both he and the ex-Mrs.
Gayford had been blacklisted in an issue of Th& Red
Republican. And, surveying his thoughts with that
soundless mind-chuckle of the Other Self, the poet
saw that he already looked upon his late associates
not only with contempt, but with a certain cruel
anger. These animals who sought to drag in the mire
all the fair and sweet and lovely things of Life. . . .
“God mine !’’
The poet ceased to float idly in his bath. He clasped
his hands behind his head. His eyes shone with
sudden resolution. Thought of a new act had come
upon him—an act which would bow in weeping all
the grey rebel shades in Hell.
“By the so-little Christ ! I will join the Primrose
League !”
CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH
Wherein Garland evolves a System of Religion and
renounces the Belief that Life is due to a Faulty
and Accidental Mixing of Chemicals.
Subchapter i
EARLY in March a young man descended from
a tramcar in Clerkenwell and sought a side-
street. Though it lay remote from the main thorough¬
fare, he found it without difficulty. Entering it, he
was apprised of an unusual smell. This was caused
by the upper half of the street being used as a stable
for the horses of the London and Surrey Cartage
Company. Through the white and blue of the March
day arose the sound of iron-shod hoofs clumping on
worn cobbles, the whoas of drivers, the lift and fall
of stable effluvia. The young man paid no attention.
With a letter in his hand he walked up the street,
amidst disordered dustbins, seeking a certain
number.
He found it on the doorway of a house, wedged
sideways between two others and leaning crazily
forward as if to peer round the shoulder of its neigh¬
bours upon the faces of the passers-by. The young
man rang at a bell, and, obtaining no answer, beat
upon the door with his stick. Doing this, he noted,
detachedly, that the bellpush was green and that
round its edges a minute fungoid growth flourished
obscenely.
The door opened. A man, unshaved, wearing cloth
STAINED RADIANCE
253
slippers and carrying a copy of the Daily Mail,
appeared. From his face exuded a smell of kippers.
Upon his waistcoat were the miniature ribbons of
three War-medals. He regarded the young man with
large, fishy, grey eyes, the while he absorbed details
of his appearance.
He saw before him one of middle height, stout,
with a heavy face and sulky eyes. The young man
was in Air Force uniform and carried one arm in a
sling.
They spoke simultaneously :
“Are you Mr. Roupell ?"
“Mr. Garland ?”
The fish-eyed man stared at Garland queerly. A
heavy redness uprose beneath his unshaven skin.
“Mr. Garland ? I eard you were in Egipp. Urt your
and ?”
“Smashed by a bursting rifle. I’ve been sent home,
invalided out of the Service.” Garland’s eyes smoul¬
dered sulkily. The letter in his hand shook. “Is my
wife in ?”
Mr. Roupell backed away. “Ere, come in. In there.
Sit down and I'll . . .”
The door closed behind him. The flap of his list
slippers sounded remoter down a passage. Garland
looked round, sat down. His heart was beating high
in his throat. He loosened the neck of his tunic, stared
at the door, looked away from it again. Thea . . .
He became conscious of the letter still grasped in
his hand. He read it, tiredly, looking up at the door
uncertainly, once folding the pages and putting them
in his breast pocket and then taking them out
again.
He had received this letter in Jerusalem on the
15th of January. It showed creased and soiled with
much re-reading.
254
STAINED RADIANCE
Dear Husband-lover,
Thanks for your letter of the 29th. It came a
week ago. You’re a dear man. I wish I were
with you, for you’re a lucky one as well, and it
must be a kind Air Force which organizes such
Cook’s tours.
But I wish it was a little kinder to me. You’ll
see that I’ve changed my address. The Stickellys
turned me out, and I know you wouldn't guess
the reason though I gave you a hundred years
to do it in. It was because James Storman—
remember him ? the Communist who was in love
with Norah and is now married to her—paid me
a visit. Dear, Stickelly was a detective, Storman
was well known, and it was concluded that I was
a Communist. So the Government instructed
that I should be thrown out.
I found this place without much trouble.
It’s cheap and quite comfortable. I have a
bed-sitting-room, with a gas-ring on the landing
to do my cooking. The people, Roupell is the
name, are not detectives. Mr. Roupell is a carter.
He eats kippers at every meal, I think, and wears
medals on Sunday. He’s interested in you because
he was a driver in the R.F.C. during the War.
I’ll be all right, don’t worry, though money’s
a devil of a nuisance.
This, in Thea’s wide, easy scrawl, had ended
page 2 of the letter. Each sheet was numbered, and
page 3 resumed :
Been rotten weather this last week, but it
should clear up soon. Haven’t seen anything of
Norah or Ellen since I moved here. Don’t suppose
they know my change of address. I’ll have to write
STAINED RADIANCE
255
a note to Norah, anyway. At home I think they’re
still sulking over our hasty marriage, but they’ll
cure in time. Silly old geese !
That’s about all at the moment, sweet heart.
Do look after your dear self and don’t go falling
off pyramids or camels or anything. Write me
often.
Yours,
Thea.
This ended page 3.
But there were four pages. The fourth was also
numbered 3. It was a crumpled page, obviously
inserted by mistake ; written to ease the fear and
loneliness of the writer, then thrown aside ; picked
up in the twilight of the bed-sitting-room and enveloped
with the lighthearted other sheets.
Oh, my dear, my dear, God knows what I’ll
do. I could go mad when I sit thinking ; I daren’t
sit thinking. I’ve no money—I’ve been without
food, except for bread, for two days. Your allow¬
ance comes to-morrow but it’ll hardly do more
than pay off the rent. And so on it’ll go for
months, never ending. . . .
And the baby’s coming. Soon be here. I’ve
no clothes for it, no cot, nothing. Poor little
kid ! I can’t afford to see a doctor, and I don’t
know anything about things, but I think it’s a
criminal offence not to notify a doctor. I should
see a doctor, I know, and arrange to go somewhere,
or have a nurse, or something. But I can’t,
I can’t. I’ve no money, not even to pay for a
bus-fare. And walking tires me so that I can hardly
stand. My legs have swollen.
I’m afraid, God, I’m afraid. Not only of this
but the pain and loneliness to come. In the
256
STAINED RADIANCE
darkness, nothing to hold on to. Oh, I’m a scared
coward, but I can’t, can’t go on. . . .
John. Oh God God God God . . .
Subchaptey ii
It had brought him from Egypt, that blotted,
hysterical page ; it had led him to shatter his hand
at Bir Salem by the old trick of disablement—firing
a rifle with an unscrewed bolt; it had accomplished
his invaliding to England and his pending discharge.
Now he waited, hearing steps. The door opened.
It was not Thea, but a woman with great breasts
and a red-scoured face. She held out a red, damp
hand. There was about her the smell of soap and
laundering.
“Mister Garlan ? Sit doon. That fule o a man o
mine is as fusionless as only a bairn or an Englishmin
could be. . . . Och, I mind noo, you’re English,
though Mrs. Garlan’s no. Where did ye come
frae ?”
“From hospital, Mrs. Roupell—isn’t it ?’’
“Aye, I’m her. You maun be tired. Sit still an
I’ll mak a cup o tea. Would ye like an egg ?”
“Mrs. Roupell, where’s my wife ?’’
The woman’s eyes winked together rapidly. “She’s
no in just noo. Sit doon an I’ll bring ye a cup o
tea.”
Garland walked over to her at the door, looked
into her eyes, saw the trembling of the heavy, kindly
lips. He felt cool and undisturbed.
“Mrs. Roupell, where’s my wife ?”
She made a strange, helpless gesture, half-holding
out her roughened hands.
“Sit doon, sit doon. Oh, Mr. Garlan, I dinna ken
STAINED RADIANCE
257
hoo to tell ye. . . . Puir young lassie. We havena
slept for thinkin o her, me an my man, thinkin
that maybe vve were to blame. But we didna ken, we
didna ken.” A tear rolled down her face. “We didna
ken.”
“When did she die ?”
“Die ? I dinna think she’s dead. The nurse told
Roupell this mornin that she was sinkin fast. But
she’s no dead. Puir young lassie. I’ll never forgie
mysel ”
Garland sat down. He lit a cigarette. His calmness
seemed undisturbed.
“Will you please tell me about it, Mrs. Roupell ?”
And presently everything was told. Three days
before his arrival Thea had been discovered lying in a
dead faint on the landing outside her room. A doctor
had been called in, and Mrs. Garland removed to the
London General Hospital, suffering from under¬
nourishment and certain complications of advanced
pregnancy, culminating in eclampsy.
Subchapter in
The doctor looked Garland over with critical,
kindly eyes. He seemed to be harbouring some remote
jest. He wore a white surtout, streakily stained.
“There’s no change. She’s still unconscious. Yes,
you can see her. Nurse !”
Garland followed a nurse along corridors which
rang under the steel of his feet. The nurse kept turning
to address cheerful remarks to him. Cold weather.
Looks like s'now. No spring even after such a winter.
Have you hurt your arm ? Your hand ? A rifle ?
My ! you’ll have to press for compensation. Just in
here you’ll find her. Oh, quite all right. You can move
R
STAINED RADIANCE
258
the screen. ... Now I’ll leave you. Quite safe.
If you want anything press that bell. There’s a chair
over by the radiator.
Garland stood inside four walls of grey screen.
He looked down on a bed and into a pair of very
bright eyes.
Thea lay on her back, on a kind of rubber sheet.
Her coppery hair was flung back from her brow. He
had never before noticed the shape of her brow.
She stared up at him, brightly, unseeingly. Her eyes
wavered away from him, her lips moved as at the jerk
of a string.
“Oh dear, oh dear.”
He bent over her. For a full minute he failed to
comprehend that no mind of the Thea he had known
functioned behind those bright eyes and moving lips.
He kissed her and she moved her head aside in steady,
unceasing rhythrrj.
“Oh dear, oh dear.”
For sixty hours she had lain, singing underbreath
that monotone. As he looked he saw the purpose of
the rubber sheet. From Thea’s lips a thin brown
liquid oozed and fell. In its passage across her cheek
it had already worn a trail of red, raw flesh.
“Oh dear, oh dear.”
He sat down and looked at her. All the ward outside
was very quiet. Surely listening to her. He picked up
a cloth and wiped the brown acid from her lips. He
placed his hand by the side of her cheek.
“Thea. You know me. Thea.”
And, with the sound of his own voice, he realized
with a dull amazement that he was weeping. In the
restricted space left by his hand, Thea’s head moved
to and fro, ceaselessly, on the pillowless bed.
“Oh dear, oh dear.”
He withdrew his hand. A memory of a day in the
STAINED RADIANCE 259
Zoo at Regent’s Park came to him. Why ? Oh, the
pacing of the cats. . . . To and fro, endlessly, unweary-
ingly, seekers after an undespaired-for freedom. To
and fro endlessly.
“Oh dear, oh dear.”
He became aware of a horrifying change. Her
lips had closed, were caving in, her eyes seemed
gouging from their sockets. Upon the rubber sheet
her body curved and twisted, white and bloated, scarred
with giant sores upon the poison-laden flesh. He
reached blindly for the bellpush.
“Nurse !”
A screen was quickly drawn aside. The nurse looked
in, cheerfully. Immediately she entered, then turned
back to the screen and thrust her head out.
“Sister.”
Garland stood up and aside. Of a sudden his mangled
hand began to throb. He would not look again.
He looked.
Cheerful, deft, they were holding her down on the
bed. The nurse had clamped an apparatus of metal
and linen over the distorted face. The other uncorked
a bottle and handed it to the nurse.
Thea suddenly shook and fell away from them
and lay very still. Her head did not move now. Below
her eyes gathered a strange bluishness. . . . The nurse
turned cheerfully to Garland.
“Scared, were you ? I don’t think you should stay
any longer. Go and have some tea, do. You’ll feel
better. No, there won’t be any change for some hours
yet.”
Garland followed the nurse down the ringing corridor,
to the hospital steps and a glimpse of the closing
darkness of the London March.
“When shall I come back ?”
She looked brightly from the clock to his face.
26o
STAINED RADIANCE
“Well, any time. You can’t do anything, you know.
When would suit you best ? Come at eight ? The
doctor’ll be examining Mrs. Garland again.”
“Nurse, is there any hope ?”
“Why, of course. Going to snow, I’m sure. Now,
do have a good tea. Good-bye.”
Subchapter iv
He wondered how he would feel when Thea was
dead.
Crossing the Hungerford footbridge, he brooded
upon this, but impersonally, as though he were an
observer on a ship at sea, knowing that a dim-seen
island would shortly vanish in a submarine earth¬
quake.
For all his senses seemed preternaturally sharpened.
Never had he felt so alive. Except that something
which was not his mind, something back of it and
above it, was dead. Of that he was conscious, with a
cool wonder, and knew that dead something for the
real Garland. The thing within his brain with which
he now thought and brooded was a false and alien
self.
He passed through cold, ringing streets to the
Union Jack Club, and booked a room there. Then
he went out into the night again and became aware
of something which he had surely never seen before.
Under the electric lights was a drifting fall of whiteness,
a magical, never-ceasing descent, a growing to being
out of skyey darkness into terrestrial light. He stood
on the steps of the Union Jack Club and held out his
hand.
“Snowing.”
Slowly, like a tame thing, a flake swung down to
STAINED RADIANCE
26l
his hand. He stared at the marvel of it. Newsboys
were shouting in the streets. Cabs rattled. He looked
round him with a sharp surprise.
Didn’t they know about Thea ? Lying there on that
rubber sheet, the brown acid dribbling from her lips ?
Didn’t they know ?
Something to read. Something to forget. Supper.
Something to read.
He crossed the street and went up the stone stairs
of the Waterloo Station to the bookstall. And, going,
he read the advertisements, saw their value. They
were extraordinarily bright and attractive. That
whisky splendidly postered. A new magazine out
since he had left England. Running a Tarzan serial.
Good old Tarzan. Michael Arlen. Can’t abide
Michael.
He bought “When the World Shook” at the bookstall
and took it with him up the Waterloo Road to a
frowsty restaurant where the unemployed munched
pieces of bread and drank coffee. He sat down at a
small, marble-topped table. There was a warm fire
in the room. Several men, drinking their coffee,
were discussing the day’s football. A cheerful waitress
came to him.
“Two kippers, please, and tea and bread and
butter.”
“Large or small tea ?”
“Large, please.”
He opened “When the World Shook” and began to
read it. Soon he was deep in it, enjoying it. The
kippers were brought and he ate them, with mustard,
and drank the large tea from a thick cup. Bread with
butter. Good after Air Force margarine. Time to be
going. A cigarette.
He bought a packet and lit one and sat smoking
in the warmth. The waitress came and paid him his
262
STAINED RADIANCE
change in many coppers. She stoked the fire. Garland
got up and buttoned his coat, pocketed “When the
World Shook’’ carefully, and went out.
The snow fell steadily. But up the Waterloo Road
the crowds merely thickened. Garland stopped often
to look in shop-windows, and now and then at his
watch. Plenty of time.
But near Charing Cross, stopping, he knew he was
in a nightmare. He had never married Thea Mayven.
He had never gone to Palestine. Thea was not in
hospital. He wras mixed up with ironic happenings
in his own novel. Presently he would wake up in
Burford Camp.
He must awake. Else his brain would split in the
glare of the lights. Else the crowds would know, as
he had imagined he did. They would not run
and loiter and shout and chatter if it were
true. . . .
A girl with Thea’s way of walking passed him.
He followed after her, breathless, knowing that in a
little she would turn her face towards him, halt with
the old, glad cry, the amused lips, cry “John.” In a
moment.
She went into a shop, and so turned her face towards
him, a peaked, red-nosed face, at sight of which
he halted and stared till she had vanished and the
crowds forced him on.
Snow fell steadily. Ravenously hungry, he stopped
at a coffee-stall, and bought a cup of tea and sandwiches.
Ihe keeper of the coffee-stall talked to him of a man
whom he knew in the Air Force. A sergeant pilot, and
doing very well. \es. And Garland found himself
interested, and making authoritative statements on
the Air Force, and feeling the copy of “When the
World Shook’’ pressing comfortably against his
hip.
STAINED RADIANCE 263
Ever after he was to associate Rider Haggard's
book with that night. Inextricably mixed with
that night and the snow were Arbuthnot, Bastin, and
Bickley. They swept across the southern seas in a
typhoon that was a drifting snowstorm, they talked
and wondered in the ruined ship, in low voices, because
somewhere at the back of their minds, closed out,
desperately forgotten, was the knowledge that Thea
lay in a remote part of the ship, lay moaning, turning
bright, glazed eyes to and fro, endlessly, whispering
“Oh dear, oh dear.” And then her mouth would
cave in, her body twist.
Snow fell steadily. Garland climbed the hospital
steps to the porter’s lodge and was admitted. The
porter’s moustaches, curving and bovine, hung from
his cheeks like creeper growths. Turning to guide
Garland, he expectorated cracklingly into the night.
Then the corridors rang again under the hobnails
of Garland’s boots.
The doctor, smiling at some cryptic jest. His hands
bloody, his sleeves rolled up. “Mr. Garland ? Come
in here, will you ?”
He led the way into a small room, the door of which
was labelled “Store”. There was a table, a chair, a
bed. The electric light did not work and they stood
in a glow from the corridor. A window was open and
the snow drifted by, an unbroken curtain against the
square of darkness.
The doctor stood with his bloody hands held away
from his surtout. He was taller than Garland. His
teeth glimmered as he spoke.
“There’s a change, Mr. Garland. A quite unexpected
change. Never encountered its like before. Your
wife is in labour.”
“In labour ?”
“Yes, Yes. Distinct signs of it. Unexpected. Is
STAINED RADIANCE
264
there anyone who would look after the child for you,
Mr. Garland ?"
Look after the child. Look after the child. But the
doctor did not wait for a reply. He moved towards
the doorway in the bright-shining corridor. Somewhere,
further along, a nurse was laughing. From a yet more
distant place came a burst of cheering. In the doorway
the doctor stood with his head turned in the direction
of the cheering.
“Patients’ concert.” He smiled. His bright teeth
glimmered. Recollected Garland. Moved to let him
pass. “Yes. Distinct signs.”
“Can I see her ?”
“Don’t think you should. Only upset you. They
haven’t cleared the mess up, yet. Best thing you can
do is go and have some food and come back later. If
you like. There’ll be no change for some time. Not
till morning, anyway.”
“I’ll come back at midnight.”
“All right. If you want to. But get some food and
sleep. Still snowing ?”
A sudden scream rang out—a scream thin, horrible,
animal, mounting chord upon chord up a quivering
scale of agony. It died, then rose and fell again.
Rose again, till the corridor rang with the peal of it.
The doctor nodded to Garland.
“Get some food and sleep. There’ll be no change
till morning. Good night.”
For a moment, lowering face frozen, Garland stood
hesitant. Was that Thea ? Impossible. Go now and
come back at midnight. No change. ...
The scream quavered up again from an underdrooling
scarp of shrill agony. Garland nodded to the
doctor.
“Right. Thanks very much. Good night.”
It had been Thea. . . .
STAINED RADIANCE
265
Subchapter v
He became profoundly convinced of the existence
of God. In the thinning and thickening snowfall as
he walked the Victoria Embankment he knew that
there was verily a Deity.
Only, God was a Devil.
All the legends and tales were true. Created not
by their own forces, but by a reasoning mind, had
been the universe, all the stars, life, movement, sensation.
Created by a super-scientist eternally experimenting.
And at the beginning he had set aside the earth for
his experiment in organic life.
Sometimes, busied elsewhere amongst other jars
in that giant laboratory, he forgot this planet, and the
thing labelled Life mouldered forth unforeseen growths
—pity and compassion and star-wonder, the adventure-
soul, and love. Then, in the close heat of the laboratory,
God would lift the lid off the jar and survey the new
shape and form of his experiment. With cold, clear
eyes he would look on it, then reach his hand into the
midst of it, flick fingers here and there, withdraw
them, stand watching. And where he had flicked a
finger the crabs of writhing cancer would move in
agonized stomach, great tumours would root and
sprout in rotting brain-cells, viviparous organs would
contract and close on unborn offspring. Then God
would replace the lid, make notes, walk away, and
stand watching through the star-studded windows a
never-ending snow. . . .
And God himself was but a fleeting drift of atoms
in an experiment by yet another super-scientist,
who flicked his fingers in the brain of God to
induce God to set the plagues and cancers in
motion.
Oh, rot, man, rot. Step aside and laugh at it.
266
STAINED RADIANCE
Let the drums and the processioning go by, the tears,
the love, the pain. Step out. You were never made
for that march. Probe in their comical gestures and
beliefs. Step aside and laugh at it all. Step
aside. . . .
It was a voice that cried inside his head, and there
was agony in the cry. Garland, the old Garland, fighting
a last fight.
And, standing looking over the snow-sheeted
River, he heard, as in a dream, the voice pass by and
out of his life for ever.
Subchapter vi
He walked up from the Embankment towards
Leicester Square, where the theatres blinked dead
eyes. The snow ceased abruptly. Frost set in. Under¬
foot it was a soft carpeting of crispness. Garland
walked like a ghost amidst deserted canons of stone.
The noise of a last office door closing re-echoed thun¬
derously.
At a corner a man stood aside to let Garland pass.
They looked in each other’s faces.
“Garland, isn’t it ?’’
“Eh ?”
“Our meeting the time before last was in the National
Strike. I was on a motor-cycle, and you threatened
things with a rifle. I have often wondered if it was
loaded.”
The man pushed back his hat so that the light fell
full on his face. It was Storman. Garland nodded,
dully.
“Captain Storman, isn’t it ? No, the rifle wasn’t
loaded.”
He passed on, but Storman walked beside him.
STAINED RADIANCE
267
“Thought you were abroad. How’s Mrs. Garland ?”
“She’s been in hospital three days. She’s not
expected to live.”
“Baby coming ?”
“Yes.”
They walked down the street together. Absently,
Garland related the happenings to Thea since
Storman had visited her in Shepherd’s Bush. His
face dim under his wide hat-brim, Storman listened
in silence. He expressed neither sorrow nor
regret.
“I’ll call round to-morrow. So will Norah. How
soon do you expect your discharge from the Air
Force ?”
“I don’t know. In a fortnight or so.”
“Work to go to ?”
“No.”
Storman walked in silence for a little, then :
“You’ll need work soon. Especially with Mrs.
Garland and a baby to keep.”
But Garland was not listening. Storman brought
a card out into the snowlight.
“Look here. This is Wednesday. There’s a friend
of mine who’s manager of the Kyland Press. He wants
a sub-editor or proof-reader. Go to him Saturday
forenoon. I’ll ring him up meanwhile. All
right ?”
“Eh?”
Storman looked into his face, nodded, and then
put the card into his hand. “Put it into your pocket.
Don’t forget.”
Garland was suddenly conscious. The thing dead
in him since his first visit to hospital flamed raggedly
alive.
“But why are you doing this for me ? I thought
Communists didn’t believe in charity ?”
268
STAINED RADIANCE
“My wife has a baby coming.”
They were at Charing Cross Underground. Storman
stopped.
“Can I lend you some money ?”
“I’ve plenty—for the time being. . . . Oh, you
know what I feel like. Thanks awfully. I’ll go on
Saturday if . . . My God ! My God !”
“Give Mrs. Garland my regards when she wakes.
Hope it’ll be a boy. Can’t blame you for tramping
the streets all night. I’ll do the same myself. I’ll be
round to-morrow. Good night.”
Garland stared after him. Hadn’t he understood ?
God, hadn’t he understood that Thea 
Clear and sharp across snow-whitened London Big
Ben began to strike twelve.
Subchapter vii
“Sit down in here, will you ?” said a cheerful night
nurse. “Matron’ll be to see you in a minute.”
Garland stood holding his cap and listening. The
whole hospital was asleep. Surely more than asleep.
It was deathly still.
The door opened. The matron stood looking at
Garland. She was tall, with a harsh, businesslike face,
and efficient, bony hands whereon gleamed expensive
rings. She nodded to a chair.
“Sit down, Mr. Garland.”
He sat down. The matron sat down beside a small
table, picked up a quill pen, drew a sheet of paper
towards her, meditated for a moment, then swung
round in her swivel chair.
“Well, Mr. Garland, the baby’s born. Dead. It
hadn’t a chance. Best thing. I think . .
“I thought ”
STAINED RADIANCE 269
"Yes. Came quickly. Can’t be helped. We did
all we could. Like to see it ?’’
He felt sick as he looked at the woman. Thea's
baby. Dead. Best thing. Thea’s baby. That which
had grown inside the body he had loved and desired.
That which he had fathered. Warm and a miracle,
that which Thea had yielded to him. Thea’s
baby. . . .
"No."
"All right. Best not to. Not pleasant to see. Blood
poisoned. You'd better go back to bed.”
"I want to see my wife."
“Well, can if you like. There's no change. You’ll
have to see about an undertaker in the morning for
the baby. Yes. Leave your hat and stick here.
Nurse !"
The night-nurse took him to the ward, pulled open
the surrounding screens, motioned him in with a
cheerful smile. A reek, strange and repugnant, hung
above the bed.
Thea lay on her back, on a rubber sheet. She had
no pillow. Her head moved continually from side to
side, a low moan issued endlessly, in a sing-song, from
her swollen lips.
“Oh dear, oh dear.”
She looked completely unchanged since last he had
seen her. And suddenly he was conscious that of the
happenings to her she knew nothing. She, who had
suffered travail all the long months, the days of star¬
vation, the sickening agony of the last few hours,
knew nothing of her release. Prisoned still, a prisoner
unconscious that the bars were down and the gaoler
gone.
Pitifully prisoned in mist.
And then, of a sudden, her head ceased to move to
and fro. Dark blood gushed from her lips. Her eyes
270
STAINED RADIANCE
seemed to start from her head. She writhed under
the thin covering as he caught her and held her, and
he saw . . .
He pressed the bell-switch beside the bed.
Subchapter viii
The matron stood talking to the night-nurse. It
was three o’clock in the morning. Garland had gone.
The matron and the nurse were drinking tea made
from an electric kettle. On the stand in front of her
the matron was inspecting a paper fashion plate
advertised in the Daily Express.
“Yes. Neat thing. Have you sent for it ?”
“No. I thought of it. But there's hardly any time
here for making one’s clothes. Now, if I were a
matron ’’
The matron smiled. She and the nurse were old
friends, and in moments such as these, in the stillness
of the nights, they relaxed discipline, and were critical
and friendly. The nurse yawned.
“Eaoww ! Time I went the rounds again. That
septic case in Ward 3 is having a tough time
of it.”
“Operate to-morrow, I should think,” said the
matron. “Time to, anyway. You’d better have a look
at Mrs. Garland, first thing.”
The nurse stood up, fastening her shoulder-straps.
“Yes. I think she’s going.”
“Bound to. Linger a few hours, perhaps. Not
much more. Best thing.”
The nurse finished her tea. “Ugh ! She’s poisoned
through and through. The worst case of eclampsy
I've seen.”
“Yes, it’s her waist that caused the bother. Too
STAINED RADIANCE
271
narrow : pelvis undeveloped, kidneys strangled with
the double work of the child and herself. Should
never have married. . . . We’ll want that bed of
hers for the patient who’s coming from Norwood
to-morrow.”
“That husband takes it cool enough.”
“Yes. Heartless. Ah, well, she’ll know nothing
about it. Won’t recover consciousness again. Best
thing.”
Subchapter ix
Until those days and nights, Garland had never
realized the extent of London. Its multitudes of
streets and alleys shocked him as might some obscene
and unlooked-for country discovered as hinterland to
a well-known coast. He wandered them at all hours,
aimlessly, mile upon mile of them, so that he strayed
far away into North London, east into the depths of
Limehouse, lost himself amongst the innumerable
bye-ways of Thames-side, came unexpectedly upon
stretches of countryside, upon queer, old-time gardens
lost in slopes of slums, upon houses of a strange beauty
standing on high hills and overlooking all London.
Especially at night-time was he astounded at the
unknown beauty of London—beauty of the spirit,
he told himself—and would wander in mazes of specu¬
lation as to the relation of beauty to the human
mind, the while his feet trod the muddied mazes
of the New Cut. He had never before realized
London.
His wanderings focussed on the hospital. It was
as though he were a laggard factory-hand bound
there by necessities of life and bread. Rigidly, once
every three hours, he turned back from far wanderings
272 STAINED RADIANCE
and made for the hospital. And always, as he turned
back, the covered mind with which he had thought
and speculated seemed to bare itself anew, as a
festering wound, to the reality of things.
For Thea had not died. Day after day, night after
night she lay, turning her head from side to side,
ceaselessly, the while a little stream of brown-red acid
bubbled from her lips, the while she intoned in plain¬
tive sing-song the commonplace that had once ex¬
pressed a day’s weariness or the sum of a moment’s
mirth.
“Oh dear, oh dear.’’
He came to expect the sight of her, so. Under the
glare of the unshaded electric light, in the chill of the
March day, he would stand and look at her, once
every three hours, with a feeling of detachment.
Away from her, outside the hospital, when he allowed
his mind to uncover her memory, it was a searing
agony. In her unconscious presence, somehow, there
was relief. It was not Thea who lay there.
And then, at seven o’clock one Saturday morning,
bending to kiss her as on every visit he did, there
happened that which caused the cheerful nurse who
stood watching to open wide her eyes. For at Garland’s
kiss Thea ceased the endless movement of her head,
enduring the kiss, staring up into the face bent over
her. Her thin, scarred arms came up, tentatively.
She put them around Garland’s neck, held him so,
for a moment, then released him. And, as he stared
at this miracle, she suddenly yawned, deeply, as
might a child, and knuckled her eyes.
“Thea.’’
Her hands came slowly from her face. Puzzled, she
stared at him. Then a smile touched the corners of
her lips.
“Poor old John.”
STAINED RADIANCE
273
Snbchapter x
She came out of hospital a fortnight later, and
Garland brought a taxi to take her away. He had
had her clothes sent by the Roupells, and when he
saw her coming down the corridor on the arm of a
cheerful nurse, he stopped and stared. Her clothes
hung about her as though made for someone twice
her size. She laughed at him, lifted an unsteady foot,
waggled its shoe.
“Look, John, it’s too big.”
They were in the taxi. It turned south, down to
the River, crossed Battersea Bridge, was in the dingi¬
ness of Battersea, passed on, stopped in a quiet, dead
road that looked upon the park. Garland got out,
helped out Thea. She looked around her with knit
brows.
“John, you’re a miracle to have got a place here.
How did you manage it ?”
“Luck and the impudence of despair. . . . Shall
I carry you up ?”
“That would be nice—if you were a romantic hero,
John, and I were a romantic heroine. Instead— Why,
what’s wrong ?”
His face was moving strangely. He laughed at her.
“Instead of being only an ironist one ? Oh,
Thea.” >
He picked her up in his arms and carried her up
two flights of stairs. Mid-way up he halted to kiss
her and she kissed him back with soft, sweet lips.
She hid her head against him. With a song in his
heart he opened the door of the flat.
It was furnished on deferred payment. Its five
poor, tawdry rooms were new and shone. And in the
doorway of the sitting-room someone waited.
“Thea—you wonder !”
s
274
STAINED RADIANCE
“Oh, Norah !”
Outside, as Garland turned to close the door, he
heard slow and deliberate footsteps ascending the
stairs. He opened the door. The postman was counting
over his letters.
“Name of Garland ?“
“Yes. Thanks.”
He took the package in his hand. It had been
re-addressed from Shepherd’s Bush, from Clerkenwell.
He stood looking at it a moment, then closed the door
and went into the kitchen. From the sitting-room he
heard the voices of Thea and Norah. He half-undid
the strings of the package, then, with a laugh, flung it
into the coalbox.
His first publisher had rejected him.
“Thank God !” said Garland.
CHAPTER THE LAST
Wherein the Author avoids the Gloomily Immoral
Ending of the Modern Realist, and closes with
Three Separate Accounts of Domestic Felicity, thus
proving himself worthy of his Literary Heritage
and an Upholder of the National Morale.
Suhchapter i
THE Central Executive,
The Anarchocommunist Party of Great
Britain.
Dear Comrades,
I beg to give notice that I am relinquishing
the secretaryship of the Party on the 20th of
this month.
This step I have contemplated for some time,
and in fairness both to the Party and myself
can no longer carry out those duties which were
once more than duties.
At the same time as I resign the secretaryship,
I also wish to resign my membership of the
Party itself.
The events of the last twelve months have
convinced me alike of the hopelessness of Com¬
munism and its lack of justification. In Russia,
a Communist state, I saw the same purposeless
disorder as rules in capitalist England ; I saw
the same aimless enslavement to an archaic
economic machine ; I saw a ruling-class—the
Communist Party—in power—a class differing
in no fundamentals from those ruling elsewhere.
*75
276
STAINED RADIANCE
I saw Communism in operation as merely one
more refutation of the belief that betterment
is a thing capable of achievement by any mass
action.
For a time I withstood the logic of my observ¬
ations, telling myself that Communism in England
need not be the Communism of Russia. That
is a futile illusion. Communists in England are
no better or worse than their comrades abroad.
A successful Revolution in England would be
destined to the same bitter quaffing of the cup
of success as has poisoned the Revolution of
Lenin.
I can no longer believe in the saving of the
world through the sinking of individuality in a
common cause. Mob salvation is a proven lie.
I can no longer believe that the common good
is greater than the good of the individual.
There is no common good.
I have no counterbelief to set against Com¬
munism. I am not about to enter any other
Party. I have finished with politics and parties.
These reasons are hardly likely to commend
themselves to you. I will not expand them.
No doubt I will seem to you either a renegade
or a traitor, and will be blacklisted accordingly.
Though I am neither, I can only express a perfect
indifference to whatever opinions you entertain.
Their very method of formation is no longer mine.
Finally, comrades, thank you for your friend¬
ship in the past.
Yours sincerely,
James Storman.
So that was that.
It was April outside—the clear beginning of an
STAINED RADIANCE
277
April afternoon which had surely strayed from the
calendar pages of July. But the April had hardly
penetrated to Peckham. Grey pall of smoke drifted
across the sky. Below the room in which Storman
sat writing buses stopped, sending up whiffs of
stale petrol. A barrel-organ was playing a faded rag¬
time—“Good-bye, Blackbirds”.
So that was that.
Storman stood up and stretched, read over the
letter he had written, walked to the window. A fire
burned in the grate, the room was mellowly warm.
Storman adjusted the curtains into symmetrical lines,
then forgot them, standing with his hand upon them.
So that was that.
He was going over again the phrases indited in his
letter of resignation. They had been cold, lifeless
phrases, he realized, staring down at a bus. They had
enshrined his thoughts and disbelief clumsily and
inadequately. Yet there was no other way in which
to write.
No reason why he should take any pains to write
them more clearly.
Finished and past that phase. On the 22nd he was
starting work as the Kyland’s manager. Good salary
and excellent chances of increasing it. Be able to
move from Peckham. But go carefully, do nothing
in a hurry. No money to be wasted. Besides, there’d
be more furniture needed if they moved to a house
in the suburbs. . . .
For a little while furniture and details of a campaign
of house-hunting in Purley or Wallington occupied
him, but a persistent other thought intruded. That
letter . . .
He walked across the room to the writing-desk,
picked up the sheets again, read them. . . . What
else was there to say ? Communism was slavery, the
STAINED RADIANCE
278
tyranny of the mob-mind upon the individual. He had
realized it at last. He had finished with it.
Yet something in it sounded most false and futile.
He dropped the leaves on the table, impatiently, and,
in the moment of his doing so, a door in the flat opened,
a murmur of voices came to his ears. He stood
listening.
Then, of the murmurs, but distinct from them,
there came to his ears the thin wail he had listened
for—a murmurous piping that was abruptly shut off
as the door which had opened was closed again.
Footsteps sounded along the corridor. Someone
knocked.
“Come in.”
The district nurse entered. She was tall, old, bony.
“Mrs. Storman would like to see you.”
“Right. How’s ?”
“Quite nicely. Strong, healthy child.”
“That’s good.” He stared through her absently.
“That’s good. I’ll be along in a moment.”
The door closed behind her. He was alone.
Yet not alone. Never alone again.
There was his son !
His son. Now he knew that which his letter of
resignation had lacked. Mention of his son. The
days of mass-enthusiasms, mass-achievements, were
indeed over for ever. Yet, through the individuals,
here and there, by hands and means unguessed, might
yet be laid the first, unguessable foundations of the
City of the Sun.
His son—his immortality, blood of his blood, flesh
of his flesh—for whom he would slave and toil—his
son would carry him on. He would see to that. And
not hopelessly, aimlessly.
His son would carry him on, would, in the years to
come, presently bear out into the world a torch to
STAINED RADIANCE
279
add to that light that has so often flickered and
seemed to fail, yet is inextinguishable—the Light that
men call by many names, by the names of Freedom
and Knowledge, of Anarchy, and of God.
And, as Storman stood dreaming, there again
penetrated to his ears a sound as old in essence as
the stones that paved the streets of Peckham—the
thin, mammalian wail of Norah’s bastard child seek¬
ing the breasts of its mother.
Subchapter ii
“Goddilmighty !” said John Garland, “a day like
this makes me want to cry."
"Why ?" asked Thea.
Her husband smelt at the air. He wore no hat.
His head was thrown back. His sulkily eager face
opened its thick lips.
"I don’t know. It’s an unbelievable day. It's a
taste of magic from the never-never. It’s no right
to be here—a day from the dim millennium. But I
won’t cry, after all."
"Don’t," said Thea. "Let's sit down instead. Grass
may be damp, in spite of the sun. Spread out that
paper you brought. Which is it ?”
Garland spread out the paper, carefully, absently,
and absently replied.
“The Red Republican'’ he said.
Thea squatted down, on her heels, and folded her
arms, and peered up at him, quizzically, under the
brim of her green hat. For a little they looked at
each other happily, with a perfect peace upon them.
For they were in love with each other, with a love
that was at moments the crooning of a mother upon
an infant, and at others a welling of blood-red indigna-
28o
STAINED RADIANCE
tion against the whole outer world. And this love
perpetually amazed them, because from books they
had believed it unbelievable.
Putney Heath was a vivid, artificial green under
that unbelievable April sun. Never could Nature
have produced such colours or day naturally, Garland
had said. She had risen early and decked herself from
innumerable jars and caskets, with innumerable
scents and pomades. She was a gay harlot.
“My dear, you are lovely,” said Garland to his
wife, consideringly. “And your eyes are very deep.
I don’t think the sun has ever been right down into
them.”
“Shall I open them wider ?”
“Do. . . . Listen to that bird.”
There was a bird whistling in the tree above them.
Garland saw it through the foliage and pointed to it
with his left hand. And thereat Thea’s eyes stared
instead at that extended hand. And staring, a redness
came in the depths of the eyes that Garland said the
sun had never quite entered.
For the hand with which Garland pointed was
minus two fingers, a hand maimed, almost dead, with
the remaining fingers upon it slow and faltering, half-
paralysed. . . . They had done that in the Air
Force. Those damned, damned swine had forced him
to do that. John, John, you hero, you poor, badly
treated, sulky boy hero. They made you do that,
and you did it. For me. . . . The swine, the
swine !
“Why, darling, you’re crying,” said Garland.
“Sit down. I’m not. It’s the sun. Tried to let it
down into the depths of my eyes. . . . Oh, damn,
where’s that handkerchief ?”
She searched her handbag. Not there. Garland
sat down beside her. And he felt a queer, precious
STAINED RADIANCE 281
glow of happy, foolish, married intimacy, as he made
a suggestion.
“Try the knee-band of your knickers."
“So it is." Thea brought out the handkerchief, and
applied it, unnecessarily, to her eyes. For by then
the sun had dried them. Garland watched her
wonderingly. Her hair had a colour it surely never
had before her illness. She was as slim as a school¬
girl, but about her neck and shoulders were little
hollows which had no need to be there. She called
them salt-cellars of a night when she stood in the
bedroom and dabbed at them with a powder puff.
Funny thing.
So, inadequately, he thought of her, and thought
of another matter, but the latter adequately enough.
How Thea would take the communication was hard
to say. Even yet there were wide stretches of her
mind that he had not explored.
A woman passed down the footpath beside them.
She was young, with a thin anxious face. She carried
a child, warmly wrapped, with a pink face obtruding
from a white fluffiness of garmenture. Its eyes looked
in Garland’s with a great intentness. It smiled.
“That might have been our baby. The baby they
murdered," said Garland.
Thea made a face. “I hope not. It would have
looked better—if babies can look good. Insanitary
little things. . . . And really, I suppose I murdered
it myself. My narrow waist, you know."
Garland sat up on the sheets of The Red Republican.
The new livid flush of anger was upon his face. “Don’t
talk rot. They murdered it—the swine who had you
turned away from the Stickellys, the spy-hunting
half-wits who forced you into the slums and starvation,
the shaved and slavering apes who rule England.”
Her hand sought his maimed one. She laughed.
282
STAINED RADIANCE
strainedly. “Oh, my dear, don’t let’s think about it.
It’s over and past. They can’t harm us now.’’
“Can’t they ? I used to think they were only fools.
I used to think the world was a boring joke. But
they’re not. It’s not. We’ll be starved and tortured
and maimed again—senselessly, for no reason—if we
allow ourselves to be caught.”
“And what are you to do about—them ?”
“I’ll see to—them. By God, I can play their game
myself.”
Thea lay flat upon the sheets of The Red Republican.
Beyond their cover, where she laid her head, the grass
was soft and young and green. She closed her eyes.
John was near. Dear crusader. Smashing the world
with the club of his anger. And, lying, she pondered.
He had changed. That old-time humour that found a
pleasure in the absurd cruelties and contradictions of
life had gone. She felt his hand touch her leg and lie
there, and the pleasure of the touch was sweet upon
her. Her man. Her husband. Oh! Funny thing,
Life. . . .
“Thea, I’m leaving Kyland’s on the 22nd.”
She opened her eyes, stared up at him, and he saw
her face grow white. The old starvation fear.
“Why ? Are they reducing the staff ?”
“Not that I know of. Thea, I’ve joined the Anarcho-
communist Party.”
“And because of that ”
“Not exactly. It’s known that Storman is following
Koupa’s example and is going to resign. Turning
renegade. I’ve been offered the Party secretaryship in
his place.”
“But, John . . .”
“Yes, I’ve accepted. Oh, it’s a living wage.
Besides ”
“What ?”
STAINED RADIANCE 283
“It’ll be a chance to pay back a little of what you
and I have had to suffer.”
The bird piped in the near-by tree. The colour of
Putney Heath began to fade. Thea looked at Garland.
He sat with his elbows upon his knees, his chin rested
upon his fist. A crouched, strong figure reminding her
of someone she’d once read about. . . . Who was
that ? Oh, the giant in the “Food of the Gods” who
sat one afternoon and surveyed all London. . . .
She had a vague feeling of pity and loss.
“But you’ve surely changed a lot ? You used to
detest the Communists. Remember ? You’re joining
them—just in order to hit back ?”
Garland laughed. “What else ? What else is there
to do or believe in the stinks and treacheries of this
rat-run we call the world ? . . . Oh, I don’t know.
Perhaps, somehow, I’ll help a little to change things,
to clean and fumigate the rat-run. No individual can,
but some brotherhood of the shamed and tortured
may do it yet . . . unless that’s a dreary illusion as
well.”
“You’ve grown bitter.”
“I’ve eaten bitter things.”
She had sat up. Her eyes lit on his maimed hand.
She stared at it. She put her arms round his neck.
“I’ll join the Communists as well.”
“Eh ?” He turned and stared, startled, into her
face, saw the seriousness and purpose in her eyes
where the sun had never penetrated. Suddenly he
felt chilled, as though a breath of cold air had blown
across the golden afternoon.
“Why not ?” She looked away from him, into the
Wrest. “Oh, Garland, my dear, we’re young yet, and
bitter and hurt. Both of us. And we want to hurt
the world as well. But there’s more in life, there’ll
be more in our Communism than just that. . . .
STAINED RADIANCE
284
Sometime, when the last year’s grown dim. We’ll
do great things yet. There’s more than just hate and
darkness and hopelessness. . .
Garland did not look at her. Brooding, he also
peered into the West. The wind shook the tree-tops of
the Heath. Then :
‘There’s to fight. Even though it’s a hopeless fight
against immortal evils. . . . There’s to fight. That
for you and I and the thousands of other fools, Thea.”
He was silent for a little. “Or perhaps it was God,
not Satan, who in times long ago was overthrown, and
we rebels against Life are the champions of the
dethroned God.”
“That’s a fine thought,” said Thea.
Garland laughed and sighed. Thea shivered. Her
husband put his arm around her and held her fast.
So sitting together, the sunset waned behind them,
and below, far and wide, the lights of the City sprang
into being.
Subchapter in
From his bath that evening, after a long immersion
in scented water and dreamy thought, Andreas van
Koupa slowly emerged and towelled himself, passing
the hard and then the softer towels over his body
with the motions of one performing a religious exer¬
cise. Finally, caressed to a warm, sweet dryness by
cloths of silken web, he put on a dressing-gown, and
entered his bedroom. His valet was waiting, standing
at attention near the dressing-table. Koupa looked
at him drowsily, head on one side, then pointed to
the bed. Promptly Clelland stepped forward and
turned back the counterpane and sheets, and felt the
warmth of the sheet beneath. Then he took out two
STAINED RADIANCE
285
warming pans and laid them aside. Then he tested
the temperature of the bed with a thermometer, and
showed it to the poet.
It was exactly at blood heat.
“Excellent, Ashurbanipul. Now I will go to bed.
My pyjamas.”
The startling garments were handed to him, and he
was assisted into the trousers of them, and then the
jacket held out deferentially for him to place his arms
in it. He did so, standing with dreamy eyes.
“Button it,” he commanded.
Clelland fitted the buttons into their holes, and
upon his skin the poet felt momentarily the dank
fingers of his valet. This was distasteful. Motioning
him aside, Koupa got into bed, slowly, sinking deep
down. Clelland stood to attention.
“Anything else, sir ?”
Koupa opened his eyes. A gleam came into them.
“I would ask you a question, Ashurbanipul.”
“Sir ?”
“Do you believe in birth control ?”
“Birth control, sir ?”
“Even so, my little. Not anthropophagy, or
bimetallism, or tar macadam, or rice puddings, or
divination by water. But birth control. The control
of the arrival of offspring. The cheating of the so-
lively spermatozoon. Birth control.”
Clelland looked at him with meek, truculent eyes.
In his waistcoat pocket reposed a stolen tiepin. He
shook his head.
“No, sir.”
“Why not ? Have you any children ?”
“I am not married, sir.”
“Ah. But if you were you would reproduce yourself
as endlessly as possible ? Why ? Do you not think
the good detached billions of atoms preferable in
286
STAINED RADIANCE
their detachment to being agglomerated into young
Clellands ?”
“My brother, sir, a grocer in Bethnal Green, is
married. He has three very nice children."
“The atoms are arranged nicely ? And he proposes
still to continue arranging more ?”
“Sir ?”
“There will be other offspring of this good grocer,
you think ?”
“His wife is a healthy woman, sir."
“Ah. That will do, then, Ashurbanipul. Awake me
at noon to-morrow."
“Two hours later than usual, sir ?"
“I will leave the calculation of the difference to
you, my little. Put out the light.”
When Clelland had gone, leaving the room in dark¬
ness, the poet sank into a light sleep. Not as usual
did he immerse himself deeply, relaxing each limb,
deliberately numbing each nerve. He slept like one
floating on the top of a gentle sea. He slept awake,
as often in the past necessity had compelled him to do.
It was after midnight when he awoke. Sounds
of movement had come to him from his wife’s bedroom.
They were attenuated ghosts of sound, for the walls
were thickly panelled and padded with tapestry to
prevent his being disturbed. But his hearing had
been keyed to receive these sounds. He opened his
eyes, and put forth an arm from the warmth of the
bed. The night air of the room struck chillily upon
it. He withdrew the arm and lay in thought.
Suddenly he flung aside the blankets and got out
of bed and padded across the soft rugs till he stood
by the window.
Outside, all London lay in the grip of an iron frost.
It held the skies and streets and the roof spaces in a
web of steely, salted rime. The skies were burnished
STAINED RADIANCE 287
and garnished with stars. He looked up at a Milky
Way that glimmered like a tiara. And all London
was strangely silent. The end of the world might be
come, life dead and frozen and forgotten, a thin
twittering ended and foregone beneath the iceglow
of the stars. So it would end, some time.
A sudden fear, a desolation, held his soul. Not for
the first time had he visioned the end of the world
and of life, but never as he did on this night, in the
stark silence. An awful loneliness horrified him. . . .
For that his days and nights. For that all the count¬
less days and nights of humanity, the changings of
the innumerable seasons, the burgeonings of the vernal
Aprils, autumns with hands red from the winepress.
For that the dream and the desire.
Life ! a misarrangement of the electrons, a phantasy
against the still splendour of the eternal whorls. . . .
He drew the curtains suddenly and blinded the
room from that desolate splendour. Through his
mind rang lines of Shelley, singing the wild vision of
a dreamer dreaming beyond dreams and desires.
Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass.
Stains the white radiance of eternity.
Stains the white radiance of eternity. . . . God
mine, great Shelley ! You at least have looked upon
the winter skies, and seen. . . . Seen, and the
vision scared that so-sweet soul of yours that you
turned from it to Italy and the sunshine, Prometheus
and his fires, to your bird-eyed Mary and laughter and
song, to the fathering of children and the boating on
wild seas. . . . Akh God! Did ever again you
behold that terror of the skies ? . . .
He covered his eyes in a kind of agony. What
purpose, what meaning, what hope—the Dome aflame
in the wastes of time and space ?—Allare with
288
STAINED RADIANCE
millennium on millennium, generation after generation
since that first amoeba in the Arctic seas. . . .
Sceptic, believer, fanatic, fool—they whoomed and
shrivelled like calcined flies in the furnace-Dome of
Life.
God mine, forget it as did Shelley. Thou livest.
Life is yours, comfort, the padded belly. You are
clad in purple and fine raiment. You may build you
wall on wall till you shut out the radiance for ever,
and in the end pass as a mindless beast through the
suttee yourself, with the debt of your blood paid out
in replenishing faggots. . . .
He chuckled, standing by the drawn curtains. God
mine, if a Clelland adventured in arranging the so-
little atoms, might not a Koupa ? Even though on
the so-fat sow. . . . She would object. She believed
and practised the contraceptive methods that in a
civilized society would have damned eternally her
own chances of appearing on the earth. . . . But
she would do as he said. God mine, he would see to
that. . . .
And presently, with the humorous cruelty of a
tiger and the wistfulness of a little child in his heart,
Andreas van Koupa knocked upon the door of his
wife’s bedroom, and entered, and drew the long folds
of heavy tapestry behind him.
the end
